                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             IMPROVING THE ACCURACY OF ECONOMIC MEASUREMENT
                        WITH MULTIPLE DATA SOURCES:
                   THE CASE OF PAYROLL EMPLOYMENT DATA

                                          Tomaz Cajner
                                         Leland D. Crane
                                         Ryan A. Decker
                                     Adrian Hamins-Puertolas
                                        Christopher Kurz

                                       Working Paper 26033
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26033


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




We thank ADP for access to and help with the payroll microdata that underlie the work described
by this paper. In particular, this work would not have been possible without the support of Jan
Siegmund, Ahu Yildirmaz, and Sinem Buber. We are grateful for discussions with Katharine
Abraham, Boraan Aruoba, Simon Freyaldenhoven, Erik Hurst, Gray Kimbrough, Alan Krueger,
Norman Morin, Matthew Shapiro, John Stevens, David Wilcox, Mark Zandi, and seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, ESCoE
Conference on Economic Measurement, the BLS, NBER CRIW meetings, the Bank of England,
and the 2018 ASSA meetings. The analysis and conclusions set forth here are those of the authors
and do not indicate concurrence by other members of the research staff, the Board of Governors,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

 2019 by Tomaz Cajner, Leland D. Crane, Ryan A. Decker, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, and
Christopher Kurz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including  notice, is given to the
source.
Improving the Accuracy of Economic Measurement with Multiple Data Sources: The Case
of Payroll Employment Data
Tomaz Cajner, Leland D. Crane, Ryan A. Decker, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, and Christopher
Kurz
NBER Working Paper No. 26033
July 2019
JEL No. C53,C55,C81,C82,J11,J2

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper combines information from two sources of U.S. private payroll employment to
increase the accuracy of real-time measurement of the labor market. The sources are the Current
Employment Statistics (CES) from BLS and microdata from the payroll processing firm ADP.
We briefly describe the ADP-derived data series, compare it to the BLS data, and describe an
exercise that benchmarks the data series to an employment census. The CES and the ADP
employment data are each derived from roughly equal-sized samples. We argue that combining
CES and ADP data series reduces the measurement error inherent in both data sources. In
particular, we infer "true" unobserved payroll employment growth using a state-space model and
find that the optimal predictor of the unobserved state puts approximately equal weight on the
CES and ADP-derived series. Moreover, the estimated state contains information about future
readings of payroll employment.

Tomaz Cajner                                   Adrian Hamins-Puertolas
Federal Reserve Board                          Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and C Street, NW                   20th Street and C Street NW
Washington, DC 20551                           Washington, DC 20551
tomaz.cajner@frb.gov                           Adrian.B.Hamins-Puertolas@frb.gov

Leland D. Crane                                Christopher Kurz
Federal Reserve Board                          Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th Street and C Street, NW                   20th and C Streets NW
Washington, DC 20551                           Mail Stop 82
leland.d.crane@frb.gov                         Washington, DC 20551
                                               christopher.j.kurz@frb.gov
Ryan A. Decker
Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20551
ryan.a.decker@frb.gov
1   Introduction

Economists and statisticians are increasingly confronted with new data sources, often pro-
duced by private companies as part of their business operations, that may be useful for eco-
nomic research and measurement. These new data hold promise for advancing economic
measurement and understanding, but their use raises many questions. How are new, al-
ternative data different from traditional surveys and censuses? How are we to assess their
reliability? How should multiple disparate data sources be synthesized to produce the best
possible estimates?
    We seek to answer these questions in the context of measuring payroll employment. In
particular, we use data from a private payroll provider--ADP--to build an index of U.S.
private payroll employment, similar in spirit to the Current Employment Statistics (CES)
survey. While the CES survey is carefully conducted and uses an extremely large sample,
it still suffers from significant sampling error and nonresponse issues. The ADP-derived
employment indexes are based on a sample that is roughly the same size as the CES sample,
so it is plausible that pooling the information from ADP with that from CES would reduce
sampling error and increase our understanding of the state of the labor market at a given
time.
    Previous work by Cajner et al. (2018) describes the construction of weekly and monthly
aggregate employment series based on ADP's weekly payroll microdata. Their aggregate
series (referred to as ADP-FRB) are designed to be an independent signal about labor mar-
ket conditions rather than solely an attempt to forecast monthly BLS employment figures.
However, Cajner et al. (2018) do indeed find that the timeliness and frequency of the ADP
payroll microdata improves forecast accuracy for both current-month employment and re-
visions to the BLS CES data.
    In this paper we further compare the ADP-FRB index to existing, high-quality govern-
ment estimates and find encouraging results. The ADP-FRB index, and state-space estimates
derived from it, provide information about future CES estimates in real time, including at


                                             1
the start of the Great Recession. In addition, we integrate benchmark employment data and
compare the ADP-FRB benchmark revisions with the CES benchmark revisions. While the
CES and ADP-FRB series are both prone to significant sampling and non-sampling error,
the BLS Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) is generally considered the
"final word" for annual employment growth because of its comprehensive administrative
source data. Consequently, we benchmark the ADP-based series to the QCEW on an annual
basis. The benchmarking procedure is broadly similar to CES benchmarking and ensures
that year-to-year changes in ADP-FRB are governed by the QCEW, while higher-frequency
changes, and the period after the most recent benchmark, are mostly a function of the ADP
data.1
    Existing work on using nontraditional data sources for economic measurement typi-
cally takes official government data as the source of truth, at all frequencies. For example,
the monthly National Employment Report (ADP-NER) series published by ADP are con-
structed with the goal of predicting the fully revised CES data.2 In this paper we take a
different approach by recognizing that both CES and ADP-FRB employment are subject to
non-negligible measurement error and by using the Kalman filter to extract estimates of
unobserved "true" employment growth from observations of both series.
    Our baseline model assumes that true U.S. employment growth follows a persistent,
latent process and that both the CES and ADP-FRB estimates are noisy signals of this un-
derlying process. Standard state-space tools allow us to estimate the latent process and the
observation error associated with each series. We find that the optimal predictor of the un-
observed state, using only contemporaneous information, puts approximately equal weight
on the CES and ADP-FRB series. This finding is not necessarily surprising, as the ADP sam-
ple covers roughly the same fraction of private nonfarm U.S. employment as the CES sample
(about 20 percent), so the sampling errors ought to be of roughly similar magnitudes. We
   1 Benchmarking illustrates an essential role that government statistics play even when there is significant

value in nontraditional data sources.
   2 Mastercard's SpendingPulse, which attempts to forecast U.S. retail sales, is another example.




                                                      2
also show that the smoothed state estimate, as constructed in real time, helps forecast fu-
ture values of CES. Throughout, we focus on the role of these privately generated data as
a complement to existing official statistics. While there is no substitute for official statistics
in terms of consistency, transparency, and scientific collection methods, official numbers do
have limitations that alternative data sources can address.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature. Section 3 de-
scribes the process of creating ADP-based employment indexes and lays out both the strengths
and the inherent limitations of measuring nationwide payroll employment with ADP data.
In section 4 we compare the annual ADP-FRB employment estimates to the official bench-
marks, discuss the role of the birth-death model in the official estimates, present a case study
of the usefulness of alternative employment data during the Great Recession, and show the
efficacy of the ADP-FRB estimates in predicting fully revised CES payroll employment num-
bers. Section 5 introduces the state-space model that combines the information from both
the ADP-FRB and CES-based estimates and provides evidence that the combined state im-
proves our understanding of current and future payroll gains. Section 6 concludes.



2   Related Literature

Ours is not the first paper to make use of ADP payroll data. Several papers study the Na-
tional Employment Report (NER), ADP's publicly available monthly estimate of U.S. pay-
roll gains constructed jointly with Moody's Analytics. Importantly, NER estimates are de-
rived from a model including not only ADP microdata but also other contemporaneous and
lagged indicators of U.S. economic activity. The existing literature finds that the NER moves
closely with CES (Phillips and Slijk, 2015) and has some ability to forecast CES, though it
does not appear to improve forecasts based on other available information, such as existing
consensus forecasts (Gregory and Zhu, 2014; Hatzius et al., 2016).
    As noted above, we do not use the NER but instead focus on the ADP microdata. A
number of recent papers explore these data. Cajner et al. (2018) analyze the representative-


                                                3
ness of ADP microdata (relative to CES and QCEW) and construct an ADP payroll index
that can improve forecasts of CES; we employ that index in the present paper. Ozimek,
DeAntonio and Zandi (2017) use ADP's linked employer-employee microdata to study the
negative effect of workforce aging on aggregate productivity growth. Grigsby, Hurst and
Yildirmaz (2019) study wage rigidity in the same data, finding that the high-frequency mi-
crodata can be useful for shedding light on a key business cycle question. Cho (2018) uses
ADP microdata to study the employment and wage effects of the 2009 American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act.
   Our approach in the present paper is different from those above in that we explicitly
investigate the usefulness of ADP as a supplement to CES data for tracking the underlying
state of the labor market. In this respect, our work is inspired by Aruoba et al. (2016) who
note difficulties in assessing the growth of aggregate output in real time given limitations
on the comprehensiveness and timeliness of GDP measures. Two independent measures
of GDP exist--the commonly reported expenditure-side approach and the income-based
approach--and both are prone to measurement errors arising from various sources. Aruoba
et al. (2016) combine the two measures using a state-space framework, recovering an un-
derlying state of output growth which they label "gross domestic output." We follow this
general approach with a focus on employment rather than output.
   More broadly, a growing literature seeks to extract macroeconomic-relevant insights
from alternative data sources. This topic is too broad to adequately summarize here, but we
will provide some representative citations. Regarding labor markets, Hershbein and Kahn
(2018) and Cajner and Ratner (2016) work with online job postings, while Antenucci et al.
(2014) use social media data to predict UI claims. Inflation is another area of active research,
with Cavallo and Rigobon (2016) and Goolsbee and Klenow (2018) using large databases of
online prices. Gallin et al. (2018) use detailed real estate data to develop measures of hous-
ing wealth. Aladangady et al. (2016) use high-frequency data on credit card (and other card)
transactions to study retail sales. The present paper adds to this (incomplete) list of uses of



                                               4
"big data" in macroeconomics. In addition, there is a large econometrics literature on work-
ing with high-dimensional data; see Stock and Watson (2002), Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz
(2005), Giannone, Lenza and Primiceri (2017) among many others. While our application is
low-dimensional, with two observation series and one state process, we view the integra-
tion of detailed, alternative data with high-dimensional time series methods as a promising
area of future work.



3    Data

This paper primarily uses three data sources: ADP microdata, the Current Employment
Statistics (CES) survey, and the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW). Be-
fore turning to the ADP microdata in Section 3.1, it is useful to briefly lay out the relevant
features of the CES and the QCEW.
    The CES is the main source of monthly employment information in the United States. It
is published by the BLS a few days after each reference month and is based on a stratified-
sample survey of about 500,000 private establishments covering 23 percent of all U.S. private
employees.3 The CES asks each respondent for the count of employees who worked for pay
in the pay period including the 12th of the reference month. Aggregate CES employment
growth is a (weighted) average of the growth reported by units that respond for two or more
consecutive months, plus a residual adjustment for establishment birth and death.
    While the CES is a very large survey, it is still based on a sample and subject to sampling
and non-sampling error (as discussed further below). In contrast, the QCEW, also main-
tained by the BLS, is a near-census of employment covered by unemployment insurance
and serves as the sampling frame for much of the CES as well as the target for the an-
nual benchmark of the CES. The main drawback of the QCEW is that the data are collected
quarterly and published with a lag of two quarters. Thus, while the QCEW has negligible
   3 See https://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/cestn.htm. Note that the CES contains data for total nonfarm pay-

roll employment, but here we focus only on private payroll employment, excluding government employment
to be consistent with the reliable scope of ADP.


                                                   5
sampling error, it is of limited use to real-time decision makers. In addition, the QCEW is
subject to various sources of non-sampling error.4 Nevertheless, we follow CES in using the
QCEW for reweighting the ADP microdata and as a benchmark target.


3.1     Structure and Representativeness of the ADP Microdata

ADP provides human capital management services to firms, including payroll processing.
Processing payroll for a client firm involves many tasks, including maintaining worker
records, calculating taxes, and issuing paychecks. The structure of the microdata is deter-
mined by the business needs of ADP. ADP maintains records at the level of payroll account
controls (PAC), which often correspond to business establishments (but may sometimes cor-
respond to firms) as defined by the Census Bureau and the BLS. Each PAC updates their
records at the end of each pay period. The records consist of the date payroll was processed,
employment information for the pay period, and many time-invariant PAC characteristics
(such as an anonymized PAC identifier, NAICS industry code, zip code, etc.). PAC records
include both the number of individuals employed ("active employees") and the number of
individuals issued a paycheck in a given pay period ("paid employees"). Active employees
include wage earners with no hours in the pay period, workers on unpaid leave, and the
like. Paid employees include any wage or salary workers issued regular paychecks during
the pay period as well as those issued bonus checks and payroll corrections. In this paper we
focus exclusively on active employment, having found that it is substantially less volatile,
more closely resembles officially published aggregates, and performs better in forecasting
exercises, though we plan to further investigate the active/paid distinction in the future.5
      The data begin in July 1999.6 In terms of frequency, the files we use are weekly snapshots
of individual PAC records, taken every Saturday since July 2009 (snapshots were taken semi-
   4 For   a detailed analysis of measurement challenges in CES and QCEW, see Groen (2012).
   5 One topic for further investigation is exactly why active employment performs better than paid employment.

It is possible that double counting due to the inclusion of payroll corrections, reimbursements, and bonuses adds
noise to paid employment as measured in the ADP data. See Cajner et al. (2018) for further discussion.
    6 When accessing the microdata, we follow a number of procedures to ensure confidentiality. Business names

are not present in the data we access.


                                                       6
monthly between May 2006 and June 2009 and monthly before May 2006). Each snapshot
contains the most recent pay date for each PAC, the relevant employment counts, and the
other information described above. As few firms regularly process payroll more than once
per week, the weekly snapshots provide a comprehensive history of PAC-level employment
dynamics.
    Several important differences between ADP payroll microdata and the QCEW and CES
data exist in terms of pay frequency, region, establishment size, and industry composition:7


 Pay Frequency: The composition of businesses by pay frequency in the ADP data is roughly
      comparable to the population estimates available. In the ADP microdata, PACs re-
      porting biweekly payroll frequency are somewhat more common, and those reporting
      weekly pay are somewhat less common, than in the official BLS data.

 Region: ADP data provide reasonable geographic representation of the country as a whole.

 Size: While the ADP data include businesses of all sizes (in terms of employment), ADP
      PACs generally tend to be larger than U.S. establishments. The ADP PAC size distri-
      bution marks a middle ground between the CES sample and the QCEW universe, with
      relatively more employment in small units compared with the CES sample. Notably,
      however, ADP has significantly more employment in mid-sized units than does CES,
      with a distribution that looks reasonably similar to QCEW.

 Industry Composition: Compared with both the CES sample and the QCEW universe,
      the ADP sample modestly overweights manufacturing employment and slightly over-
      weights employment in services. Trade, transportation, and utilities employment is
      underweighted in the ADP data, while the weight of construction employment in
      ADP is similar to the CES sample, but both ADP and the CES sample underweight
      construction employment relative to QCEW.
   7 These composition differences are covered in detail by Cajner et al. (2018), which also provides additional
detail on the construction of the indexes covered in section 3.2.



                                                       7
3.2     Series Construction

The process of transforming the raw data to usable aggregate series is complex. Here we
provide a brief, simplified explanation of the process. The interested reader may refer to
Cajner et al. (2018) for details.
      Each week, we calculate the weighted average growth of employment at PACs appear-
ing in the data for two consecutive weeks. The restriction to "continuers" allows us to ab-
stract from changes in the size of ADP's client base: as long as client turnover is random,
the growth rate of continuers will be a valid estimate of aggregate growth (of continuers).
Growth rates are weighted by PAC employment and further weighted for representative-
ness by size and industry. We use QCEW employment counts by establishment size and
two-digit NAICS as the target population. Formally, let w j,t be the ratio of QCEW employ-
ment in a size-industry cell j to ADP employment in cell j in week t, let C ( j) be the set of
                                                                                                       ei ,t - ei ,t -1
ADP businesses in cell j, let ei,t be the employment of the i'th business, and let gi,t =                   ei ,t -1

be the weekly growth rate of business i.8 Aggregate growth is estimated as



                                              J
                                            j = 1 w j , t - 1  i  C ( j ) e i , t - 1 gi , t
                                    gt =          J
                                                                                                                 (1)
                                              j =1 w j,t -1  i  C ( j ) e i ,t -1

      Cumulating the weekly growth rates across time yields a weekly index level for employ-
ment. Our focus in this paper is on monthly estimates. We calculate the monthly index as
the average of the weekly index for each month, weighting by days to account for partial
weeks in each month.9 Monthly averaging smooths through the weekly volatility, and the
results in Cajner et al. (2018) suggest that averaging improves performance relative to point-
in-time methods more similar to the CES. The monthly index is seasonally adjusted using
   8 For weighting, we use March QCEW employment values for each year. For years where the March QCEW
has not been released, we use the last available March QCEW. While we could allow QCEW values to vary
quarterly or monthly, the shares are slow moving and thus this change would not significantly alter the results.
   9 For example, if a calendar week has four days in January and three days in February, our weighting by days

procedure proportionally attributes the weekly employment to both months.



                                                             8
the X-12 algorithm.
      Figure 1 displays the seasonally adjusted ADP-FRB series (black line) along with the in-
dexed CES estimate (red line). Importantly, the growth rate of the (weighted) ADP-FRB se-
ries is very similar to the CES, and the business-cycle frequency fluctuations are very closely
aligned. Moreover, this ADP-FRB series does not incorporate any of the benchmarking dis-
cussed below, so nothing forces it to resemble CES. It is also evident that the ADP-FRB series
is volatile, and much of the month-to-month variation does not appear to be related to the
monthly swings in the CES data. We interpret this finding as evidence that both series are
contaminated with measurement error, which can plausibly be attenuated by modeling the
series jointly. For reference, Figure 1 also shows the ADP-FRB unweighted series, which
does not correct the ADP size-industry distribution. Clearly, the unweighted series has a
markedly different trend growth rate, though it shares the qualitative business-cycle fre-
quency behavior of the others.10


3.3     Strengths and Weaknesses of Different Types of Payroll Employment Data

Perhaps the most important issue when analyzing the quality of a dataset is its representa-
tiveness. Obviously, the QCEW data have a clear advantage here because these data repre-
sent population counts.11 In contrast, CES and ADP estimates are sample based. As with
CES, our ADP samples are adjusted with weights that are meant to make the estimates rep-
resentative of the United States, but the weighting does not solve all issues. In the case of
ADP, an important sample selection issue exists because only the firms that hire ADP to
manage their payrolls show up in the ADP data. In the case of CES, the data are based on
a probability sample of establishments, but as the response rates are only about 60 percent
(Kratzke, 2013), this can introduce a potential sample selection issue as well.
  10 While we do not directly use the weekly ADP-FRB series in this paper, we view these high-frequency mea-
surements as a promising topic for future research on, for example, natural disasters. The weekly series are
discussed in more detail in Cajner et al. (2018).
  11 Note, though, that there is a small scope discrepancy between QCEW on the one hand and CES/ADP on

the other hand: about 3 percent of jobs that are within scope for CES/ADP estimates are exempt from UI tax
law. For more detail, see https://www.bls.gov/news.release/cewqtr.tn.htm.


                                                     9
                                                           Monthly Growth Rates
                           1



                         0.5
        Percent Change




                           0



                         -0.5                                                                     CES Private Employment
                                                                                                  ADP-FRB
                                                                                                  ADP-FRB Unweighted
                           -1
                         Jan2000   Jul2002   Jan2005   Jul2007      Jan2010       Jul2012   Jan2015     Jul2017       Jan2020




                                                                 Indexed Levels
                         140

                         130

                         120

                         110

                         100
                                                                                                  CES Private Employment
                          90                                                                      ADP-FRB
                                                                                                  ADP-FRB Unweighted
                          80
                         Jan2000   Jul2002   Jan2005   Jul2007      Jan2010       Jul2012   Jan2015     Jul2017       Jan2020

Note: Monthly data (current vintage), normalized to 100 in 2010.
Source: ADP, CES, authors' calculations. CES series is benchmarked; ADP-FRB is not.

                                             Figure 1: Index Levels and Growth Rates


    Both the ADP and the CES data are subject to dynamic selection issues related to estab-
lishment entry and exit. In the United States, young firms account for a disproportionate
share of employment growth (Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda, 2013); indeed, mean and
median net employment growth rates of firms above age five tend to be around zero (Decker
et al., 2014). A critical limitation of the CES sample is its lack of coverage of new firms and
establishments.12 In addition, the CES does not directly measure establishment deaths. The
BLS attempts to correct for these shortcomings using a two-step CES birth-death methodol-
ogy. In the first step, employment losses from known business deaths are excluded from the
sample to offset the missing employment gains from new business births. Thus, dead es-
  12 The CES sample is redrawn only once a year. See the CES technical notes at https://www.bls.gov/web/

empsit/cestn.htm.



                                                                     10
tablishments (i.e., those reporting zero employment) and nonrespondents (suspected dead
establishments) are implicitly given the same growth rate as the continuing establishments
in the CES survey. In the second step, an ARIMA model based on historical QCEW data
estimates the birth/death residual: employment at newly formed establishments less em-
ployment at exiting establishments. This estimate is added to the estimates from the CES
establishment sample to generate the final CES estimate. In many months, the model's con-
tribution to headline employment estimates is sizable.13 Actual new firms do not affect CES
estimates until the sample is rotated.14
    Even after a benchmark revision, the monthly CES data never truly account for the birth
and death of establishments. When a benchmark revision occurs, with the January CES re-
lease in a given year, the previous year's March level of the CES data is set to the March level
of QCEW employment. The monthly sample-based estimates for the 11 months preceding
the March benchmark are revised with the use of a "wedge-back" procedure, where a linear
fraction of the benchmark revision is added to the CES level each month.15 The wedging-
back procedure results in a constant being added to the monthly change in employment
each year. So, while the year-to-year change in the post-benchmark CES data will capture
the within-QCEW-scope dynamics of entry and exit at the annual frequency, the monthly
numbers will not.
    ADP suffers from a related limitation in that we do not know the age composition of
ADP clients, nor do we observe firm or establishment age in the ADP microdata. However,
new and young firms may enter the ADP data immediately upon engaging ADP for payroll
   13 See a discussion of the model and its recent contributions here: https://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/cesbd.

htm. For example, since 2009 the net birth-death adjustment has added a nontrivial average of 800,000 jobs to a
particular year's employment gains, or roughly 40 percent.
   14 The sampling frame is based on QCEW source data (state unemployment insurance (UI) records), which lag

several months. It might be wondered if the UI records pick up new establishments quickly; this is apparently
the case. Employers must file UI taxes if they have paid (cumulatively) $1,500 or more in payroll, so most
new employers would appear in the UI records very quickly; see https://oui.doleta.gov/unemploy/pdf/
uilawcompar/2018/coverage.pdf. However, note that even after a business birth appears in the UI records,
there is also time required for sampling, contacting, and soliciting cooperation from the firm as well as verifying
the initial data provided. In practice, CES cannot sample and begin to collect data from new firms until they are
at least a year old; see https://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/cestn.htm.
   15 Again, see the CES technical notes.




                                                        11
services. While the number of young firms in ADP data is unknown, any number could be
a useful supplement to the CES data, in which new firms are entirely absent.
      As discussed above, the ADP data consist of weekly snapshots (since July 2009). In con-
trast, the QCEW and CES data contain information for only the pay period that includes the
12th day of the month. As a result, the CES and QCEW data cannot measure employment
activity over the entire month, which can be especially problematic in the case of tempo-
rary distorting events during the reference period. For example, an unusually large weather
event (e.g., a hurricane or a snow storm) that reduced employment during the reference pe-
riod but left the rest of the month unaffected would result in a CES employment report that
understates the strength of the labor market throughout the month. In the weekly ADP data
we can, in principle, observe both the shock and the recovery. In any case, averaging the
level of employment for the month attenuates the impact of such short-lived events.
      Finally, the QCEW and ADP data are both essentially administrative data and thus ar-
guably somewhat less prone to reporting errors and nonresponse, which are often signifi-
cant problems survey data such as the CES.



4     Comparing ADP-FRB to Official Data

4.1     Predicting Annual Benchmarks

In this section we evaluate the ability of ADP-FRB and CES to forecast the QCEW, which can
plausibly be treated as "truth". We restrict attention to annual changes (March-to-March) to
avoid complications related to seasonality and seam effects in the QCEW.
      We follow the CES in benchmarking the level of our ADP-FRB indexes to the QCEW
each year. Our procedure closely follows that of the CES: we iteratively force each March
value of ADP-FRB to match the corresponding QCEW value, and we linearly wedge back
the pre/post benchmark revision. The wedge reaches zero at the previous (already bench-
marked) March. The data are currently benchmarked through March 2017.



                                              12
   Throughout the paper, we use our monthly ADP-FRB index starting in 2007. For the pur-
pose of annual benchmarking, this means we begin annual benchmark comparisons with
the 2008 benchmark year, which measures the change in private nonfarm employment from
April 2007 through March 2008. In the 10 years starting from 2008, the pre-benchmark ADP-
FRB estimates were closer to the eventually published population counts in four years, while
the pre-benchmark CES estimates were more accurate in six years (see Table 1). Overall, the
root-mean-squared benchmark revision is 0.49 percent for the ADP-FRB data and 0.36 per-
cent for the CES data from 2008 onward. Interestingly, the ADP-FRB estimates markedly
outperformed the CES estimates during the Great Recession (2008-2010). Specifically, from
2008 to 2010 the ADP-FRB absolute revisions averaged 200,000 per year, whereas the BLS-
CES absolute revisions averaged 490,000 per year. In contrast, over the past five years the
pre-benchmark ADP-FRB estimates consistently overpredicted employment growth.
   An evaluation of the CES benchmark misses should also take the net birth-death model
into account, as the net birth-death adjustment adds roughly 40 percent to a particular year's
employment change. As a result, a comparison of the benchmark misses of ADP-FRB series
to the CES data is not exactly direct, as the ADP-FRB data would likely only capture a
portion of the contribution of the employment contribution of births. The third row in Table
1 presents the benchmark miss of the CES data without the inclusion of the net birth-death
adjustment. That is, the "CES no BD" row reflects the growth to the level of employment
solely due to the sample of businesses for which the CES data is collected.
   As can be seen in the table, the benchmark misses for CES excluding the net birth-death
adjustment are substantially larger (with a root-mean-squared revision of 0.65 percent on
average since 2008). Since 2008, the misses have also been almost always positive, reflect-
ing a positive effect of establishments' births on the level of employment. The negative
revisions in 2009 and 2010 point toward the autoregressive nature of the birth-death adjust-
ment carrying inertia forward from previous years' employment changes. That is, because
new business formation falls in recessionary years, the net effect of the birth-death frame-



                                             13
                     2008    2009    2010    2011    2012   2013     2014    2015   2016    2017
      ADP-FRB        -173    -451      12     709     283   -230    -1030    -853   -322    -623
      CES            -137    -933    -391     229     481    340      105    -259   -151     136
      CES No BD       645    -216     -55     561     972    975      874     638    737    1066
      Notes: Units: Thousands of jobs. CES revisions are the post-benchmark (QCEW-based) March es-
     timate less the pre-benchmark estimate. ADP-FRB revisions are calculated in a similar fashion.
     CES no BD are the CES benchmark revisions that would have occurred excluding net birth-death
     adjustment.
     Source: https://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/cesbmart.pdf, authors' calculations.

   Table 1: Level Differences between Private Employment Benchmarks and Estimates


work overpredicts the actual birth-death contribution to employment growth, and thus CES
benchmark misses were larger than benchmark misses of CES data with no birth-death ad-
justment.
   We more formally test the performance of ADP-FRB and CES in predicting annual bench-
marked employment growth by running the following regressions. The dependent variable
is the annual change in employment from March of year t - 1 to March of year t as known
upon the release of the CES benchmark revision in February of year t + 1. We consider
three different independent variables, with each annual observation specified as the econo-
metrician observed them at the time of the CES jobs report for March of year t: (1) annual
employment change from March of t - 1 to March of t as estimated by monthly CES non-
seasonally-adjusted figures; (2) estimated annual employment change from March of t - 1 to
March of t as estimated by monthly CES non-seasonally-adjusted figures in which the con-
tributions of the birth-death model have been removed; and (3) annual employment change
from March of t - 1 to March of t as observed in the ADP-FRB non-seasonally-adjusted ("ac-
tive") employment index. The purpose of the exercise is to evaluate the ability of an analyst
to estimate "true" (i.e., benchmarked) employment gains for the past year, observed at the
time of the CES March employment report (in early April). At that time, the analyst has
in hand CES data for the first release of March of year t (which includes the second release
of February of year t and the third release of January of year t and all prior months). The
analyst also has in hand the past year's ADP-FRB data up through the third week of March



                                                    14
of year t. That is, we estimate the following:


                                    EMPtB =  +  EMPtMarch +  t


where  EMPt is the change in private nonfarm employment from March of year t - 1 to
March of t, the B superscript indicates the benchmark revision vintage of the series, the
March superscript indicates the vintage of the series that is released with the March jobs
report in year t (where we construct the annual estimate by summing all non-seasonally-
adjusted monthly estimates through the year), and  EMPtMarch can be the March vintage of
CES, CES without birth-death model contributions, or ADP-FRB ("active") employment.
    Table 2 reports results from this annual forecasting exercise. While we believe there is
value in reporting this formal test, given the extremely small sample size the results are sug-
gestive at best and should be treated with caution. That said, we find that the best predictor
of benchmarked employment growth, according to both adjusted R2 and RMSE, is the CES
series that excludes birth-death model contributions (column 2). That is, the birth-death
model does not appear to improve estimates of annual employment growth beyond the in-
clusion of a simple regression constant (compare columns 1 and 2). The ADP-FRB series
(column 3) has predictive content but is outperformed by both CES series. However, we do
find that adding the ADP-FRB series to the CES series that excludes birth-death contribu-
tions does improve forecasts (column 5).16
    While the regression results in Table 2 are interesting, it is difficult to draw conclusions
from such small-sample exercises. Moreover, ADP-FRB data are most valuable to policy-
makers if they increase our ability to understand recessions in real time; the predictive
power of ADP-FRB during periods of steady, modest job growth is much less useful. We
illustrate the point with a simple case study from the only recession in our ADP sample.17
    Consider the beginning of the Great Recession. The NBER business cycle dating com-
  16 Inunreported exercises, we find that, unsurprisingly, the results are highly sensitive to the specific time
period included.
  17 ADP began taking snapshots on a semimonthly basis starting in May 2006.




                                                      15
                                          (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)
         CES                           1.126***                              1.104***
                                       (0.0316)                               (0.142)
         CES excl. Birth-Death                      1.154***                             0.927***
                                                    (0.0235)                             (0.0847)
         ADP-FRB                                                0.976***     0.0197       0.199**
                                                                (0.0543)     (0.121)     (0.0818)
         Constant                       -163.7*     604.5***      -135.1     -163.6*     452.5***
                                        (76.93)      (75.29)     (172.8)     (82.61)      (79.37)

         Observations                      10          10          10          10           10
         R-squared                       0.990       0.994        0.969       0.990        0.995
         Adj. R-squared                  0.989       0.993        0.965       0.988        0.994
         RMSE                            299.2       243.3        535.9       319.7        224.2
         Notes: Dependent variable is benchmarked annual change in private nonfarm employment,
        March to March. Years 2008-2017. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
        5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

                       Table 2: Forecasting Annual Employment Changes


mittee identified December 2007 as the business cycle peak, but throughout 2008, economic
data sent somewhat mixed signals about the deterioration of labor market conditions. CES
data releases from throughout 2008 were revised substantially with the 2009 QCEW bench-
mark.
   Figure 2 reports three payroll real time ADP-FRB and CES estimates of the level of em-
ployment, along with the final (current vintage) CES estimate. The heavy blue line is the
final CES estimate, which shows employment losses of about 1.4 million jobs by August
2008. The red lines show each real-time vintage estimate for 2008: each end point represents
a first-print estimate, and the thicker central line represents the estimate after a few monthly
revisions (but before the benchmark revision). That is, following the line back from an end-
point in month t, the line reflects the path of employment as it would have been known to
observers in month t (including revisions up to that date). The black lines show the same
set of real-time estimates for the ADP-FRB index. All of the real-time series have been nor-
malized to equal the CES current vintage estimates in August 2008 to remove a level shift



                                                     16
                                116200
                                                                                                 ADP-FRB, real time
                                                                                                 CES, real time
                                                                                                 CES, final
                                116000




                                115800
     Level, Thousands of Jobs




                                115600




                                115400




                                115200




                                115000




                                114800




                                114600
                                   Jul2007     Oct2007       Jan2008        Apr2008       Jul2008                Oct2008

Note: Monthly data. NBER recession is shaded in gray. Real-time lines show each successive vintage as a
connected line, with the end point at the first-print value for that month. All series have been normalized to
match the current vintage CES estimate in August 2007.
Source: ADP, CES, authors' calculations.

                                             Figure 2: Real-Time vs. Current Vintage Estimates


due to benchmark revisions.
    As is apparent from the figure, in real time the ADP-FRB series was typically more ac-
curate in tracking the true pace of labor market deterioration during the first year of the
recession. By August, real-time CES estimates showed job losses totaling about 750,000,
while ADP-FRB was at approximately 1.0 million job losses (both numbers should be com-
pared with the current vintage estimate of 1.4 million job losses). Better knowledge of this
deterioration would have been useful to policymakers as the critical fourth quarter of 2008
approached. In future cyclical downturns, ADP data may again prove useful in previewing
the eventual revisions to CES data.



                                                                       17
4.2     Predicting Monthly Employment

While annual forecasts of the benchmark revisions are important, the CES is a monthly mea-
sure of employment that revises over several releases as both more data and benchmarks
become available. In this section we evaluate the ability of the ADP-FRB employment in-
dexes to improve forecasts of CES data in real time and in conjunction with other real-time
indicators. Table 3 reports forecasting models described in Cajner et al. (2018) using real-
time ADP indexes and other variables to predict the final print of CES (i.e., after all of the
revisions). In particular, we estimated the following regression model:


                    CES, f inal
             EMPt                 =  +  1  EMPtADP-FRB,RT5 +  2  EMPtCES
                                                                     -1
                                                                         , RT
                                                                              +  Xt +  t                     (2)

      The explanatory variables include current-month real-time (five weeks after the start of
the month, which corresponds to the week before or the week of the Employment Situation
release) ADP-FRB data, previous-month real-time (first print) CES private employment, as
well as initial unemployment insurance claims, Michigan Survey unemployment expecta-
tions, the lagged (previous-month) unemployment rate change, and Bloomberg market CES
payroll employment expectations. In addition, t =  t +  t-1 is an MA(1) error term.18
      Cajner et al. (2018) discuss similar results in more detail; here we simply note that the
ADP-FRB indexes for active employment make statistically significant contributions to the
model and generate modest improvements to forecasting accuracy. Column (1) of Table 3
reports the baseline forecasting model without the ADP-FRB data or market expectations.
Adding market expectations in column (2) improves the forecast notably, as can be seen
from the 15,000-job reduction in RMSE. In column (3) we add the ADP-FRB index and find
that RMSE declines and the ADP-FRB coefficient is statistically significant; that is, the in-
clusion of the ADP-FRB index provides further marginal forecasting improvement beyond
the inclusion of market expectations, in contrast to the Gregory and Zhu (2014) results us-
  18 The MA error term corrects for serial correlation in the errors when estimating equations of the change in
employment. The results for a similar specification using OLS are qualitatively similar, despite the existence of
serial correlation.


                                                       18
                                                (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)
     ADP-FRB active employment                                         0.29**      0.39***     0.16**
                                                                       (0.11)       (0.11)     (0.07)
     Lagged private CES employment             0.82***       -0.13      -0.21      0.51***
                                                (0.07)      (0.15)     (0.14)       (0.12)
     Lagged UR change                        -156.73**      -45.66     -43.05    -123.09**
                                               (61.56)     (52.17)    (46.84)      (58.02)
     Unemployment expectations                39.17***     30.95***    14.08        16.55      15.21
                                               (11.82)     (11.01)    (12.29)      (12.74)    (10.88)
     Initial UI claims                        -3.10***       -0.91      -0.79     -2.52***      -0.56
                                                (0.74)      (0.71)     (0.72)       (0.83)     (0.52)
     CES employment expectations                            1.15***   0.98***
                                                            (0.16)     (0.15)
     Private CES employment                                                                    0.97***
                                                                                                (0.07)
     UR change                                                                                  33.12
                                                                                               (36.03)
     Constant                                   4.87       -17.77*    -24.39**     -7.48      -17.85**
                                               (9.36)      (10.40)     (11.58)    (10.77)       (8.98)

     RMSE                                        99          84         80          92           58
     Notes: Dependent variable is final print of CES private employment. ADP-FRB series are real-time
    vintage, as of 5 weeks after the start of the month (i.e., the week before or week of the Employment
    Situation release). Unemployment expectations are from the Michigan survey. CES employment ex-
    pectations are eve-of-release median markets expectations. Lagged private CES employment refers
    to pre-Employment Situation release. Robust standard errors in parentheses. RSMEs are calculated
    in-sample. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Estimation period: 2007m1-2018m9.

                      Table 3: Forecasting Monthly Employment Changes


ing ADP-NER. In column (4) we report a model including ADP-FRB but omitting market
expectations, which reduces RMSE by 7,000 jobs relative to the baseline. Finally, column (5)
indicates that even when the first print of CES data is available, the real-time ADP-FRB data
provide additional signal about the final or "true" BLS measure of employment change.
   The forecasting success of the ADP-FRB indexes should not be overstated. Cajner et al.
(2018) show that the improvements in forecasting due to ADP data are statistically signifi-
cant, though they are not particularly dramatic in magnitude. However, we should not ex-
pect dramatic improvement because the sampling variance of the CES estimate is large rela-
tive to the RMSE of our forecasts. For example, from 2013 until 2017 (which omits the Great
Recession period of large forecast errors), the out-of-sample RMSE for predicting monthly


                                                      19
payroll employment using the ADP-FRB data (along with other predictors) is 70,700 jobs,
whereas the (sampling) standard error of the CES estimate is 65,000.19 To the extent that
sampling error is i.i.d., the sampling error provides a lower bound on the forecasting error
for CES estimates. Practically, it should be nearly impossible to reduce the RSME of a fore-
cast below 65,000, and any forecast that achieved better performance would be forecasting
sampling error, not actual changes in employment.
      The fact that our forecasting errors are already close the 65,000 lower bound, even with-
out the ADP indexes, suggests that the main value of the ADP data may not be in forecasting
CES. The data can instead be used to generate estimates that are timelier, higher frequency,
and more granular. In addition, the ADP data may be combined with the CES to reduce
total measurement error.
      On net, the ADP-FRB index adds to our understanding of annual and monthly employ-
ment changes and has some predictive power for benchmark revisions. Importantly, we
find that during the Great Recession the ADP-FRB index provided a more accurate measure
of the employment declines. With these findings in mind, we now turn to a methodology
that combines the information from both the CES and the ADP-FRB series.



5      State-Space Model of Employment

Payroll employment growth is one of the most reliable business cycle indicators. Each post-
war recession in the United States has been characterized by a year-on-year drop in payroll
employment as measured by CES, and, outside of these recessionary declines, the year-on-
year payroll employment growth has always been positive. Thus, if one knew the "true"
underlying payroll employment growth, this would help enormously in assessing the state
of the economy in real time. In this section, we present results from a state-space model to
infer the "true" underlying payroll employment growth.20
    19 See   https://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/cestn.htm
    20 Aruoba    et al. (2016) use a similar approach to provide a better measure of output.



                                                            20
   Let  EMPtU denote the unobserved "true" change in private payroll employment (in
thousands of jobs), which is assumed to follow an AR(1) process:


                                     EMPtU =  +  EMPtU
                                                     -1 +
                                                                       U
                                                                       t .



 EMPtU is a latent variable for which we have two observable noisy measures, that is CES
( EMPtCES ) and ADP-FRB ( EMPtADP-FRB ). Both are monthly changes in thousands of jobs.
The observed values of CES and ADP-FRB employment gains are a function of the underly-
ing state according to the following measurement equations:

                                                                                       
                        EMPtADP-FRB              ADP-FRB                       ADP- FRB
                                                                               t
                                       =                     EMPtU +                       .
                          EMPtCES                  CES                           CES
                                                                                 t


   Without loss of generality, we can assume that  CES = 1. This assumption only nor-
malizes the unobserved state variable to move one-for-one (on average) with CES. We make
the assumption in our baseline specification but leave  ADP-FRB unrestricted. The latter
approach is in contrast to Aruoba et al. (2013), who assume that both the observation vari-
ables in their paper (GDP and GDI) have unit loadings on the unobserved state variable.
While those authors' assumption is justifiable given their use of the two well-understood
(and conceptually equivalent) measures of output, given the relatively untested nature of
the ADP-FRB data we feel it is better to let the model choose the loading.
   We assume that all shocks are Gaussian and that                U   is orthogonal to the observation
                                                                  t

errors (   ADP- FRB , CES ).   However, we do allow the observation errors (           ADP- FRB , CES )   to be
           t          t                                                                t          t

contemporaneously correlated, with variance-covariance matrix :


                                                                           
                                           2
                                           ADP             2
                                                           ADP
                                               - FRB           - FRB,CES
                                  =                                        .
                                          2
                                          ADP                  2
                                                               CES
                                              - FRB,CES




                                                     21
      Both the CES and ADP-FRB estimates can be regarded approximately as sample means,
with the samples drawn from the same population. As such, both CES and ADP-FRB are
(approximately) truth plus mean-zero sampling error. This sampling error is captured by
the Kalman filter in the observation noise terms. A critical assumption for our setup is that
this noise is i.i.d. over time, which would be exactly true if CES and ADP-FRB redrew their
samples every month, but there is, in fact, much overlap in the units from one month to
the next. Thus, any persistence in idiosyncratic establishment-level growth can propagate
to persistence in the sampling error. Fortunately, the available evidence suggests that there
is very low, or even negative, persistence in short-run establishment growth (Cooper, Halti-
wanger and Willis, 2015), which in turn implies nearly i.i.d. sampling error and justifies the
Kalman filter.


5.1    Characterization of the State

The estimates for the model above are collected in the first column of Table 4. Interest-
ingly, the estimate of  ADP-FRB is precisely estimated and not statistically different from
                                                                       2
unity. Somewhat surprisingly, the covariance of the observation errors ADP - FRB,CES is neg-

ative, though it is not statistically different from zero. Specification 2 further generalizes the
model, allowing for the ADP-FRB observation equation to have its own intercept  ADP-FRB .
This modification makes little difference, and the point estimates are essentially unchanged
from the baseline. Specification 3 imposes a unit factor loading in the ADP-FRB equation
and a diagonal . Again, these alterations do not significantly change the point estimates,
though the variances of the observation errors are inflated somewhat. Finally, Specification
4 assumes that the unobserved state follows a random walk. All of the qualitative features
of Specification 1 carry through to this model as well.
      As discussed above, the BLS produces estimates of the sampling error of CES. These
estimates are based on the observed cross-sectional variation in employment growth and
knowledge of the stratified sampling scheme. The estimated standard error for the change



                                               22
                                                             Specification
  Parameter                 (1)                  (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)
                         0.96***              0.96***            0.96***          1.00              0.96***
                        (0.02)               (0.02)             (0.02)                             (0.02)
                         4.39                 4.31               4.21             0.88              4.31
                        (4.84)               (4.84)             (4.69)           (5.03)            (4.58)
       CES               1.00                 1.00               1.00             1.00              1.00

    ADP-FRB            1.03***             1.03***               1.00           1.03***           1.06***
                      (0.03)              (0.03)                               (0.03)            (0.04)
       2
       U            3765.41***          3786.13***           3609.16***      3698.76***        3290.51***
                    (827.64)            (832.95)             (678.03)        (805.89)          (733.10)
      2
      CES           3796.51***          3779.60***           3984.78***      3860.32***        4727.96***
                    (721.96)            (721.17)             (642.11)        (713.98)          (853.74)
 2
 CES                -393.91             -388.67                              -315.56           -869.32
     , ADP- FRB
                    (573.61)            (573.63)                             (563.56)          (560.55)
   2
   ADP              3758.90***          3773.01***           4171.35***      3852.70***        3517.13***
       - FRB
                    (792.63)            (793.08)             (680.98)        (782.16)          (761.84)
    ADP-FRB                                4.10
                                          (8.15)
 Notes: Maximum likelihood parameter estimates. Measurement series are the monthly change in the number
of jobs according to CES and ADP-FRB, in thousands of jobs. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. Specification 2 allows for a non-zero
intercept in the ADP-FRB observation equation. Specification 3 restricts both observation equation loadings to
unity, and assumes that the observation errors are uncorrelated. Specification 4 imposes a random walk on the
unobserved state. Specification 5 uses an unbenchmarked version of the ADP-FRB series. Estimation period:
2006m5-2018m8.

                              Table 4: Kalman Filter Parameter Estimates


in private CES employment is about 65,000 jobs, which is remarkably close to our estimates
                            2
of CES ; the square root of CES reported in Table 4 ranges between 61,000 and 69,000 jobs. In
our state space model, CES captures all sampling and non-sampling error in the CES series,
so it is reassuring that our error estimates align so closely with those of the BLS.
    Given that both the CES and the ADP-FRB series have been benchmarked to the QCEW,
it may not be surprising that the model tends to treat them symmetrically. It is possible that
most of the identification is coming from year-over-year variation, which would be dom-
inated by the QCEW. We address this concern in Specification 5, which uses an unbench-
marked ADP-FRB series. The results are remarkably similar to the other specifications, in-

                                                        23
dicating that the QCEW benchmark is not, in fact, dominating our estimates.
   Taken together, the results in Table 4 suggest that is it reasonable to think of ADP-FRB
and CES as two symmetric measurement series, each with approximately the same relation
to the unobserved state (i.e., the same loading and intercept) and with approximately equal
degrees of uncorrelated measurement error.
   With these estimates in hand, we can extract estimates of the unobserved state process.
Figure 3 shows the smoothed (two-sided) estimate of the state (the heavy black line), along
with 90 percent confidence intervals (the gray shaded area). Naturally, the state estimate
appears less volatile than either observation series. The smoothed state estimates use data
for all available sample periods to estimate the state. A simpler exercise is also instructive.
Following Mankiw, Runkle and Shapiro (1984) and Aruoba et al. (2013), we seek to approxi-
mate the state estimate using only contemporaneous observations of CES and ADP-FRB. In
particular, let the estimator be


                        EMPtC =  EMPtADP-FRB + (1 - ) EMPtCES ,


where  is the weighting parameter to be chosen. We minimize the distance between the
state estimate and the weighted average:

                                    T                           2
                             min
                               
                                           EMPtU -  EMPtC           ,                       (3)
                                   t =1



where  EMPtU is the state estimate from the Kalman smoother. This exercise is particu-
larly simple under the assumptions of Specification 3, where both series are just truth plus
uncorrelated noise. In that case, we can plug in the estimated parameters and solve for  as



                                               2
                                               CES
                                    =                       ,
                                          2           2
                                          ADP - FRB + CES




                                              24
       500


       250


         0


      -250


      -500

                                                                     ADP-FRB
      -750                                                           CES
                                                                     Smoothed State
                                                                     90 Percent Confidence Interval
     -1000
        Jan2005       Jul2007        Jan2010       Jul2012        Jan2015          Jul2017            Jan2020
Note: Monthly data. Both CES and ADP-FRB are current vintage and benchmarked to QCEW. Smoothed state
estimate is calculated from Specification 1.
Source: ADP, CES, authors' calculations.

                                 Figure 3: Smoothed State Estimate

      2
where CES is the estimated variance of the observation error in CES, and similarly for
2                                                        
ADP - FRB . Using the values from Specification 3 yields  = 0.49, so the optimal contem-

poraneous estimator puts nearly equal weight on the two series.21 Relatedly, the Kalman
gains for the two series (not shown) are also very similar.
    Placing roughly equal weight on CES and ADP-FRB employment gains might seem
counterintuitive. However, both data sets cover roughly a similar share of private U.S. pay-
roll employment (23 percent for CES, 20 percent for ADP) and thus the sampling error could
plausibly be of similar magnitude. Additionally, while the BLS eventually benchmarks CES
payroll employment to the QCEW as discussed earlier, the month-to-month changes are
largely unaffected by benchmarking due to the linear wedging-back procedure. Thus, if in a
particular month the CES sample estimate of payroll employment gain is distorted because
of the sampling error, it is likely that the error will survive even the subsequent revisions.
  21 Note that the linear combination of the ADP-FRB and CES series is nearly identical to the smoothed two-

sided state estimate from the Kalman filter.




                                                    25
As the ADP data rely on a (mostly) different sample, it should be unsurprising that tak-
ing a Kalman filter estimate of underlying gains based on both observed measures should
give a more precise estimate of the current pace of employment growth, with weights being
roughly similar because of the similar sample size.22


5.2     Evaluating the Estimated State's Predictive Content

The fact that the CES and ADP-FRB series receive roughly equal weight when extracting the
common signal supports the idea that combining the signal from both series can contribute
to our understanding of "true" employment growth. In this section we tentatively treat
the fully revised CES as "truth" and employ the state-space estimates to predict the future
readings of final CES employment gains.
      For the forecasting exercises, we employ a framework similar to that found in equation
(2), without the additional controls. The dependent variable is the current vintage of the
CES estimate. As independent variables we include various combinations of the ADP-FRB
employment estimate, the CES employment estimate, the smoothed state as estimated us-
ing both ADP-FRB and CES, and the smoothed state as estimated by CES only. This final
variable is included to distinguish the time-averaging effect of the state-space model from
the additional information included in ADP-FRB. If the ADP-FRB series has no information,
then CES and the smoothed state based on CES only ought to be the only relevant predic-
tors. Importantly, all of the independent variables are real-time estimates, which means that
the state-space estimates include no future information.
      The results of this exercise can be found in Table 5. The first two columns include the
t + 1 current vintage CES employment value as its dependent variable. The second column
adds the CES state as an additional explanatory variable. The third column contains the
average employment growth over t + 1, t + 2, t + 3--i.e., the average growth rate of the next
 22 In another exercise, we replace the ADP-FRB series with the change in employment calculated from the

Current Population Survey (CPS), adjusted to the CES scope of private employment. We find that the optimal
weighting only puts 4 percent of the weight on the CPS series, showing that near-equal weighting scheme for
CES and ADP-FRB series was not an inevitable result.


                                                    26
                                       (1)                    (2)                      (3)
                                 CES employment         CES employment         3-month average
                                                                               CES employment
             Constant                   -28.14                 -28.52                -17.05
                                       (19.43)                (18.78)               (20.35)
             ADP-CES State             1.43***                1.50***               1.69***
                                        (0.49)                 (0.55)                (0.44)
             ADP-FRB Emp.                -0.18                  -0.19               -0.30**
                                        (0.15)                 (0.16)                (0.15)
             CES Emp.                    -0.18                  -0.11                 -0.41
                                        (0.34)                 (0.55)                (0.31)
             CES State                                          -0.12                 -0.04
                                                               (0.68)                (0.42)
            Notes: The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the fully revised change in CES pri-
           vate employment at time t + 1; in column 3 the dependent variable is the average of the
           fully revised change in CES private employment for t + 1, t + 2 and t + 3. ADP-FRB series
           are real-time vintage, as of 5 weeks after the start of the month. CES series appearing as
           independent variable or in state-space estimates are real-time vintage. Robust standard
           errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Estimation period: 2007m1-2018m9.

      Table 5: Forecasting Monthly Employment Changes using State Space Estimates


three months of employment. Estimated together, the only variable that is statistically sig-
nificant across all three specifications is the ADP-CES state.23 The horserace results indicate
that when comparing employment-based indicators of future CES readings of employment
gains, the combination of the ADP-FRB series and the past CES gains provides the most
information about future employment.



6    Conclusion

In this paper we asked whether additional information on payroll employment could im-
prove the accuracy of employment estimates. We believe the answer is a qualified yes. At
the monthly frequency, this question is tricky, as there is no "true" measure of monthly em-
ployment gains.24 That said, the ADP-FRB estimates and the resulting state-space measures
  23 In unreported results, we find that estimating each equation using only one of the explanatory variables

indicates that each variable is independently significant. In addition, the horserace results are qualitatively
similar when using first-print CES values as the dependent variable.
  24 As discussed above, the QCEW is more comprehensive than either CES or ADP-FRB, and serves as the

annual benchmark for CES. However, the QCEW has measurement error and is not used as a time series by the


                                                      27
that combine both the ADP-FRB and CES information provide insight into the current state
and future values of employment. Moreover, we find that the monthly ADP-FRB estimates
outperformed CES in tracking the rapid employment decline during the Great Recession
and can help predict eventual revisions to the first prints of the CES data. At the annual fre-
quency the official CES data best predict benchmark revisions, though the sample is small.
That said, the ADP-FRB data were closer to the QCEW levels in four out of the past 10 years.
    Could the BLS make use of data from payroll processors to supplement the CES? Our
understanding is that ADP almost never reports any client firm employment numbers to
BLS. The only exceptions are isolated cases where the client firm explicitly directs an ADP
field office to submit their information for the CES survey. This being the case, the CES
sample and the ADP sample are collected largely independently.
    It is possible that improvements could be made through closer coordination. One pos-
sibility would be having payroll processors submit information to the BLS in a systematic
way, which could allow for an increase in the sample size of CES, a reduction in collection
costs, or both. BLS working directly with the payroll processors would reduce the burden
on the sampled businesses. It could also reduce non-response, as businesses might be more
willing to consent when they know their payroll company will handle the forms (even if the
BLS obtains data directly from the processors, it would likely be necessary to obtain their
consent). The per-unit cost to BLS of collecting data could also fall, as collection for more
sample units would be handled through centralized payroll processors.
    Such an arrangement may benefit the respondents and the BLS, but what incentive do
the payroll processors have to take on the additional work? Civic duty may play some role,
if processors see that a relatively low-cost contribution from them can measurably improve
the national statistical framework. Payroll processors might also benefit from interaction
with government statistical experts, who can suggest improvement and bring issues to their
attention. Of course, payments may be necessary to get the cooperation of the processors.
One approach would be allowing the sampled businesses to make a small payment to the
BLS. See Groen (2012), Krueger and Fortson (2003), and Hiles (2016).


                                                     28
payroll firm to avoid the survey paperwork. Another arrangement would have BLS paying
the processor for access to the records, which would in turn raise significant "hold up"
problems: if the BLS becomes dependent on payroll processor data, reducing or eliminating
surveys, then the payroll processors would be free to raise prices once the outside option is
gone. The relatively concentrated nature of the payroll industry means that competition for
BLS contracts would be sparse, which suggests that agencies should not substitute private
data for their own surveys, unless the market for the data is sufficiently competitive. While
arranging for data collection through payroll processors may be challenging, we are actively
exploring the possibilities.
   The results in this paper lay the foundation for future work employing private payroll
microdata. We plan on testing the estimated state-space results against other measures of
employment, including state- and national-level measures of employment from the QCEW.
We also plan on further exploring the geographic and industry detail to improve employ-
ment estimates. Importantly, there is additional information in the measure of ADP paid
employment and at the weekly frequency that we have not fully leveraged in our current
research.



References

Aladangady, Aditya, Shifrah Aron-Dine, Wendy E. Dunn, Laura Feiveson, Paul Lenger-
  mann, and Claudia Sahm. 2016. "The Effect of Hurricane Matthew on Consumer Spend-
  ing." Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.) FEDS Notes.

Antenucci, Dolan, Michael Cafarella, Margaret Levenstein, Christopher R, and
  Matthew D. Shapiro. 2014. "Using Social Media to Measure Labor Market Flows." NBER
  Working Paper 20010.

Aruoba, S. Boragan,
                    Francis X. Diebold, Jeremy Nalewaik, Frank Schorfheide, and
  Dongho Song. 2013. "Improving U.S. GDP Measurement: A Forecast Combination Per-


                                             29
  spective." In Recent Advances and Future Directions in Causality, Prediction, and Specification
  Analysis: Essays in Honor of Halbert L. White Jr. , ed. Xiaohong Chen and Norman R. Swan-
  son, 125. Springer, New York.

Aruoba, S. Boragan,
                    Francis X. Diebold, Jeremy Nalewaik, Frank Schorfheide, and
  Dongho Song. 2016. "Improving GDP Measurement: A Measurement-Error Perspective."
  Journal of Econometrics, 191(2): 384397.

Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz. 2005. "Measuring the Effects of Monetary
  Policy: A Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach." The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 120(1): 387422.

Cajner, Tomaz, and David Ratner. 2016. "A Cautionary Note on the Help Wanted Online
  Data." Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.) FEDS Notes.

Cajner, Tomaz, Leland Crane, Ryan A. Decker, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, Christopher
  Kurz, and Tyler Radler. 2018. "Using Payroll Processor Microdata to Measure Aggregate
  Labor Market Activity." Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.) FEDS
  Working Paper 2018-005.

Cavallo, Alberto, and Roberto Rigobon. 2016. "The Billion Prices Project: Using Online
  Prices for Measurement and Research." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(2): 151178.

Cho, David. 2018. "The Labor Market Effects of Demand Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from
  the Recovery Act." unpublished.

Cooper, Russell, John Haltiwanger, and Jonathan L. Willis. 2015. "Dynamics of Labor De-
  mand: Evidence from Plant-Level Observations and Aggregate Implications." Research in
  Economics, 69(1): 3750.

Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2014. "The Role of En-
  trepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism." The Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 28(3): 324.

                                               30
Gallin, Joshua H., Raven S. Molloy, Eric Nielsen, Paul A. Smith, and Kamila Sommer.
  2018. "Measuring Aggregate Housing Wealth: New Insights from an Automated Valu-
  ation Model." Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.) FEDS Working
  Paper 2018-064.

Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza, and Giorgio E. Primiceri. 2017. "Economic Predic-
  tions with Big Data: The Illusion Of Sparsity." CEPR Discussion Paper 12256.

Goolsbee, Austan D., and Peter J Klenow. 2018. "Internet Rising, Prices Falling: Measuring
  Inflation in a World of E-Commerce." NBER Working Paper 24649.

Gregory, Allan W., and Hui Zhu. 2014. "Testing the Value of Lead Information in Fore-
  casting Monthly Changes in Employment from the Bureau of Labor Statistics." Applied
  Financial Economics, 24(7): 505514.

Grigsby, John, Erik Hurst, and Ahu Yildirmaz. 2019. "Aggregate Nominal Wage Adjust-
  ments: New Evidence from Administrative Payroll Data." NBER Working Paper 25628.

Groen, Jeffrey. 2012. "Sources of Error in Survey and Administrative Data: The Importance
  of Reporting Procedures." Journal of Official Statistics, 28: 173198.

Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2013. "Who Creates Jobs? Small
  versus Large versus Young." Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2): 347361.

Hatzius, Jan, Zach Pandl, Alex Phillips, David Mericle, Elad Pashtan, Dann Struyven,
  Karen Reichgott, and Avisha Thakkar. 2016. "The ADP Employment Report: Pay Atten-
  tion to Large Surprises." Goldman Sachs Economics Research US Daily.

Hershbein, Brad, and Lisa B. Kahn. 2018. "Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased
  Technological Change? Evidence from Vacancy Postings." American Economic Review,
  108(7): 173772.




                                               31
Hiles, David. 2016. "QCEW Update: Acceleration Test and NAICS 2017." Bureau of Labor
  Statistics.

Kratzke, Diem-Tran. 2013. "Nonresponse Bias Analysis of Average Weekly Earnings in the
  Current Employment Statistics Survey." Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Krueger, Alan B., and Kenneth N. Fortson. 2003. "Do Markets Respond More to More Re-
  liable Labor Market Data? A Test of Market Rationality." Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 1(4): 931957.

Mankiw, N.Gregory, David E. Runkle, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1984. "Are Preliminary
  Announcements of the Money Stock Rational Forecasts?" Journal of Monetary Economics,
  14(1): 15  27.

Ozimek, Adam, Dante DeAntonio, and Mark Zandi. 2017. "Aging and the Productivity
  Puzzle." unpublished.

Phillips, Keith R., and Christopher Slijk. 2015. "ADP Payroll Processing Data can Provide
  Early Look at Texas Job Growth." Southwest Economy, 1013.

Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2002. "Forecasting Using Principal Compo-
  nents from a Large Number of Predictors." Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  97(460): 11671179.




                                            32
