                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       EVALUATING CENTRAL BANKS' TOOL KIT:
                            PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE

                                         Eric R. Sims
                                       Jing Cynthia Wu

                                      Working Paper 26040
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26040


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019




We are grateful to Rich Clarida, Todd Clark, Drew Creal, Andrew Foerster, Yuriy
Gorodnichenko, Rob Lester, Leonardo Melosi, Ken Rogoff, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, as
well as seminar participants at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and
Communication Practices (A Fed Listens Event), the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and
Cleveland, the University of Notre Dame, and the University of Wisconsin-Madison, for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Eric R. Sims and Jing Cynthia Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Evaluating Central Banks' Tool Kit: Past, Present, and Future
Eric R. Sims and Jing Cynthia Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 26040
July 2019
JEL No. E10,E32,E5,E52,E58

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a structural DSGE model to systematically study the principal tools of
unconventional monetary policy ­ quantitative easing (QE), forward guidance, and negative
interest rate policy (NIRP) ­ as well as the interactions between them. To generate the same
output response, the requisite NIRP and forward guidance interventions are twice as large as a
conventional policy shock, which seems implausible in practice. In contrast, QE via an
endogenous feedback rule can alleviate the constraints on conventional policy posed by the zero
lower bound. Quantitatively, QE1-QE3 can account for two thirds of the observed decline in the
"shadow" Federal Funds rate. In spite of its usefulness, QE does not come without cost. A large
balance sheet has consequences for different normalization plans, the efficacy of NIRP, and the
effective lower bound on the policy rate.


Eric R. Sims
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
esims1@nd.edu

Jing Cynthia Wu
Department of Economics
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
cynthia.wu@nd.edu
1    Introduction
In response to the Financial Crisis and ensuing Great Recession of 2007-2009, the Fed and
other central banks pushed policy rates to zero (or, in some cases, slightly below zero).
With conventional policy unavailable, central banks launched a sequence of experimental
unconventional policy interventions. The principal tools of unconventional policy include
large scale asset purchases (or quantitative easing, QE), forward guidance (FG), and neg-
ative interest rate policy (NIRP). Even ten years subsequent to the Crisis, many advanced
economies are still plagued by near-zero policy rates. Further, an emerging consensus is that
global forces and demographic trends have lowered the "natural" or "neutral" rate of inter-
est; see Laubach and Williams (2003) and Del Negro, Giannone, Giannoni and Tambalotti
(2017). This means that the Great Recession is likely not a one-off event and heretofore
unconventional tools will become a more conventional part of central banks' tool kit. The
time is therefore ripe for a comprehensive, quantitative review of these tools in a unified
modeling framework.
    Our paper makes a number of important contributions to the literature. First, rather
than introducing them in a piecemeal fashion as in the existing literature, we develop the
first quantitative DSGE model that builds in all three different types of unconventional
tools together. This allows us to study similarities, differences, and potential interactions
between them. Second, we draw attention to two distinct channels by which NIRP can
transmit to the economy. On the one hand, NIRP in our model can be stimulative via a
forward guidance type channel, but on the other hand, it erodes the net worth of financial
intermediaries, which works in the opposite direction. Third, we propose a novel and intuitive
endogenous specification for QE that is similar to a conventional Taylor rule. We find that
endogenous QE can successfully neutralize the adverse consequences of a binding zero lower
bound (ZLB). Despite its usefulness, QE does not come without a cost. A fourth contribution
of our paper is to address questions relating to the size of a central bank's balance sheet,
including consequences of different normalization plans as well as the interaction between
the size of the balance sheet and NIRP. Fifth, we provide a first attempt at endogenizing
an effective lower bound (ELB) for policy rates. The ELB depends on the overall size of
a central bank's balance sheet. Finally, we introduce a novel timing assumption to model
forward guidance, where our approach ameliorates the so-called forward guidance "puzzle"
(Del Negro, Giannoni and Patterson 2015).
    Though it shares similarities with canonical medium-scale models (e.g. Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans 2005, and Smets and Wouters 2007), our model differs from standard
models in some important ways. Firms are required to issue long term bonds to finance part


                                              1
of investment in new physical capital, similarly to Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2017).
Asset markets are segmented in that households can only indirectly access long term bonds
via holding short term debt (i.e. deposits) with financial intermediaries. Financial inter-
mediaries are introduced in a way similar to Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013). A costly
enforcement problem results in an endogenous leverage constraint on intermediaries. This
results in excess returns and time-varying interest rate spreads, which allows QE type poli-
cies to have real effects. New to the literature, we also formally model the central bank's
balance sheet with interest-bearing reserves. Along with a constraint on minimum reserve
balances at intermediaries, this allows for the interest rate on reserves to potentially differ
from the deposit rate, thereby permitting us to explore the effects of negative interest rate
policy.
    During normal times, conventional monetary policy in our model involves the central
bank setting the interest rate on reserves (what we hereafter refer to as the policy rate),
which equals the deposit rate, according to a Taylor (1993) type rule.1,2 QE in our model
entails the central bank purchasing (or selling) long maturity private or government bonds,
financed via the creation (or destruction) of reserves.3 QE policies can be undertaken whether
conventional policy is constrained by the ZLB or not, though they are more effective when
short term rates are fixed. Forward guidance in our model involves cutting the desired short
term policy rate implied by the Taylor rule when the actual policy rate is constrained by
zero. This signals a commitment to lower the actual short term rate after the ZLB constraint
has lifted. We introduce into our model a reduced form parameter capturing the perceived
credibility of forward guidance announcements.
    Consistent with the experience of many countries that have experimented with NIRP, our
model assumes that the policy rate can go negative, while the deposit rate (the economically
relevant short term interest rate) cannot. To implement NIRP, the central bank can require
intermediaries to hold more reserves than they would like. On the one hand, NIRP affects the
economy much like forward guidance ­ it signals the intent to lower economically relevant
short term rates in the future, which in turn can affect long term rates in the present.
Because it involves a tangible action rather than mere words, it may be more credible than
   1
      For a study of Ramsey optimal instrument rules in a model sharing similarities with ours, see Mau
(2019).
    2
      Several related papers (e.g. Gertler and Karadi 2011, 2013 and Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian 2017)
do not model reserves at all and instead think of conventional policy as directly setting the deposit rate via
a Taylor rule.
    3
      Clarida (2012) distinguishes between different types of large scale asset purchases, calling purchases of
long term government bonds "quantitative easing" and purchases of privately-issued debt "credit easing."
Our model features both government and private sector long maturity bonds. We will use the term "quan-
titative easing" as it has been used in the financial press to refer to any type of large scale asset purchase
(either government or non).


                                                      2
conventional forward guidance. A countervailing mechanism at work in the model is that
NIRP reduces intermediary net worth, which, other factors held constant, works to tighten
credit conditions.
    We begin by comparing exogenous changes in both conventional and unconventional
policies. In our model, a 100 basis point expansionary shock to the policy rate results in
output rising by about 0.5 percent at peak. To generate a similar output expansion when
conventional policy is constrained by the ZLB for two years in expectation, the central bank
must expand its balance sheet by about 4 percent relative to steady state output. Generating
the same output increase via FG or NIRP at the ZLB requires a cut in the desired policy
rate of more than twice the magnitude of a conventional policy shock. With a pre-QE size
of the Fed's balance sheet, NIRP is less stimulative than a fully-credible FG, but more than
a partially-credible one.
    Significant stimulus from NIRP requires very large cuts in policy rates. Such large cuts
into negative territory have not been attempted in practice for a variety of political and
financial reasons. Forward guidance may be plagued by credibility issues. Quantitative
easing, in contrast, is relatively effective in our model. It has also been the most popular of
unconventional tools among central banks. Most prominently, the Bank of Japan, the Fed,
and the European Central Bank have each expanded their balance sheets via QE operations
to roughly 5 trillion dollars, which amounts to anywhere between 25 and 100 percent of their
corresponding GDPs.
    Having analyzed the effects of exogenous changes in unconventional policy tools, we then
focus on endogenous quantitative easing in attempt to speak to the Great Recession expe-
rience. To our knowledge, we are the first paper to model QE endogenously in the context
of a detailed structural model. In particular, we posit a Taylor-type rule for quantitative
easing when the policy rate is constrained by the ZLB.
    Endogenous quantitative easing serves as a highly effective substitute for conventional
policy. This result holds conditional on different shocks, but more interestingly, also in an
unconditional simulation with several adverse demand shocks meant to mimic the experience
of the US during the Great Recession. In this simulation exercise, the endogenous QE rule
involves expanding the central bank's balance sheet to about 25 percent of GDP, which
corresponds to the Fed's balance sheet after QE3. This balance sheet expansion provides
stimulus roughly equivalent to a decline in the policy rate of about 2 percent, which is closely
in line with the empirical estimates of the shadow rate from Wu and Xia (2016).
    Although endogenous QE can serve as an effective antidote to the ZLB, its use does not
come without costs. Many central banks around the world have accumulated a large balance
sheet over the course of their QE operations, and they are confronting questions related


                                               3
to the cost associated with unwinding now that the ZLB period is over. We quantitatively
study different normalization plans, sometimes referred to as quantitative tightening (QT). A
smooth balance sheet normalization is preferred to either an immediate normalization after
a ZLB period has ended or to carrying a significantly larger balance sheet going forward.
Interestingly, the normalization plan after the ZLB is expected to be over can impact how
the economy fares during the ZLB. Specifically, if agents expect the central bank to maintain
a large balance sheet after the ZLB, the economy could experience a deeper recession even
with the central bank accumulating a larger quantity of bonds.
    We also study interactions between the size of a central bank's balance sheet and the use
of other unconventional tools. Other things being equal, NIRP is less effective the larger a
balance sheet a central bank carries. Fixing other parameters but increasing the size of the
central bank's steady state balance sheet to 38% of GDP (which matches the Euro area as of
the end of 2018), NIRP actually becomes mildly contractionary. Furthermore, there exists a
cutoff negative policy rate below which financial intermediaries would voluntarily choose to
exit. We refer to this cutoff rate as the effective lower bound (ELB) and find that it can be
quite close to zero for an economy in which the central bank carries a large balance sheet.


1.1     Literature
The last decade has witnessed an explosion in work studying unconventional monetary policy.
Kuttner (2018) provides an accessible overview. There are both reduced-form empirical
papers and quantitative theoretical analyses; our paper is most similar to the latter. To date,
the majority of this literature has typically studied unconventional policies in isolation. We
are one of the first to propose a theoretical framework in which the three principal types of
unconventional policies may be simultaneously studied.
   The principal modeling frameworks to study QE are the preferred-habitat model and
DSGE models. Hamilton and Wu (2012) and Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) rely on the
preferred-habitat model of Vayanos and Vila (2009) to study the empirical effects of the
maturity structure of publicly held debt on the term structure.4 Ray (2019) incorporates
a preferred habit framework into a New Keynesian model to study QE. In a similar vein,
Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013) and Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2017) build DSGE
models with segmented asset markets and financial frictions to quantify the effects of QE
   4
     Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) use an event study methodology to quantify the effects
of the different waves of QE in the United States on a variety of different interest rates. Gagnon, Raskin,
Remache and Sack (2011) is one of the first papers to empirically study the effects of large scale asset
purchases. They find that these purchases were successful in driving down long term interest rates primarily
through lower risk and term premia. Bauer and Rudebusch (2014), in contrast, emphasize how large scale
asset purchases can affect long term yields by signaling the expected path of short term rates.


                                                     4
on output and other economic aggregates. The structure of financial intermediaries in our
model is similar to these papers. We differ in that we model the central bank as financing
its operations through the issuance of interest-bearing reserves, which appears to be the
operating framework on which the Federal Reserve has settled moving forward. The inclusion
of reserves in our model is also central to studying negative interest rate policy. Moreover,
to our knowledge, we are among the first papers to endogenize QE policy, which we consider
more policy relevant than focusing on exogenous QE. Unlike most papers in the literature,
Foerster (2015) also studies exit strategies from QE programs, and some of our conclusions
regarding exit are consistent with his. The difference between our paper and his is the
modeling framework. He uses a regime-switching model, whereas we set up a more realistic
environment that takes the ZLB into account.
    Del Negro, Giannoni and Patterson (2015) point out that in standard monetary DSGE
models, the effects of forward guidance become stronger when the intended rate change
happens farther off into the future, which they refer to as the "forward guidance puzzle."
McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016) propose a possible resolution of the puzzle relying
on heterogeneity and incomplete asset markets.5 We model forward guidance with a novel
timing assumption as a shock to an underlying desired policy rate in the present that, in
turn, affects the actual policy rate once a ZLB episode is over. This ameliorates many of the
puzzling theoretical results concerning the efficacy of forward guidance. We also introduce a
reduced-form parameter to capture the degree of commitment or credibility involved in the
implementation of forward guidance.
    Several recent papers study NIRP. Abo-Zaid and Gar´       in (2016) argue that in a New
Keynesian model with credit frictions and money demand the optimal nominal interest rate
may be negative. Wu and Xia (2018) extend the shadow rate term structure model to allow
for a negative interest rate and they emphasize a forward guidance aspect to NIRP. Our
model is closely related to this mechanism, though their term structure model is mute about
the responses of macro aggregates to NIRP. Ulate (2018) and Eggertsson, Juelsrud, Summers
and Wold (2019) both construct quantitative DSGE models with a bank-lending channel and
argue that negative policy rates erode bank profits, which reduces pass-through from policy
rates. A similar channel is at play in our model. Different than these papers, we stress the
importance of the size of the central bank's balance sheet for the strength of this channel.
Moreover, we discuss an additional forward guidance channel and emphasize that NIRP can
be thought of as forward guidance with commitment.
    On balance, our conclusions align with a number of recent papers that argue that uncon-
  5
    Campbell, Evans, Fisher and Justiniano (2012) empirically study the responses of asset prices and
interest rates to Federal Reserve communications both before and during the Great Recession.



                                                 5
ventional policies are an (almost) perfect substitute for conventional monetary policy and
that the ZLB (or ELB) on policy rates is ultimately not much of a hindrance to effective
stabilization policy. See, for example, Swanson and Williams (2014), Wu and Xia (2016),
Wu and Zhang (2017, 2019), Gar´    in, Lester and Sims (2019), Debortoli, Gal´  i and Gambetti
(2016), Mouabbi and Sahuc (2017), and Swanson (2018a,b). Different from the literature,
we build all three unconventional policy tools in a unified structural model. This facilitates
an understanding of underlying mechanisms and allows us to compare and contrast the effec-
tiveness of different types of unconventional policy interventions as well as how these policies
interact with one another.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the model, and
Section 3 describes how our model can accommodate various monetary policy tools. Sec-
tion 4 compares alternative exogenous monetary policy shocks. Section 5 studies endogenous
quantitative easing and recreates the experience of the Great Recession. Section 6 discusses
future issues facing central banks related to the size of their balance sheets. Section 7 offers
concluding thoughts.


2    Model
In this section, we flesh out the key ingredients of our model. The principal actors in the
model are households, labor unions, several types of production firms, financial intermedi-
aries, a fiscal authority, and a central bank.
    Although it shares many familiar ingredients with canonical medium-scale DSGE models
(i.e. Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans 2005, and Smets and Wouters 2007), several fea-
tures of our model are less common. First, similar to Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2017),
we assume that production firms must issue perpetual bonds (Woodford 2001) to finance
part of their new investment. These bonds allow for a succinct presentation and can easily
be mapped into a long term zero coupon bond for quantitative analysis. Second, we formally
model financial intermediaries. As in Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013), intermediaries finance
themselves with net worth and short term debt (what we call deposits) and hold long term
bonds issued by firms and the government as well as reserves issued by the central bank.
Markets are segmented in the sense that households cannot hold long term bonds directly.
Because of a costly enforcement problem, intermediaries face an endogenous leverage con-
straint that results in excess returns. This feature, in conjunction with our assumption that
firms must issue long term bonds to finance investment, generates an "investment wedge"
that allows QE type policies to have real economic effects. Third, our framework is also
unique in that we model the central bank as financing its operations through the issuance of

                                               6
interest-bearing reserves, which appears to be the operating framework on which the Federal
Reserve has settled moving forward. Combined with a constraint on minimum reserve bal-
ances at financial intermediaries, this allows us to study negative interest rate policy (NIRP)
when the deposit rate is constrained by the zero lower bound.
    Below, we only highlight the non-standard ingredients that are directly relevant for incor-
porating unconventional monetary policy tools; the rest of the model is presented in detail in
Appendix A. There are six relevant sectors in the model economy: households are discussed
in Appendix A.1, the labor market in Appendix A.3, and the fiscal authority in Appendix
A.5; financial intermediaries are discussed in Subsection 2.2 and the production side of the
economy in Subsection 2.3. A description of monetary policy is in Section 3.


2.1     Long Term Bonds
A representative wholesale firm (described in Section 2.3) and the fiscal authority (discussed
in Appendix A.5) issue long term bonds to finance their activities. We follow Woodford
(2001) in modeling these bonds as perpetuities with decaying coupon payments. Let   [0, 1]
denote the decay parameter for coupon payments.6 A one unit bond issue in period t for Qt
dollars obligates the issuer to a coupon payment of one dollar in t + 1,  dollars in t + 2, 2
dollars in t + 3, and so on.
    Let CFm,t denote the new nominal issuance of these bonds by the representative wholesale
firm (which we index by m). The total coupon liability due in period t for the firm based
on past issuances is:

                        Fm,t-1 = CFm,t-1 + CFm,t-2 + 2 CFm,t-3 + . . .                             (2.1)

   An attractive feature of these perpetual bonds is that one need not keep track of the
entire sequence of past issues. Rather, one need only keep track of the period t and t - 1
total coupon liabilities. Iterating (2.1) forward one period, one observes:

                                       CFm,t = Fm,t - Fm,t-1                                       (2.2)

    New bond issuances in period t trade at market price Qt . Given the decaying coupon
structure, bonds issued in period t - j must trade at j Qt , for j  0. This means that
one only needs to keep track of the bond price for the current issue rather than the entire
sequence of prices for past issues. In particular, the value of a bond portfolio consisting of
all the outstanding private bonds in period t may be written:
   6
    For simplicity, we assume that  is the same for both private and government bonds, although this need
not be the case.


                                                   7
                   Qt Fm,t = Qt CFm,t + Qt CFm,t-1 + 2 Qt CFm,t-2 + . . .                  (2.3)

   Nominal government bonds have an identical structure to privately issued bonds. CBG,t
denotes new issuances in period t, BG,t denotes the total nominal liability on current and
past issuances, and QB,t is the market price.


2.2    Financial Intermediaries
Financial intermediaries are structured similarly to Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013). Each
period there is a fixed mass of intermediaries indexed by i. Intermediaries finance themselves
with net worth, Ni,t , and deposits taken from households, Di,t . Each period, a fraction 1 -  ,
with   [0, 1], stochastically exit and return their net worth to their household owner. They
are replaced by an equal number of new intermediaries that begin with real start up funds
of X given to them by their household owner.
    Intermediaries hold privately issued bonds, Fi,t ; government issued nominal bonds, Bi,t ;
and interest-bearing reserves, REi,t , which are held on account with the central bank. The
inclusion of reserves is different than Gertler and Karadi (2013) and ends up being useful
in thinking about negative interest rate policy. The balance sheet condition of a typical
intermediary is:
                             Qt Fi,t + QB,t Bi,t + REi,t = Di,t + Ni,t                     (2.4)

    A financial intermediary accumulates net worth until stochastically exiting. Net worth
for surviving intermediaries evolves according to:

          F    d                  B    d
  Ni,t = Rt - Rt-1 Qt-1 Fi,t-1 + Rt - Rt-1 QB,t-1 Bi,t-1
                                                      re     d              d
                                                   + Rt-1 - Rt-1 REi,t-1 + Rt-1 Ni,t-1 (2.5)


      re
    Rt -1 is the (gross) interest rate on reserves, which is set by the central bank and known
             d
at t - 1. Rt  -1 is the deposit rate, which is determined in equilibrium. The first three terms
are the excess returns from holding private bonds, government bonds, and reserves relative
to the cost of funding via deposits. The last term measures cost savings from financing with
                                         F        B
net worth as opposed to deposits. Rt        and Rt   are the realized holding period returns on
private and government issued bonds and satisfy:




                                               8
                                               F      1 + Qt
                                              Rt =                                                       (2.6)
                                                        Qt-1
                                              B       1 + QB,t
                                             Rt     =                                                    (2.7)
                                                        QB,t-1

    The objective of an intermediary is to maximize its expected terminal net worth where
discounting is by the stochastic discount factor of the household, t,t+1 . Consider the problem
of an intermediary continuing after period t. There is a 1 -  probability that it will exit
after t + 1, a (1 -  ) probability that it will exit after t + 2, and so on. Accordingly, its
objective is
                                                            
                                Vi,t = max (1 -  ) Et               j -1 t,t+j ni,t+j ,                  (2.8)
                                                            j =1

where ni,t = Ni,t /Pt is real net worth, with Pt the price of final output.
    A financial intermediary faces two constraints. One is a costly enforcement problem
as in Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013). A financial intermediary can choose to abscond
with some assets at the end of a period rather than continuing as an intermediary. If an
intermediary does this, depositors can recover a fraction of the intermediary's assets, with
the intermediary retaining the rest. For depositors to be willing to lend to intermediaries, it
must not be optimal for the intermediary to divert funds in this way, which we refer to as
going into bankruptcy. Accordingly:

                                        Vi,t  t (Qt fi,t + QB,t bi,t )                                   (2.9)

In (2.9), the right hand side of the inequality represents the (real) funds that a financial
intermediary can keep should it choose to enter bankruptcy, while the left hand side is the
value of continuing as an intermediary.7 Should it choose to divert, an intermediary can
keep a stochastic fraction of its private bonds, t . It can keep the fraction t  of government
bonds, where 0    1. This means that it is easier for the intermediary to divert private
bonds than government bonds. We choose to make t stochastic (and exogenous). t may be
thought of as a type of liquidity shock ­ when t increases, depositors can recover a smaller
fraction of an intermediary's assets in the event of bankruptcy, which in turn makes them less
willing to lend funds. This will have the effect of driving interest rate spreads up, which is
a hallmark of liquidity crises. We assume that the third type of asset held by intermediaries
­ reserves ­ is fully recoverable by depositors in the event of bankruptcy.
  7
      fi,t = Fi,t /Pt and bi,t = Bi,t /Pt are real private and government bond holdings, respectively.


                                                        9
     The second constraint faced by intermediaries is a reserve requirement. Relative to the
extant literature, this is new in our model. We assume that intermediaries are required to
hold a minimum level of reserves that is set by the central bank. The reserve requirement
is time-varying and proportional to an intermediary's deposits. Letting rei,t = REi,t /Pt and
di,t = Di,t /Pt denote real reserve holdings and real deposits, the constraint is:

                                         rei,t  t di,t                                  (2.10)

For most of the analysis, the reserve requirement will be non-binding. (2.10) is included so
as to potentially allow for a negative interest rate on reserves. When this constraint binds
for all intermediaries, t = re
                            dt
                               t
                                 .
    All financial intermediaries will behave in the same way with identical optimality condi-
tions. These are

                                                             t
                       Et t,t+1 t+1 - 1  F      d
                                    t+1 Rt+1 - Rt        =       t                      (2.11)
                                                           1 + t
                                                             t
                       Et t,t+1 t+1 - 1  B      d
                                    t+1 Rt+1 - Rt        =       t                      (2.12)
                                                           1 + t
                                                               t
                         Et t,t+1 t+1 - 1  re   d
                                      t+1 Rt - Rt        = -       ,                    (2.13)
                                                             1 + t

where

                        t = 1 -  + t t                                                  (2.14)
                            1 + t                         t ret
                        t =       Et [t,t+1 t+1 - 1   d
                                                t+1 ]Rt -       .                       (2.15)
                              t                           nt t

(2.11) - (2.13) are the key equilibrium conditions in the model. t  0 is the multiplier on the
costly enforcement constraint, (2.9), while t is the multiplier on the reserve requirement,
(2.10). If neither constraint binds, then to first order expected returns on all three types
of assets must equal the cost of funds (i.e. the deposit rate). If the costly enforcement
constraint binds, then there will be excess returns of long term private and public bonds
over the deposit rate.  < 1 means that excess returns on government bonds will be lower
than excess returns on private bonds. In principle, we could allow  to be time-varying
and exogenous; this would disassociate the term premium from the corporate spread. In the
interest of tractability, we leave this extension to future work. The interest rate on reserves
can never exceed the deposit rate, but it could be less than the deposit rate when the reserve
requirement is binding. (2.14) is an auxiliary variable introduced to simplify the analysis.
See derivations in Appendix A.2.



                                              10
      The value of an intermediary satisfies

                                       Vi,t = t t ni,t .                               (2.16)

When the constraint in (2.9) binds,

                                           Qt fi,t + QB,t bi,t
                                     t =                       ,                       (2.17)
                                                    ni,t

which is an endogenous leverage ratio, whose equilibrium condition is in (2.15). The con-
straint makes the financial intermediary less levered than it would find optimal. This en-
dogenous leverage constraint is ultimately what can give rise to excess returns.
    We show from (2.15) that:

                                                      t ret
                                     t t  1 + t -                                      (2.18)
                                                      nt

If neither (2.9) nor (2.10) bind, then t+j = t+j = 0 for all j , which implies that t t = 1.8
Intuitively, this means that net worth is as valuable to a household as to an intermediary.
In this case, returns on all assets are equal. Hence, whether an intermediary invests in Ft ,
Bt , Dt or REt is irrelevant.
    The two different constraints have competing effects on the value of an intermediary.
Other things being equal, when the costly enforcement constraint, (2.9), binds, then t > 0
and t t is larger. In this case, there exist excess returns on holding long term assets
(private and government bonds). Hence, net worth is more valuable inside an intermediary
as opposed to a household (who cannot hold these assets and hence cannot take advantage
of these excess returns). In contrast, when the reserve requirement, (2.10), binds, t t gets
smaller. A binding reserve requirement pushes the interest rate on reserves below the deposit
rate, which means that intermediaries suffer a loss for each dollar of reserves they hold.


2.3       Production
There are four different types of production firms in our model. A competitive final good pro-
ducer aggregates retail output into a final good available for consumption and investment. A
continuum of retail firms repackage wholesale output for resale to the final good firm. Retail
firms behave as monopolistic competitors and are subject to price stickiness. A representa-
tive investment good firm purchases final output and transforms it into new physical capital
subject to a convex adjustment cost. A representative wholesale firm produces output using
  8
      In this circumstance, t = 1.


                                                 11
its own capital, accumulated via purchases of new capital from the investment good firm,
and labor hired from labor unions. The key departures from a standard framework involve
the wholesale firm, and so we focus on that in the text. The rest of the production side is
presented in detail in Appendix A.4.
    The representative wholesale firm produces output according to a Cobb-Douglas tech-
nology:
                                                        -
                                   Ym,t = At (ut Kt ) L1
                                                       d,t                          (2.19)

Ym,t is flow output and Ld,t is labor input. 0 <  < 1 is the exponent on capital services in
the production function. At is an exogenous productivity variable that obeys an exogenous
stochastic process. ut is capital utilization. Kt is the stock of physical capital, which the
firm owns. The cost of utilization is faster depreciation, where  (ut ) maps utilization into
depreciation. Physical capital accumulates according to a standard law of motion:

                                 Kt+1 = It + (1 -  (ut ))Kt                            (2.20)

   Similar to Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2017), we assume that the wholesale firm
must issue perpetual bonds to finance the purchase of new physical capital, It . Different
than them, we only require the firm to finance a constant fraction,   [0, 1], of investment,
not the entirety. This gives rise to a "loan in advance constraint" of the form:

                         Ptk It  Qt CFm,t = Qt (Fm,t - Fm,t-1 ) ,                      (2.21)

where Ptk is the price at which the wholesale firm purchases new physical capital.
   The wholesale firm hires labor in a competitive spot market at nominal wage Wt . Its
nominal dividend is

                                -
    DIVm,t = Pm,t At (ut Kt ) L1                 k
                               d,t - Wt Ld,t - Pt It - Fm,t-1 + Qt (Fm,t - Fm,t-1 )    (2.22)

The firm maximizes the present discounted value of real dividends, where discounting is by
the stochastic discount factor of households. The first order conditions are

              wt = (1 - )pm,t At (ut Kt ) L- 
                                           d,t                                         (2.23)
                                    -1 1-
     pk
      t M1,t  (ut ) = pm,t (ut Kt )   Ld,t                                             (2.24)
                                          - 1       1-
          pk                                                               k
           t M1,t = Et t,t+1 pm,t+1 At+1 Kt+1 ut+1 Ld,t+1 + (1 -  (ut+1 ))pt+1 M1,t+1 (2.25)

         Qt M2,t = Et t,t+1 - 1
                            t+1 [1 + Qt+1 M2,t+1 ]                                     (2.26)
        M1,t - 1
                 =                                                                     (2.27)
        M2,t - 1


                                             12
wt = Wt /Pt is the real wage, pm,t = Pm,t /Pt is the relative price of wholesale output, and
pk      k
  t = Pt /Pt is the relative price of new capital. (2.23) is the standard static first order
condition for labor demand. M1,t is one plus the product of  with the multiplier on the
constraint that firms must issue bonds to finance investment, (2.21), while M2,t is simply one
plus the multiplier on the constraint. (2.24) is the first order condition for utilization. (2.25)
and (2.26) are optimality conditions for capital and bonds, respectively. If the constraint
did not bind, then M1,t = M2,t = 1 and (2.25)-(2.26) would reduce to standard asset pricing
conditions. M1,t serves as an endogenous "investment wedge" and M2,t can be thought
of as a "financial wedge." These wedges distort the standard asset pricing decisions and
fluctuations in these wedges are the mechanism through which QE type policies transmit to
the real economy. See details in Appendix A.4.2.


3       (Un)conventional monetary policy tools
In this section, we formally discuss how our model can accommodate both conventional
as well as unconventional monetary policy. To date, the literature has tended to study
unconventional policy tools in isolation. We are the first to build a model in which all three
types of policies can simultaneously be studied.
    Before discussing unconventional policies, we must first specify what is meant by conven-
tional policy. We define conventional policy as the adjustment of a short term interest rate,
  TR
Rt   , and characterize it via an endogenous feedback rule similar to Taylor (1993):

        TR
    ln Rt  = (1 - r ) ln RT R + r ln Rt
                                      TR
                                       -1 +

                                   (1 - r ) [ (ln t - ln ) + y (ln Yt - ln Yt-1 )] + sr r,t , (3.1)

where RT R and  are steady state values of the policy rate and the inflation target, 0 < r <
1, and  and y are non-negative parameters. We restrict attention to parameter values
giving rise to a determinate equilibrium, i.e. we assume  > 1. The policy rate adjusts in
response to deviations of inflation from target and output growth from trend (which in our
model is zero).9
    During "normal" times, we assume that (i) the central bank sets the interest rate on
reserves equal to the underlying policy rate, and (ii) the reserve requirement, (2.10), is
    9
    In the model there is no analytical expression for "potential" output and with the myriad nominal and
financial frictions it is not even theoretically clear what concept of potential ought to be used. Responding
to output growth may be both theoretically desirable (e.g. Walsh 2003 and Orphanides and Williams 2006)
and empirically more in-line with observed central bank reaction functions (e.g. Coibion and Gorodnichenko
2011).


                                                     13
non-binding, so that


                                          d    re    TR
                                         Rt = Rt  = Rt  .                                             (3.2)

    Unconventional policies of the sort described and analyzed below have by-and-large been
attempted during an environment in which short term rates were constrained from below by
zero. To implement a conventional ZLB constraint, we suppose that the reserve requirement
is non-binding, so that the deposit rate and interest rate on reserves are equal, and that the
net interest rate on reserves must be non-negative:

                                       re    d           TR
                                      Rt  = Rt = max 1, Rt                                            (3.3)


3.1     Quantitative easing
Perhaps the most prominent unconventional policy tool implement by central banks through-
out the world is quantitative easing (QE). It was first introduced by the Bank of Japan in
the early 2000s. In the aftermath of the Great Recession and subsequent ZLB period, the
United States, Euro Area, and United Kingdom (among others) all adopted this policy tool.
In the United States, by the end of QE3 the Federal Reserve had expanded its balance sheet
to 4.5 trillion dollars (or approximately 25 percent of GDP). By the end of 2018, the ECB's
balance sheet had grown to 4.7 trillion Euros, which was about 38 percent of GDP in the
Euro Area, and the Bank of Japan held 552 trillion in Yen, an amount in excess of 100
percent of Japanese GDP.
    As in Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013) and Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2017), we
interpret quantitative easing as central bank purchases of private or government issued bonds.
These purchases are financed via the creation of interest-bearing reserves held by financial
intermediaries. This is a realistic description of how QE policies played out in practice in
the United States subsequent to the crisis. This also distinguishes our model from both
Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2017) and Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013).10
    In our model, the central bank's balance sheet is given by:

                                       Qt Fcb,t + QB,t Bcb,t = REt                                    (3.4)
  10
     Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2017) do not model the central bank's balance sheet at all, and Gertler
and Karadi (2011, 2013) assume that the central bank finances purchases by issuing short term debt directly
to households (though Gertler and Karadi 2013 discuss the similarity of such a setup to one with interest-
bearing reserves).




                                                    14
The central bank can hold either private, Fcb,t , or government, Bcb,t , bonds. These assets
are financed via the creation of interest-bearing reserves. Any operating surplus is returned
to the fiscal authority via a lump sum transfer. Market-clearing requires that bonds issued
by the wholesale firm and debt issued by the government must be held by either financial
intermediaries or the central bank.
    QE policies can have real effects to the extent to which financial intermediaries are
constrained via the costly enforcement problem, (2.9). When intermediaries are constrained,
bond purchases financed via the creation of reserves ease this constraint. In this case, central
bank bond purchases do not simply crowd out intermediary bond purchases, in such a way
that the total demand for bonds increases. This results in higher bond prices, which in
turn eases the loan-in-advance constraint facing the wholesale firm. This results in higher
investment and aggregate demand. If the constraint on intermediaries is non-binding, or if
the wholesale firm does not need to finance investment via debt (i.e.  = 0 in (2.21)), then
bond purchases have no economic effects. Provided  < 1 and both of these constraints
bind, central bank purchases of private bonds will have a stronger effect on excess returns
compared to government bond purchases, and will hence be more stimulative.
    We consider both exogenous and endogenous QE policies. For exogenous policy, we
simply assume that central bank bond holdings follow exogenous AR(1) processes:

                           fcb,t = (1 - f )fcb + f fcb,t-1 + sf f,t                        (3.5)
                           bcb,t = (1 - b )bcb + b bcb,t-1 + sb b,t                        (3.6)

where fcb and bcb denote steady state (real) central bank private and government bond
holdings, f and b are parameters constrained to lie between zero and one, and shocks are
drawn from standard normal distributions (with sf and sb denoting standard deviations of
the shocks). Endogenous QE policies are considered in Section 5. Bond purchases may be
undertaken either in "normal" times, when the policy rate is set according to (3.1), or during
periods in which the policy rate is constrained by zero as in (3.3).


3.2    Forward guidance
Forward guidance entails promises from a central bank about the future path of its policy rate
(Campbell, Evans, Fisher and Justiniano 2012 and Del Negro, Giannoni and Patterson 2015).
Some degree of forward guidance has been used as a communications tool by central banks
around the world for some time, though it has gained more attention recently due to the
ZLB constraint on short term policy rates. Language used in central bank communications
has varied widely across both space and time. For example, the Federal Reserve started by

                                              15
communicating its expected duration of extremely low policy rates, with announcements to
the effect of "we expect conditions to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds
rate for/through..." Initially the forecast of the duration of low rates was ambiguous, with
phrases such as "for some time" or for "an extended period." Later the Fed turned to more
specific guidance regarding the duration of low policy rates. As the duration of the ZLB
period wore on, the Fed also resorted to more explicitly contingent language, for example
promising low rates until a target unemployment rate of 6.5 percent was achieved. Mario
Draghi of the ECB used words to influence policy with his famous "whatever it takes" remark
in 2012.
    We model forward guidance as a shock to the underlying desired policy rate in (3.1) at a
time when the ZLB constraint, (3.3), is binding. Taking the expected duration of the ZLB,
H , as given, a negative shock to the desired policy rate portends a lower interest rate on
reserves (and hence a lower deposit rate, assuming the two are equal) after the ZLB is over.
As a reduced form way to capture the credibility of forward guidance announcements, we
scale the shock to the desired policy rate in a forward guidance experiment by   [0, 1].
 = 1 entails perfect credibility, whereas  = 0 means that forward guidance announcements
are not believed by agents in the model. This parameter can be motivated by the empirical
findings of Campbell, Ferroni, Fisher and Melosi (2019). To the extent to which forward
guidance announcements are credible, such shocks can impact long term yields in the present
via the logic of the expectations hypothesis.
    Our modeling of forward guidance is different from the extant literature, which typically
captures forward guidance as an anticipated shock to a policy rule after a ZLB period is
expected to be over. The difference in timing is important ­ a one unit shock to the desired
policy rate at t has a much smaller effect on the economy than an announced shock of the
same size to the policy rate in t + H . This is because of decay due to interest smoothing
(i.e. 0 < r < 1) ­ the change in the expected path of future deposit rates is smaller
in our experiment compared to a more standard forward guidance shock. In a somewhat
mechanical way, therefore, our new timing assumption leaves our model immune from the
so-called "forward guidance puzzle," which refers to the fact that forward guidance becomes
more powerful as it targets policy rates in the more distant future (McKay, Nakamura and
Steinsson 2016).11
  11
     To be perfectly transparent, in our model a shock which lowers the deposit rate by a given amount H
periods into the future has a smaller stimulative impact than a shock which lowers the deposit rate by the
same amount H + 1 periods into the future. While it is therefore afflicted by the "forward guidance puzzle"
so-defined, we should note that the puzzle is less severe in our model than in a version of our model with
unconstrained financial intermediaries.




                                                    16
3.3     Negative interest rate policy
Although it has not been attempted by the Federal Reserve, a number of central banks
around the world have experimented with negative interest rate policy (NIRP) in the last
several years ­ the Euro Area and Japan being prominent examples. While recent experience
suggests that interbank interest rates can go negative, deposit rates in countries experiment-
ing with NIRP have not. Accordingly, we implement NIRP in our model by assuming that
the ZLB constraint applies only to the deposit rate and not to the interest rate on reserves.12
The inclusion of interest-bearing reserves in our model therefore allows us to incorporate
NIRP into a model that can also be used to study other unconventional policy tools.
    Formally, we assume that the central bank sets the interest rate on reserves equal to the
                                  TR
desired underlying policy rate, Rt   . For the purposes of the presentation here, there is no
constraint on how negative the policy rate can go. We defer a discussion of the ELB until
Subsection 6.2. We only assume that the deposit rate cannot go negative via a modification
of (3.3):
                                d             re       re    TR
                              Rt  = max {1, Rt   } , Rt   = Rt                            (3.7)

We model NIRP as a negative shock to the underlying desired policy rate, met by an equal
reduction in the interest rate on reserves, at a time where the deposit rate is constrained by
zero. Implementation of such a policy requires that the reserve requirement, (2.10), which
is non-binding in all of the policy experiments discussed above, binds. Intuitively, absent a
reserve requirement, intermediaries are willing to hold an indeterminate amount of reserves
              re       d                                                    re      d
so long as Rt     = Rt   . They would not wish to hold any reserves if Rt      < Rt   . To get
intermediaries to hold reserves with a negative gap between the rate on reserves and the rate
on deposits, we simply assume that the central bank requires them to do so, which makes
(2.10) binding.
    NIRP affects the economy through two distinct channels in our model. First, NIRP has
an effect similar to forward guidance ­ to the extent to which r (the interest rate smoothing
parameter) is large relative to H (the duration of the ZLB), lowering the interest rate on
reserves in the present signals lower deposit rates in the future after the ZLB has ended.
Since implementation of NIRP involves an observable action (lowering the interest rate on
reserves), it may well be more credible than pure forward guidance. The second channel
  12
    The conventional logic for the ZLB is that deposits and cash are substitutes, and cash pays a zero
nominal return, so rates on deposits cannot go below zero or else households will hoard cash. Our model is
cashless, so it is not immediately clear why such logic would carry over. We could instead allow the household
to hold a non-interest bearing asset called cash, and could generate a non-zero demand for it by assuming
that households receive utility from holding money balances. As long as the utility from money balances
is additively separable from utility from consumption and leisure, this would not affect the equilibrium
dynamics of the model.


                                                     17
                                                                   re    d
through which NIRP operates works in the opposite direction. Rt       < Rt works like a tax on
intermediaries in the evolution of net worth, (2.5). This lowers net worth and exacerbates
the costly enforcement constraint facing intermediaries; other things being equal, this results
in higher excess returns. This channel is similar to what is emphasized both theoretically
and empirically in Ulate (2018) and Eggertsson, Juelsrud, Summers and Wold (2019). If
forward guidance is completely credible (i.e.  = 1), NIRP will therefore be less stimulative
than pure forward guidance. If the central bank is not perfectly credible ( < 1), then this
may not be the case. How important this offsetting effect of NIRP coming through the
evolution of net worth is depends on how many reserves intermediaries hold. This in turn
has implications for the size of the central bank's balance sheet.


4      Comparing Alternative Monetary Policy
In this section, we compare and contrast exogenous changes in alternative unconventional
policy tools to an exogenous shock to conventional policy. We wish to assess the efficacy of
unconventional policy interventions in affecting output and other macroeconomic aggregates.


4.1     Calibration
The model is solved via a linear approximation about the non-stochastic steady state.13
When considering the effects of the ZLB, we solve a piecewise linear version of the model
using the approach suggested by Guerrieri and Iacoviello (2015). Many of the parameters in
the model take on relatively standard values drawn from the literature. These parameters
are listed and discussed in Appendix B. In the text, we focus only on the less standard
parameters. These are given in Table 1.
    The relatively non-standard parameters in our model relate to financial intermediaries,
private and government bonds, the fraction of investment the wholesale firm must finance
by issuing bonds, and the size of the central bank's balance sheet. We follow Carlstrom,
Fuerst and Paustian (2017) in setting  to imply a ten year duration for both private and
government bonds. We choose  , the survival probability for intermediaries, to be 0.95, which
is in-line with Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013). We target a steady state excess return of
                                         F     d
private bonds over the deposit rate, Rt    - Rt  , of 300 basis points and that of government
                              B     d
bonds over the deposit rate, Rt - Rt  , of 100 basis points (both at an annualized frequency).
These are chosen to roughly match observed spreads of Baa yields over the Federal Funds
  13
    In this steady state neither the ZLB nor the reserve requirements bind, so that the steady state reserve
and deposit rates are equal.



                                                    18
                                          Table 1: Calibrated Parameters
           Parameter       Value or Target           Description
                           1 - 40-1                  Bond duration
                           0.81                      Fraction of investment from debt
                           0.95                      Intermediary survival probability
                           400(RF - Rd ) = 3         Recoverability parameter / steady state spread
           X               Leverage = 4              Transfer to new intermediaries / steady state leverage
                           1/3                       Government bond recoverability
                           bcb QB
           bcb               4Y    = 0.06            Steady state central bank Treasury holdings
           fcb             0                         Steady state central private bond holdings
                           0.98                      AR liquidity
           b               0.8                       AR central bank Treasury
           f               0.8                       AR central bank private bonds
           ¯
           bG              BG QB
                                   = 0.41            Steady state government debt
                             4Y
                           G
           G               Y   = 0.2                 Steady state government spending
Note: this table lists the values of calibrated parameters or the target used in the calibration.



rate and the ten year Treasury yield over the Federal Funds rate.14 These targets imply a
steady state value of  = 0.58 and a value of the parameter  = 1/3. The value of X (the
transfer of startup funds to new financial intermediaries) is chosen to be consistent with a
steady state leverage ratio (ratio of assets to aggregate net worth) of four, which is similar
to Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013). The fraction of investment the wholesale firm must
finance by issuing debt is  = 0.81. This is chosen to match the observed ratio of the value
of outstanding private debt to annualized nominal GDP immediately prior to the Crisis of
1.68.15 The steady state values of government spending and government debt are chosen to
match a government spending share of output of 20 percent and a steady state debt-to-GDP
ratio of 41 percent, the latter of which is the observed ratio of federal government liabilities
to annualized nominal GDP in the fourth quarter of 2007. The steady state (real) value of
central bank private bond holdings, fcb , is set to zero because the Fed only held Treasury
debt at the end of 2007. The steady state central bank holding of government bonds, bcb , is
chosen to match the fraction of the Fed's assets over annualized GDP immediately prior to
the Great Recession of 6 percent.
    Although it can accommodate many more, our model features a parsimonious selection
of exogenous shocks ­ aside from policy interventions, these include shocks to productivity,
liquidity, and government spending. Turning off all exogenous monetary policy shocks (both
  14
     Note that excess returns and yields to maturity (defined and discussed below) are not necessarily the
same outside of steady state, but are identical in the steady state. Over the period 1960-2008, the average
Baa-FFR spread is 272 basis points and the average 10 Year-FFR spread is 86 basis points. Over a shorter
sample, from 1984-2008, the average spreads are 352 and 142 basis points, respectively. Targeting spreads
of 300 and 100 basis points, respectively, therefore represents a middle ground.
  15
     Outstanding private debt is measured by total credit to the private non-financial sector for the United
States from FRED.


                                                               19
conventional and unconventional), the standard deviations of these three remaining shocks
are then chosen to loosely match a small set of selected moments from the data. More details
are provided in Appendix B.


4.2     Quantitative Analysis
In this section, we seek to quantify how much an unconventional policy tool must be moved
so as to generate similar aggregate responses to a conventional policy shock. The comparison
is depicted in Figure 1, which plots impulse responses of different macroeconomic aggregates
to various policy interventions. In each case, the relevant exogenous shock hits in period
7. The solid blue lines depict responses to a conventional policy shock to the Taylor rule,
(3.1). The size of the shock is -1 percent at an annualized percentage rate, which results
in about a 0.75 percentage point decline in the policy rate on impact (the difference being
accounted for by the endogenous reaction of the policy rate to inflation and output growth).
The responses of aggregate variables to this shock are familiar. Output increases by about
0.5 percent on impact and follows a hump-shaped pattern. The responses of investment and
consumption are similar, though investment responds about four times as much as output
and consumption about one third as much as output. Inflation rises by about 0.6 percentage
points on impact and remains above trend for about three years.
    Responses to unconventional policy interventions are depicted via colored dash lines (red
for QE, purple for FG, and orange for NIRP). For these experiments, we assume that a se-
quence of liquidity shocks drives the economy to the ZLB; from the period the policy shock
hits (period 7), the ZLB is expected to bind for nine quarters, or just over two years. This is
in-line with the expected duration of the ZLB as estimated by Bauer and Rudebusch (2016)
and Wu and Xia (2016).16 The quantitative easing experiment involves purchasing private
bonds (a purchase of government bonds has a qualitatively similar, albeit smaller, effect on
macroeconomic aggregates, as we discuss further below). The magnitudes of the unconven-
tional policy interventions are chosen to roughly match the impact change in output to the
conventional policy shock. The autoregressive coefficient in the quantitative easing experi-
ment, f , is set equal to the Taylor rule smoothing parameter, r , to facilitate comparison.
    The unconventional shocks all have qualitatively similar effects on output compared to
the conventional policy shock, although the output response to QE is less persistent than
to the other interventions. The investment dynamics mirror the output response for all
of the unconventional shocks. The consumption dynamics are similar for FG and NIRP
  16
    In the case of the quantitative easing and forward guidance experiments, the policy rate (interest rate on
reserves) and the deposit rate are both constrained by zero. For the NIRP experiment, as discussed above,
only the deposit rate is constrained.


                                                     20
                                         Figure 1: Exogenous monetary policy

                          Output                               Investment                     Consumption                            Inflation
           0.6                                                                     0.3                                 1
                                                2
           0.4
                                                                                   0.2
                                                1
           0.2                                                                                                        0.5

                                                0                                  0.1
             0
                                                                                                                       0
           -0.2                                -1                                    0
                  0   5     10      15   20          0     5       10    15   20          0   5     10     15   20          0    5      10       15   20

                          TR rate                              Policy rate                    Deposit rate                      CB Balance sheet
                                                0                                    0                               0.04
             0
                                              -0.5                                                                   0.03
           -0.5                                                                    -0.2

            -1                                 -1                                                                    0.02
                                                                                   -0.4
           -1.5                               -1.5                                                                   0.01
                                                                                   -0.6
            -2                                 -2                                                                      0
                  0   5     10      15   20          0     5       10    15   20          0   5     10     15   20          0    5      10       15   20

                      Real long yield                    Nominal long yield                       Spread
             0                                  0
                                                                                   0.5                                               MP
                                                                                                                                     QE
                                              -0.1                                                                                   NIRP
                                                                                                                                     FG
           -0.5                               -0.2                                   0

                                              -0.3

            -1                                -0.4                                 -0.5
                  0   5     10      15   20          0     5       10    15   20          0   5     10     15   20




Notes: Blue solid lines: a -1% shock to the annualized policy rate. Red dash-dotted lines: a QE shock, where
the central bank increases its balance sheet by about 4 percent of steady state GDP by purchasing private
debt, where f = r . Yellow dotted lines: NIRP with a shock of -2.4% to the annualized policy rate. Purple
dashed lines: forward guidance with a shock of -2.2% to the desired policy interest rate. All these shocks
hit the economy in period 7. For all but the blue solid lines, we generate a binding ZLB with a sequence of
liquidity shocks of 1.5 standard deviations in each of the periods 1 through 6.


compared to conventional policy, while the consumption response to a QE shock is quite
muted in comparison. This is because QE has no effect on the deposit rate during the
period of the ZLB, which is what is relevant in the household's Euler equation. All the
shocks are inflationary, with the QE shock being the least so, while FG and NIRP are
more inflationary compared to the conventional policy shock. To generate a similar output
increase as a conventional policy shock, the QE experiment requires the central bank to
increase the size of its balance sheet by about 4 percent relative to annualized steady state
output. Translating into the equations of our model,

                                                                sf f,t = f sr r,t ,                                                                        (4.1)

where f = -7 implies the shock size on fcb,t is seven times as large as the shock to the policy
rate, and in the opposite direction. In other words, an easing policy could be implemented
by lowering the policy rate or by increasing the size of the central bank's balance sheet. We
will elaborate on this conversion rate later.

                                                                              21
    The NIRP and FG interventions are shocks to the Taylor rule of -2.4 and -2.2 percent,
respectively, resulting in roughly a 2 percentage point decline in the Taylor rule rate on
impact. This is more than twice as large as the change in the policy rate for the conventional
policy shock. The main difference between FG and NIRP is that the policy rate does not
react for the duration of the ZLB in the case of FG but falls immediately in the NIRP
experiment. Forward guidance and NIRP shocks must be larger than conventional policy
shocks to generate a similar change in output because these only affect the deposit rate in
the future rather than in the present. The longer the expected duration of the ZLB, the
larger must be the shock to FG or NIRP to generate a given output movement. FG is
slightly more expansionary than a NIRP intervention of the same amount, which is why the
NIRP shock is slightly larger than the FG shock. This is because a decline in the policy
rate relative to the deposit rate reduces the profitability of intermediaries, as discussed in
Subsection 3.3. This in turn lowers net worth and exacerbates the constraint giving rise to
equilibrium spreads. Because the model is solved about a steady state in which the size
of the central bank's balance sheet is small, intermediaries do not hold large quantities of
reserves and consequently the differences between FG and NIRP are small. This need not
necessarily be the case, as we discuss further below.
    The different policy shocks have comparable effects on output because they have similar
effects on long term interest rates. To be precise, the (gross) yield to maturity, RLF
                                                                                     t , on the
private investment bond is implicitly defined via:17

                                     1                  2
                               Qt =      +        2 +       3 + ...
                                    RLFt   (RLF
                                              t )     (RLF
                                                         t )


Consequently,

                                                      1
                                            RLF
                                              t =        +                                (4.2)
                                                      Qt

We further define the overall spread as the difference in the net long term private yield and
the net deposit rate:

                                            ln RLF       d
                                                 t - ln Rt                                (4.3)

We define the credit spread as the difference in net yields on private and government bonds:

                                           ln RLF        B
                                                t - ln RLt                                (4.4)
 17
      The expression for the yield is similar for the government bond.



                                                      22
We define the real long term yield as:

                                          L
                                         rt = ln RLF
                                                   t - Et ln t+1                                            (4.5)

    More precisely, what we call the real long term (private) yield equals the spread (which
consists of both the term spread and the credit spread ) plus the real deposit rate.18 This
turns out to be the relevant metric for assessing monetary policy transmission in the model.
One observes that the real long term yield declines by a similar amount both on impact and
dynamically in response to both the conventional and unconventional policy interventions.
This, in turn, results in very similar output dynamics to each of the policy interventions.
Long term yields being the main driving force in the economy is consistent with Wu and
Zhang (2017, 2019), who use the shadow rate of Wu and Xia (2016) as a summary statistic
for the effects of unconventional policies.
    Even though conventional and unconventional policy shocks have similar effects on the
real long term yield, they have quite different effects on the overall spread between the long
term private yield and the deposit rate. Conventional policy shocks indirectly affect long
term rates by influencing short term rates. Since long term yields react less than short term
rates, the overall spread increases. In contrast, unconventional shocks affect longer term
rates without impacting the deposit rate in the short run. This results in the overall spread
declining rather than rising.
    Figure 2 compares and contrasts forward guidance and NIRP across several different
specifications. Blue lines depict responses to the conventional policy shock; these are iden-
tical to the solid blue lines in Figure 1 and are included to facilitate comparison. For the
unconventional shocks, we generate the ZLB in the same manner as in Figure 1. Different
than Figure 1, all shocks are the same magnitude of -1 percent annualized (i.e. the shock
magnitudes are not adjusted so as to produce similar output responses). Dotted lines are
responses to a NIRP shock. Dashed lines depict responses to forward guidance with green
being fully credible ( = 1), light blue partially credible ( = 0.7), and dark red non-credible
( = 0).
    There are a couple of noteworthy results. First, although a fully credible forward guidance
policy is more stimulative than NIRP, for a central bank with limited credibility, NIRP
is likely a more effective policy. In this sense, one can interpret NIRP in our model as
commitment device a central bank can employ to carry out forward guidance. Pure forward
guidance involves nothing more than a verbal promise of future low rates, which could be
interpreted by the private sector as cheap talk, especially when the central bank has a low
 18                                                   d
      In particular, the real net deposit rate is ln Rt - Et ln t+1 . Summing this and (4.3) gives (4.5).



                                                      23
                                          Figure 2: Exogenous NIRP vs. FG

                          Output                                Investment                         Consumption                            Inflation
           0.6                                   2                                       0.2                              0.6

                                                1.5                                     0.15
           0.4                                                                                                            0.4
                                                 1                                       0.1
           0.2                                                                                                            0.2
                                                0.5                                     0.05

             0                                   0                                        0                                0
                  0   5     10      15   20           0     5       10        15   20          0   5     10     15   20         0    5       10       15   20

                          TR rate                               Policy rate                        Deposit rate                     CB Balance sheet
             0                                   0                                        0
                                                                                                                          0.4
           -0.2                                -0.2                                     -0.2
                                                                                                                          0.3
           -0.4                                -0.4                                     -0.4
                                                                                                                          0.2
           -0.6                                -0.6                                     -0.6
                                                                                                                          0.1
           -0.8                                -0.8                                     -0.8
                                                                                                                           0
                  0   5     10      15   20           0     5       10        15   20          0   5     10     15   20         0    5       10       15   20

                      Real long yield                     Nominal long yield                           Spread
             0                                   0                                       0.6                                             MP
                                                                                                                                         NIRP
                                                                                                                                         FG
           -0.2                               -0.05                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                         FG: = 0.7
                                                                                                                                         FG: = 0
           -0.4                                                                          0.2
                                               -0.1

           -0.6                                                                           0
                                              -0.15
                  0   5     10      15   20           0     5       10        15   20          0   5     10     15   20




Notes: Blue lines: responses to the conventional monetary policy shock. Red dotted lines: response to a
NIRP shock. Green dashed lines: fully credible forward guidance; light blue dashed lines: partially credible
forward guidance with  = 0.7; dark red dashed lines: non-credible forward guidance with  = 0. All shocks
are -1% annualized and hit in period 7. For all but blue solid lines, we generate a binding ZLB with a
sequence of liquidity shocks of 1.5 standard deviations in each of the periods 1 - 6.


 . NIRP, in contrast, involves an observable action in the present. Second, conditioning on
equal sized shocks, the stimulative effect of a NIRP intervention is about half as large as a
conventional policy shock. Put differently, to achieve a given stimulus on output the policy
rate must be cut twice as much when the deposit rate is constrained by zero in comparison
to normal times. In practice, this likely limits the usefulness of NIRP as an unconventional
policy tool. A number of political and social constraints likely limit how negative interbank
lending rates can go. In practice, no central bank has pushed policy rates deeply negative
(e.g. the ECB's lowest policy rate was only -40 basis points). Later, in Section 6, we will use
our model to shed some light on an effective lower bound for policy rates. We also return to
NIRP and discuss its efficacy in relation to the total size of the central bank's balance sheet.
    Figure 3 assesses different types of quantitative easing experiments. The blue solid lines
are the benchmark responses, which correspond to a purchase of private debt when the policy
and deposit rates are constrained by the ZLB. These responses are identical to the red dash-
dotted responses in Figure 1. The red solid lines are responses to a purchase of public


                                                                                   24
                                                          Figure 3: Exogenous QE

                          Output                                Investment                          Consumption                             Inflation
           0.6                                                                            0.1                               0.4
                                                 2
           0.4                                                                                                              0.3

                                                 1                                                                          0.2
           0.2                                                                          0.05
                                                                                                                            0.1
             0                                   0
                                                                                                                             0
           -0.2                                  -1                                        0
                  0   5     10      15   20           0     5       10        15   20           0   5     10     15   20          0    5       10       15   20

                          TR rate                               Policy rate                         Deposit rate                      CB Balance sheet
           0.3
                                                0.1                                       0.1                              0.04
           0.2
                                              0.05                                      0.05                               0.03
           0.1
                                                 0                                         0                               0.02
             0                                -0.05                                     -0.05                              0.01

           -0.1                                -0.1                                      -0.1                                0
                  0   5     10      15   20           0     5       10        15   20           0   5     10     15   20          0    5       10       15   20

                      Real long yield                     Nominal long yield                            Spread
           0.2                                   0                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                           QE
                                                                                                                                           QE Pub
             0                                 -0.1                                                                                        QE Normal
                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                           QE Pub Normal
           -0.2                                -0.2
                                                                                         -0.2
           -0.4                                -0.3

           -0.6                                -0.4                                      -0.4
                  0   5     10      15   20           0     5       10        15   20           0   5     10     15   20




Notes: Blue solid lines: purchasing private debt at the ZLB; red solid lines: purchasing public debt at the
ZLB. Yellow dashed lines: purchasing private debt during normal times; purple dashed lines: purchasing
public debt during normal times. The QE shocks hit the economy in period 7, and are the same across the
four specifications. Where relevant, we generate a binding ZLB with a sequence of liquidity shocks of 1.5
standard deviations in each of the periods 1 - 6.


debt (of the same magnitude as the benchmark) when short term rates are constrained.
As in Gertler and Karadi (2013), private debt purchases are more stimulative than buying
government debt. This result is essentially built into the model via our calibration of ,
which governs the steady state credit spread. The dashed lines depict impulse responses to
QE interventions during periods in which short term rates are unconstrained (i.e. "normal"
times). QE is more stimulative when short term policy rates are constrained than when not,
and private bond purchases remain more stimulative than government bond purchases.
    In summary, various unconventional policy interventions can in principle have similar
macroeconomic effects as a conventional cut in the short term policy rate. The requisite
forward guidance and NIRP interventions are quite large, however, and the efficacy of FG
depends crucially on a central bank's credibility. Further, implementing very large negative
policy rates seems implausible in practice. For these reasons, QE-type interventions seem
to be the best unconventional tool in practice. We therefore focus on QE as an endogenous
policy tool to ameliorate the adverse consequences of a binding ZLB in the next section.



                                                                                   25
5       Endogenous Quantitative Easing and the Great Re-
        cession
The previous section established that exogenous changes in different unconventional policy
tools can have similar economic effects as exogenous changes in short term policy rates.
In practice, rather than exogenous shocks, effective monetary policy design entails the en-
dogenous adjustment of policy to changing economic conditions. In this section, we study
endogenous quantitative easing in response to other shocks. We do so both conditioning
on each shock one at a time as well as in a simulation with a sequence of adverse liquidity
shocks meant to mimic the experience of the US in the Great Recession. We wish to address
the question of whether QE can serve as a close substitute for conventional policy when the
ZLB binds. If so, how much QE is required?
   So as to facilitate a comparison with conventional policy, we propose that the central
bank's private bond holdings obey a Taylor type reaction function:19

    fcb,t = (1 - f )fcb + f fcb,t-1 +
                                (1 - f )f [ (ln t - ln ) + y (ln Yt - ln Yt-1 )] + sf f,t (5.1)

    The values of  and y are the same as in (3.1), and to further facilitate comparison
we assume that f = r . The parameter f measures the intensity of the reaction of bond-
holdings, relative to the reaction of the desired policy rate, to deviations of inflation and
output growth from target. For the exercises which follow, we assume that endogenous QE
is only operative when the policy rate is constrained by the ZLB. That is, outside of the ZLB,
f = 0, and (5.1) collapses to (3.5). At the ZLB, we allow f = 0. For the quantitative
results which follow, we assume a value of f = -7, which is the same conversion factor
we used above in (4.1) when studying exogenous QE. As we shall show, this conversion
rate results in endogenous QE policy when the policy rate is constrained by zero closely
mimicking conventional policy.


5.1      Endogenous Monetary Policy Responses to Economic Shocks
In this subsection, we study the conditional responses to different exogenous shocks when the
policy rate is constrained by the ZLB. We find that endogenous QE effectively ameliorates
the effects of the ZLB in response to each shock.
  19
    We could similarly specify an endogenous reaction function for central bank holdings of government
debt. All of the results which follow would be similar, though the value of b required to mimic conventional
policy would be larger.


                                                    26
                          Figure 4: Liquidity shock and endogenous QE


                         Output                                   Investment                          Consumption
            0                                      0                                      0.2

          -0.5                                    -2                                      0.1

           -1                                     -4                                        0

          -1.5                                    -6                                      -0.1

           -2                                     -8                                      -0.2
                 2   4     6     8     10   12          2     4      6    8     10   12          2    4     6    8    10   12

                         Inflation                                Policy rate                    10 -3 CB Balance sheet
            0                                      0                                       20

                                                 -0.1                                      15
          -0.5
                                                 -0.2                                      10
                                                                  MP
           -1                                                     ZLB
                                                 -0.3                                       5
                                                                  QE
          -1.5                                   -0.4                                       0
                 2   4     6     8     10   12          2     4      6    8     10   12          2    4     6    8    10   12

                     Real long yield                        Nominal long yield                            Spread
           1.5
                                                 0.4                                      0.4

            1                                    0.3                                      0.3

                                                 0.2                                      0.2
           0.5
                                                 0.1                                      0.1

            0                                      0                                        0
                 2   4     6     8     10   12          2     4      6    8     10   12          2    4     6    8    10   12



Notes: This figure plots impulse responses to a one standard deviation liquidity shock. The shock hits in
period 7. Blue dash-dotted lines: conventional monetary policy without the ZLB. Red dashed lines: the
ZLB with no unconventional monetary policy. Purple solid lines: the ZLB with endogenous QE. We create
the ZLB with a sequence of liquidity shocks of 1.5 standard deviations from periods 1 - 6.


Liquidity shock Consider first a shock to t . In the model, this measures the fraction
of assets with which an intermediary may abscond in the event of bankruptcy; equivalently,
1 - t is the fraction of assets recoverable by creditors. An increase in t therefore makes it
more difficult for households to recover funds in the event of failure, which, other things being
equal, makes them less willing to lend to intermediaries. We therefore refer to this shock as
a liquidity shock ­ an increase in t results in creditors pulling funds out of intermediaries,
which in equilibrium results in a decline in the supply of credit and an increase in interest
rate spreads. This represents a simple way for the model to capture the "run" dynamics on
the shadow banking system during the recent crisis as described, for example, in Gorton and
Metrick (2012).
    Figure 4 plots impulse responses to a one standard deviation liquidity shock. The shock
occurs in period seven. The procedure to generate the ZLB is exactly the same as in the
exogenous policy experiments in Section 4. With conventional monetary policy (blue dash-
dotted lines) unconstrained by the ZLB, a one standard deviation liquidity shock lowers

                                                                   27
output by about 1 percent at the peak. The shock results in a sharp increase in both
the real and nominal long term yields. There is a consequent sharp decline in investment
and inflation. The conventional policy response involves lowering short term rates, which
partially offsets the decline in aggregate demand. The dashed red lines depict how the
economy would react to the same shock if monetary policy were constrained by the ZLB and
there is no unconventional policy response. With an inability to lower the policy rate, output
falls substantially more in response to the shock ­ output declines by about 1.7 percent at
peak. The shock is substantially more deflationary at the ZLB and the real and nominal
long yields rise by significantly more in comparison to when policy is unconstrained.
    The solid purple lines in Figure 4 plot responses when the policy rate is constrained by
the ZLB but the central bank implements endogenous QE via (5.1). Endogenous QE is able
to closely replicate the responses of output and investment to the shock under conventional
policy. To replicate the responses under conventional policy (which entails an eventual 35
basis point cut in the policy rate), it is necessary for the central bank to increase the size of
its balance sheet by about 1.5 percent of steady state output at the maximum.
    The underlying reason why endogenous QE is effective in response to the liquidity shock
is similar to what is discussed above for exogenous policy shocks. Endogenous QE prevents
long term interest rates from rising as much as they would when policy is constrained by the
ZLB, thereby lowering the slope of the yield curve. This encourages investment and results
in similar output dynamics in comparison to conventional policy. Consumption dynamics
are different because it depends on the short term interest rate (evident in the upper right
panel of the figure), but consumption contributes little to output fluctuations.

Technology shock Consider next the impulse responses to a one standard deviation tech-
nology shock. Responses under different policies scenarios are depicted in Figure 5.
   Under conventional policy, output, consumption, and investment all jump up on impact
and continue to grow for a number of periods. Inflation and the policy rate both fall. When
the policy rate is constrained and there is no unconventional policy response, output and
other aggregates still rise on impact, but by less in comparison to normal times. The central
bank would like to lower the policy rate to accommodate the increase in aggregate supply,
but the inability to do so results in long term interest rates being higher than they otherwise
would be, which dampens demand. When the central bank can endogenously adjust its
balance sheet by purchasing bonds, in contrast, the responses of output, investment, and
consumption virtually lie atop the responses under conventional policy. Note that this is
with exactly the same value of f as in Figure 4. The requisite bond purchase to closely
mimic the responses under conventional policy is not large ­ at the peak, the central bank


                                               28
                                            Figure 5: Technology shock


                         Output                                    Investment                           Consumption
            1                                       3                                        0.4

                                                                                             0.3
                                                    2
          0.5                                                                                0.2
                                                    1
                                                                                             0.1

            0                                       0                                         0
                 2   4     6     8     10   12           2     4         6   8   10   12           2    4    6    8   10   12

                         Inflation                                 Policy rate                     10 -3CB Balance sheet
            0                                       0                                         4

          -0.1                                                                                3
                                                 -0.02
          -0.2                                                                                2
          -0.3                                   -0.04             MP
                                                                   ZLB                        1
          -0.4                                                     QE
                                                 -0.06                                        0
                 2   4     6     8     10   12           2     4         6   8   10   12           2    4    6    8   10   12

                     Real long yield                         Nominal long yield                             Spread
          0.2                                       0                                         0


          0.1                                    -0.05                                     -0.05


            0                                     -0.1                                      -0.1


          -0.1                                   -0.15                                     -0.15
                 2   4     6     8     10   12           2     4         6   8   10   12           2    4    6    8   10   12




Notes: This figure plots impulse responses to a one standard deviation technology shock. The shock hits
in period 7. Blue dash-dotted lines: conventional monetary policy without the ZLB. Red dashed lines: the
ZLB with no unconventional monetary policy. Purple solid lines: the ZLB with endogenous QE. We create
the ZLB with a sequence of liquidity shocks of 1.5 standard deviations from periods 1 - 6.


needs to increase the size of its balance sheet by 0.3% of steady state output.

Government Spending Shock The other exogenous shock in our model is a shock to
government spending. The impulse responses under different monetary policy scenarios are
shown in Figure 6.
    In normal times, the government spending shock is expansionary for output, but con-
sumption and investment both decline (i.e. the multiplier is less than unity). Inflation and
the policy rate both rise, with long term interest rates rising as well. When conventional
policy is constrained by the ZLB and unconventional policies are unavailable, output ex-
pands by more compared to normal times. Consumption and investment both fall by less in
comparison to normal times, although for this particular experiment both still decline (i.e.




                                                                    29
                                           Figure 6: Government spending shock

                               Output                                   Investment                              Consumption
           0.2                                           0                                         0

                                                                                                -0.02
           0.1                                         -0.2
                                                                                                -0.04

                                                                                                -0.06
            0                                          -0.4
                 2         4     6     8     10   12          2     4      6    8     10   12           2       4      6   8    10   12

                               Inflation                                Policy rate                          -3CB   Balance sheet
                                                                                                        10
                                                       0.04                                        0
          0.04                                                          MP
                                                                        ZLB
                                                                        QE
                                                       0.02                                       -1
          0.02


            0                                            0                                        -2
                 2         4     6     8     10   12          2     4      6    8     10   12           2       4      6   8    10   12
                      -3   Real long yield                        Nominal long yield                                 Spread
                 10
                                                       0.04                                     0.04
           20

           10                                          0.02                                     0.02
            0

                                                         0                                         0
                 2         4     6     8     10   12          2     4      6    8     10   12           2       4      6   8    10   12



Notes: This figure plots impulse responses to a one standard deviation government spending shock. The
shock hits in period 7. Blue dash-dotted lines: conventional monetary policy without the ZLB. Red dashed
lines: the ZLB with no unconventional monetary policy. Purple solid lines: the ZLB with endogenous QE.
We create the ZLB with a sequence of liquidity shocks of 1.5 standard deviations from periods 1 - 6.


the multiplier remains below unity).20 This basic pattern is consistent with other papers that
argue that the government spending multiplier can be substantially larger at the ZLB ­ see,
e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011). With endogenous QE, in contrast, output
and other variables react similarly at the ZLB compared to normal times. The underlying
mechanism is the same as above conditional on the other shocks ­ by buying or selling bonds,
the central bank can implement similar paths of long term interest rates as when it engages
in conventional policy by adjusting short term rates.


5.2     The Great Recession
In this subsection we conduct a simulation analysis of the model. The economy starts in the
non-stochastic steady state. Random technology, government spending, and liquidity shocks
are then drawn for the subsequent 40 periods. To roughly mimic the experience of the Great
  20
    For longer expected durations of the ZLB, or different parameterizations of the model, the multiplier
can exceed unity (i.e. consumption and/or investment rise on impact). However, it is generally the case that
our model is less sensitive to the ZLB than an otherwise similar model with frictionless financial markets.


                                                                         30
                                          Figure 7: Simulation

                                 Output                            CB balance sheet
                  10                                         0.3


                   0                                         0.2


                  -10                                        0.1


                  -20                                         0
                           10       20        30   40              10     20     30         40

                                Policy rate                         Real long yield
                                                             15
                   4                                                                  MP
                                                                                      ZLB
                                                             10                       QE
                   2


                   0                                          5


                   -2                                         0
                           10       20        30   40              10     20     30         40


Notes: This figure plots simulated paths of different variables from one draw from our simulation. The
economy begins in period 1 in steady state. From period 2 on, we draw random shocks to technology,
government spending, and liquidity. We fix the size of the liquidity shock at 1.5 standard deviations from
periods 2 - 10 to create the ZLB environment. Blue dash-dotted lines: normal times with conventional
policy; red dashed lines: ZLB; solid purple lines: ZLB with endogenous QE. The size of the central bank's
balance sheet is expressed relative to current period output.


Recession in the United States, we fix the liquidity shocks in periods 2 through 10 so as to
drive the economy to the ZLB. This sequence of shocks causes the ZLB to bind for roughly
four years in expectation. Absent a ZLB constraint, it would result in the desired policy rate
falling to two percentage points below zero.
    Figure 7 plots simulated values of output (expressed in percentage deviations relative to
steady state), the size of the central bank's balance sheet (relative to annualized output),
the policy rate (expressed at an annualized percentage rate), and the real long yield for one
particular draw of random shocks. The dashed blue lines correspond to simulated values
under conventional policy absent a ZLB constraint. The dashed red lines impose the ZLB
and feature no unconventional policy reaction. The solid purple lines correspond to simulated
paths assuming that endogenous QE becomes operative while the policy rate is constrained
by zero. After the ZLB period is over, central bank bond holdings revert to obeying an
exogenous AR(1) process.
    Absent a ZLB constraint, for this particular draw of shocks output declines by more


                                                        31
than 10 percent relative to steady state. It remains persistently low and does not return
to steady state until about period 30, which is when the adverse sequence of initial large
liquidity shocks that are employed to make the ZLB bind have mostly abated. Taking the
ZLB constraint into account and assuming no unconventional policy response, in contrast,
results in a much sharper output contraction. In particular, output falls a little more than
20 percent below steady state at peak. Put slightly differently, the ZLB causes output to
decline by roughly twice as much in comparison to a version of the model ignoring the ZLB.
The mechanism behind this amplification is the behavior of the real long yield (bottom right
panel of the figure). The combination of deflation plus a fixed short term rate results in a
very large spike in the real long yield.
    It is apparent from Figure 7 that endogenous QE largely mitigates the effects of the bind-
ing ZLB. In fact, for the first 18 or so periods of the simulation, it is virtually impossible to
distinguish between the simulated paths of output and the real long yield under endogenous
QE relative to their simulated paths ignoring the ZLB. There is some difference evident after
about period 20 of the simulation, where output under the ZLB with endogenous QE lies
slightly below the simulated path of output under conventional policy. This is driven by the
unwinding of the balance sheet subsequent to the ZLB period and is discussed further in
Section 6.
    The sequence of shocks used to generate Figure 7 pushes the desired short term policy
rate more than 2 percentage points below zero. This is roughly in-line with the estimated
decline in the shadow rate series of Wu and Xia (2016). To generate the same response of
output, a central bank following our endogenous QE rule purchases bonds in an amount
that pushes the size of its balance sheet to about 25 percent of GDP. This is roughly the
experience of the US during the Great Recession, where between QE1 and QE3 the Fed
increased the size of its balance sheet to roughly 25 percent of GDP.
    Figure 7 focuses on one particular draw of shocks over a 40 quarter time horizon. In
Figure 8 we graphically depict results from repeating this exercise 1000 different times. The
figure shows scatter plots of moments of output when the short rate is subject to the ZLB
(with and without endogenous QE) on the vertical axes against moments of output under
conventional policy on the horizontal axes. The moments on which we focus are the mean
and standard deviation of output, expressed in percentage deviations from steady state.
Red circles correspond to moments with a binding ZLB but no endogenous QE, while purple
stars are moments at the ZLB with endogenous QE. For ease of interpretation, we include
45 degree lines in each plot.
    Focus first on the upper panel of Figure 8, which is based on the first 15 periods of each
of the 1000 simulations. The ZLB binds during these periods for all of the 1000 simulations.


                                               32
                                                  Figure 8: Simulation

                                        Mean                                                 Std
                          0                                                12

                          -2                                               10
                          -4
                                                                           8
                ZLB/QE




                                                                  ZLB/QE
                          -6
                                                                           6
                          -8
                                                                           4
                         -10

                         -12                                               2

                         -14                                               0
                                 -10             -5      0                      0   2   4     6      8      10       12
                                        normal                                              normal

                                        Mean                                                 Std
                         10                                                12

                          5                                                10

                          0                                                8
                ZLB/QE




                                                                  ZLB/QE
                          -5                                               6

                         -10                                               4
                                                                                                         ZLB
                         -15                                               2                             QE
                                                                                                         45 degree
                         -20                                               0
                           -20    -10             0     10                      0   2   4     6      8      10       12
                                        normal                                              normal

Notes: We generate 1000 different simulations of 40 periods each. For each simulation, from period 2 on
we draw random shocks to technology, government spending and liquidity. We fix the size of the liquidity
shock at 1.5 standard deviations from periods 2 - 10 to create the ZLB environment in each simulation. We
compute the mean and standard deviation over periods 1 - 15 (top row) or over periods 16 - 40 (bottom
row) for output for each of the 1000 different draws. We compare between ZLB (red circles) and endogenous
QE (purple stars) on the vertical axes against normal times on the horizontal axes. Each of the 1000 circles
or stars represent moments from each of the 1000 draws. Solid black line: 45 degree line. Units: percentage
deviations from the steady state.


The red circles lie far below the 45 degree line in the case of the mean, and far above the
45 degree line in the case of the standard deviation. In other words, when the economy is
at the ZLB and unconventional policies are unavailable, output is on average significantly
lower and more volatile relative to a situation in which there is no ZLB. The purple stars,
in contrast, align tightly with the 45 degree line for both the mean and standard deviation
scatter plots. This suggests that endogenous QE can serve as a highly effective substitute
for conventional policy during periods in which the ZLB binds.
    Next, focus on the bottom panel of Figure 8, which computes moments based on periods
16 to 40 of each simulation. The ZLB begins to lift in period 16. As a result, there is little
observable difference between mean output with and without endogenous QE. Relative to
the upper panel of the figure, the purple stars on average lie slightly below the 45 degree


                                                             33
                             Table 2: Simulated Means and Volatilities
                                    Mean                           Std
                                     MP ZLB                QE      MP     ZLB     QE
                    Output          -6.36 -8.84           -6.11    3.84   6.14    3.72
                                    -3.48 -3.69           -4.11    2.70   3.21    2.57
                    Real long yield 7.65 9.41              7.65    1.33   2.38    1.12
                                    5.81 5.75              6.04    0.86   0.97    0.85
Notes: We generate 1000 different simulations of 40 periods each. For each simulation, from period 2 on
we draw random shocks to technology, government spending, and liquidity. We fix the size of the liquidity
shock at 1.5 standard deviations from periods 2 - 10 to create the ZLB environment in each simulation. We
compute the mean and standard deviation over periods 1 - 15 (first row) or over periods 16 - 40 (second row)
for each draw. The table reports the average across 1000 draws. MP stands for conventional monetary policy
with no ZLB constraint; ZLB refers to the zero lower bound; and QE denotes the ZLB on short term rates
but with endogenous QE. Units are percentage deviations from the steady state for output and annualized
percentage points for the real long yield.


line in the case of mean output. This suggests that in the simulations where endogenous QE
is undertaken during a ZLB period, the economy produces slightly less on average after the
ZLB has ended. This is also evident in Figure 7 for one draw. In terms of the volatility of
output, the purple stars still align closely with the 45 degree line in the lower panel. There
is, on average, slightly more volatility in periods 16-40 in the economy without endogenous
QE, though it is markedly less than in periods 1-15 as shown in the upper panel. What is
driving this is that, as noted above, while the ZLB begins to lift in period 16, in many of
the simulations it lasts longer. In some other draws, the economy temporarily reverts to the
ZLB subsequent to the liftoff.
    Table 2 summarizes these same moments by reporting averages across the 1000 simula-
tions. The table corroborates the visual impressions from Figure 8. Even without taking
the ZLB into account, output would be substantially below the steady state given the large
sequence of liquidity shocks fed into the model. The ZLB with no unconventional policy
exacerbates this. Focusing on the first fifteen periods of the simulation, which correspond
to the first rows of each block of the table, the level of output would be on average about
2.5 percentage points lower and about 60 percent more volatile taking the ZLB into account
versus not. The reason for the lower mean and enhanced volatility is the behavior of the
real long yield, which is on average both higher and more volatile when taking the ZLB into
account. In contrast, with endogenous QE, during the ZLB period the mean and volatility
of output are roughly equal to what they would be absent a ZLB constraint.
    The second rows in each panel of Table 2 show moments calculated from periods 16 to 40
of each simulation. These moments are calculated mainly during periods after the ZLB has
ended. Output would still be well below steady state in these periods even if there were no


                                                    34
ZLB constraint. Interestingly, the version of the model taking the ZLB into account with no
endogenous policy comes closer to matching the mean of output than does the version of the
model with endogenous QE. This suggests a tradeoff ­ endogenous QE results in significantly
better performance during a ZLB period at the expense of slightly worse outcomes once the
ZLB has ended (at least in terms of mean output relative to steady state).21 As alluded
to above, this is driven by unwinding of the balance sheet once the ZLB has ended. This
unwinding exerts a mild contractionary effect on the path of output, and raises questions
about the optimal speed of unwinding. We turn to such questions next.


6      Issues Going Forward: QT, NIRP, and ELB
Combatting a sequence of negative demand shocks and minimizing the adverse consequences
of the ZLB potentially requires a large expansion in the size of a central bank's balance sheet.
This is true both in our model as well as in practice for the myriad countries that engaged in
aggressive bond purchasing programs in the wake of the Great Recession. In this section, we
discuss three broad issues related to the post-QE size of central bank balance sheets going
forward. First, an imminent issue facing policymakers around the globe is how to unwind
their balance sheets while minimizing potential disruptions to the economy. We discuss the
unwinding process, also known as quantitative tightening (QT), in Subsection 6.1. Second,
there exists an interaction between the size of a central bank's balance sheet and the efficacy
of NIRP. This is discussed in Subsection 6.2. Third, the size of the balance sheet constrains
how negative policy rates can go. We make a first attempt at endogenizing the effective
lower bound (ELB) in our model in Subsection 6.3.


6.1     Quantitative Tightening
In the previous section, we showed that endogenous QE can serve as an effective substitute
for conventional monetary policy during ZLB periods. At the same time, we showed that the
economy tends to perform somewhat worse after the ZLB period has ended when endogenous
QE is undertaken as an antidote to the ZLB. What drives this is the unwinding of the central
bank's balance sheet as it transitions away from bond purchases.
    We wish to study the consequences of different paces of balance sheet normalization. We
design our QT experiment as an extension to the impulse responses depicted in Figure 4.
Instead of showing the responses of variables to the incremental one standard deviation 
  21
    In contrast, as is also evident in the bottom panel of Figure 8, output remains slightly more volatile
in periods 16-40 in the simulation where no endogenous QE is undertaken relative to the simulation with
endogenous QE.


                                                   35
                                   Figure 9: Quantitative tightening

                                   Output                                       Inflation
                    0                                             0

                                                                 -1

                                                                 -2
                   -5
                                                                 -3

                                                                 -4
                  -10
                         5    10     15     20   25   30               5   10     15      20   25   30

                             CB Balance sheet                               Policy rate
                 0.15                                             0
                                                                                ZLB
                                                                -0.5            QT: 0.8
                  0.1                                                           QT: 0
                                                                                QT: 1
                                                                 -1
                 0.05
                                                                -1.5

                    0                                            -2
                         5    10     15     20   25   30               5   10     15      20   25   30


Notes: Red dashed lines: ZLB without unconventional monetary policy. Purple solid lines: QT according to
(3.5) with f = 0.8; orange dash-dotted lines: QT according to (3.5) with f = 0; green dash-dotted lines:
QT according to (3.5) with f = 0.1. All the variables are relative to the steady state. Output is expressed
in percentage points. Inflation and policy rate are expressed in annualized percentage points. The central
bank's balance sheet is expressed as a percentage relative to annualized steady-state output.


shock, we plot the responses based on all the shocks, including those that we use to create the
ZLB environment. In this way, we are able to generate a realistic depiction of the post-Great
Recession experience. This is shown in Figure 9.
   Red dashed and purple solid lines are the same as those in Figure 4, except that the
sequence of liquidity shocks used to generate the ZLB are no longer differenced out.22 The red
dashed lines plot simulated paths of variables under the ZLB constraint with no endogenous
QE. The purple solid lines show paths of variables under the ZLB constraint with endogenous
QE, followed by QT, with bond-holdings reverting to the AR(1) process as specified in (3.5)
with the same autoregressive parameter of f = 0.8. The dash-dotted lines also implement
QT after QE, but with different speeds of unwinding (i.e. different values of f ). The pace
of unwinding is especially relevant and has appeared prominently in many recent policy
  22
    The impulse responses shown in Figure 4 are constructed by considering two simulations. In both
simulations there are a sequence of liquidity shocks in periods 1-6. These are used to make the ZLB bind. In
the second simulation, there is an additional, one standard deviation liquidity shock that hits the economy
in period 7. The plotted impulse responses are the differences between these two simulations. In Figure 9,
we instead plot the second simulation without differencing out the first simulation.


                                                           36
discussions.
    The case of immediate unwinding is shown in orange. This was not considered a viable
possibility in policy circles. Relative to our baseline case of f = 0.8, the orange lines with
f = 0 are similar during the ZLB period but show a slightly lower trajectory of output
once the ZLB has ended. Another extreme is for the central bank to carry forward the large
balance sheet accumulated during QE with no unwinding. This possibility has been raised in
policy discussions, and is captured by the green dash-dotted lines with f = 1. Interestingly,
no normalization results in a much more severe recession and worse deflation during the ZLB
period, although a slightly higher trajectory of output once the ZLB has abated. Because
of the worse economic conditions during the ZLB period, no balance sheet normalization
requires a larger expansion for the central bank's balance sheet.
    Both of these results are somewhat surprising and cut against the grain of conventional
wisdom in policy circles, where it was thought that immediate unwinding would be detrimen-
tal but that carrying forward a large balance sheet would be inconsequential. In contrast, in
our model immediate unwinding is fairly similar to our baseline case of smooth QT, whereas
no unwinding exacerbates the output decline during the ZLB period. Moreover, our results
suggest that the anticipated speed of unwinding after the ZLB ends has an important impact
for how the economy fares during the ZLB. Our intuition for these results is as follows. When
the central bank credibly promises to unwind the balance sheet after the ZLB lifts, this makes
the present a relatively more attractive time to invest relative to the future. In contrast,
when there is no credible commitment to reduce the balance sheet in the future, firms can
smooth out their investment expenditures across more periods. Hence, aggregate demand in
the present reacts more strongly to a given bond purchase when firms expect purchases to
be reversed when the ZLB lifts. Consistent with our quantitative results, therefore, QE is
a more effective antidote to the ZLB when agents believe QT will be undertaken relatively
quickly, with the tradeoff being that rapid QT results in worse economic performance once
the ZLB lifts. The bottom line is that, to achieve the desired effectiveness of QE, policy
makers need to plan out the entire path ex ante, and credibly communicate that with the
public.


6.2    Interaction Between QE and NIRP
Moving forward, it is also important to understand interactions between different types of
unconventional policy interventions. The size of a central bank's balance is relevant for
the efficacy of NIRP. That is because negative policy rates function as a type of tax on
intermediaries; the more reserves intermediaries hold, the more burdensome is the tax. This


                                             37
                             Figure 10: Exogenous NIRP and balance sheet

                                     Output                                 10-3       CB Balance sheet
                                                                   0
                   0.2
                                                                  -1
                  0.15
                                                                  -2
                   0.1
                                                                  -3
                  0.05

                    0                                             -4

                         0      5       10        15   20               0          5          10          15           20


                                    Policy rate                                         Real long yield
                    0                                              0

                  -0.2
                                                                 -0.1
                  -0.4
                                                                 -0.2                                     NIRP
                  -0.6                                                                                    NIRP: QE3
                                                                 -0.3                                     NIRP: Euro
                  -0.8                                                                                    FG
                                                                                                          FG: = 0.7
                    -1                                           -0.4
                         0      5       10        15   20               0          5          10          15           20



Notes: Dotted lines are plots of responses to exogenous NIRP shocks conditioning on different sizes of the
central bank's balance sheet. Red dotted lines: NIRP with the steady state central bank's balance sheet
of 6% of the GDP (calibrated to pre-QE); orange dotted lines: NIRP with the steady state balance sheet
of 25% GDP (calibrated to post QE3); purple dotted lines: NIRP with the steady state balance sheet of
38% of GDP (calibrated to the Euro area to 2018Q4). Green dashed lines: fully credible forward guidance;
light blue dashed lines: partially credible forward guidance with  = 0.7. We generate a binding ZLB with
a sequence of liquidity shocks of 1.5 standard deviations in each of the periods 1 - 6.


tends to undo the stimulative signaling feature of NIRP.
    Dotted lines in Figure 10 depict impulse responses to 100 basis point NIRP shocks condi-
tioning on different sizes of the central bank's balance sheet. Red dotted lines are responses
when the central bank's balance sheet is about 6 percent of steady state GDP; this is identical
to Figure 2. The orange and purple dotted lines condition on balance sheet sizes calibrated
to the size of the Fed's post-QE3 balance sheet and the ECB's balance sheet as of the end
of 2018. For comparison, dashed lines plot responses to forward guidance shocks assuming
varying degrees of credibility. The green and light blue responses are identical to Figure 2.
    As the central bank's balance sheet becomes large, NIRP becomes less stimulative. For
example, conditioning on a balance sheet calibrated to post-QE3 in the US, a NIRP shock
becomes half as stimulative as the benchmark in red, and less stimulative than non-credible
forward guidance ( = 0.7). When the balance sheet is as large as in the Euro area, a cut
in the policy rate into negative territory is actually mildly contractionary. This is because
the contractionary banking channel outweighs the expansionary forward guidance channel
of NIRP. This interaction is especially relevant for countries such as Japan and the Euro
area that have accumulated large balance sheets and have already pushed policy rates into

                                                            38
                                                  Figure 11: ELB

                                 0

                               -0.1

                               -0.2

                               -0.3

                         ELB   -0.4

                               -0.5

                               -0.6

                               -0.7

                               -0.8

                               -0.9

                                -1
                                      0   1   2    3      4      5       6   7   8   9
                                                       Reserves/Output
Notes: This figure plots the minimum steady state value of Rre - 1 (expressed at an annualized rate) as a
function of the steady state size of the central bank's balance sheet (relative to output). For this figure, we
set  = 1 so that the deposit rate, Rd , is fixed at its lower bound of one (or zero in net terms).


negative territory.
    Another interesting implication from our model relates to the timing of unconventional
policy interventions. In practice, economies that eventually turned to negative rates all
engaged in heavy QE programs prior to doing so. From the perspective of our model, it
would have instead been more effective to first push policy rates into negative territory and
then to engage in QE programs.


6.3     Implications of a Large Balance Sheet for the ELB
In practice, no central bank has experimented with moving policy rates into deep negative
territory. An important question is how negative rates could conceivably go without adverse
consequences.
    Though we have not imposed it thus far, in principle there exists a lower bound on the
interest rate on reserves in our model. In particular, if t t were to fall below one (i.e. net
worth is more valuable in a household than in an intermediary), intermediaries might choose
                                                        re
to voluntarily exit rather than continue. How low Rt       can go without violating t t  1
depends on (i) the magnitude of excess returns on private and government bonds and (ii)
the total value of reserves issued by the central bank. The lower are excess returns, or the
larger is the volume of reserves, the higher will be the ELB.
    Figure 11 plots the minimum value of steady state Rre consistent with   1 as a


                                                           39
function of the quantity of reserves (as a fraction of output). When there are no (or few)
reserves, there is essentially no limit on how negative Rre can go. As there are more reserves
in the system, and reserves constitute a higher fraction of intermediary assets, the effective
lower bound becomes tighter. The intuition is straightforward. Negative policy rates are
essentially a tax on the holders of reserves. The more reserves there are, the more punitive
is this tax, and at some point intermediaries might find it undesirable to continue.
    Caution is in order when interpreting the quantitative magnitudes in Figure 11 seriously.
Our model abstracts from many real-world features that might further inhibit a central
bank's ability to push policy rates into deep negative territory. Nevertheless, we think that
the qualitative relationship between the size of the central bank's balance sheet and the ELB
is both instructive and intuitive. It is also potentially increasingly relevant for countries such
as Japan and the Euro area that have now amassed very large balance sheets. While more
work remains to be done, we provide a useful first benchmark to think more seriously about
this issue.


7     Conclusion
In this paper, we developed a quantitative DSGE framework to systematically evaluate three
different types of unconventional policy tools ­ quantitative easing (QE), forward guidance
(FG), and negative interest rate policy (NIRP) ­ as well as their interactions. This represents
an important step forward in the literature, which has to date tended to focus on each policy
tool in isolation. We emphasize two distinct channels by which NIRP can transmit to the
economy: a forward guidance channel and a banking channel. We introduce a novel way to
model forward guidance, where our approach ameliorates the forward guidance "puzzle."
    We find that unconventional policies can all stimulate output as much as a conventional
policy shock, though we argue that quantitative easing is likely to be the most desirable
among unconventional options. We specify an endogenous feedback rule for QE and show
that it can effectively neutralize the adverse consequences of a binding zero lower bound
on the short term policy rate. In an application meant to mimic the experience of the
US during the Great Recession, we show that our endogenous QE rule, which expands the
central bank's balance sheet to 25 percent of GDP (which is roughly in-line with the Fed's
balance sheet post-QE3), provides stimulus roughly equivalent to moving the policy rate 2
percentage points below zero. This is in-line with empirical estimates of the shadow rate
from Wu and Xia (2016).
    Though endogenous QE is an effective substitute for conventional policy when faced
with a binding ZLB, its use is not without cost or potential complication. When unwinding

                                               40
the balance sheet, a smooth balance sheet normalization is preferred. On the contrary,
carrying a large balance sheet forward would cause a deeper recession and force the central
bank to expand their balance sheet even more at the peak. Moreover, a larger balance sheet
undermines the efficacy of NIRP or even makes it contractionary. We provide a first attempt
at endogenizing an effective lower bound (ELB) for policy rates, which also depends on the
overall size of a central bank's balance sheet.




                                            41
References
Abo-Zaid, Salem and Julio Gar´  in, "Optimal Monetary Policy and Imperfect Financial
 Markets: A Case for Negative Nominal Interest Rates?," Economic Inquiry, 2016, 54 (1),
 215­228.

Bauer, Michael D. and Glenn D. Rudebusch, "The Signaling Channel for Federal
 Reserve Bond Purchases," International Journal of Central Banking, 2014, 10 (3), s114­
 s133.

   and , "Monetary Policy Expectations at the Zero Lower Bound," Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 2016, 48 (7), 1439­1465.

Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Jus-
 tiniano, "Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance," Brookings Pa-
 pers on Economic Activity, 2012, 43 (1 (Spring), 1­80.

  , Filippo Ferroni, Jonas D. M. Fisher, and Leonardo Melosi, "The limits of forward
  guidance," 2019. Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Carlstrom, Charles T., Timothy S. Fuerst, and Matthias Paustian, "Targeting
 Long Rates in a Model with Segmented Markets," American Economic Journal: Macroe-
 conomics, January 2017, 9 (1), 205­42.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, "Nominal
 Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy," Journal of Political
 Economy, 2005, 113, 1­45.

  , , and Sergio Rebelo, "When is the Government Spending Multiplier Large?," Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (1), 78­121.

Clarida, Richard H., "What Has ­ and Has Not ­ Been Learned about Monetary Policy
  in a Low-Inflation Environment? A Review of the 2000s," Journal of Money, Credit and
  Banking, 2012, 44 (s1), 123­140.

Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, "Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation, and the
 Great Moderation: An Alternative Interpretation," American Economic Review, February
 2011, 101 (1), 341­70.

Debortoli, Davide, Jordi Gal´i, and Luca Gambetti, "On the Empirical (Ir)Relevance
 of the Zero Lower Bound Constraint," 2016. Universitat Pompeu Fabra working paper.

                                          42
Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tam-
 balotti, "Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest," Brookings Papers on Eco-
 nomic Activity, 2017, Spring, 235 ­ 294.

  , Marc P. Giannoni, and Chiristina Patterson, "The Forward Guidance Puzzle,"
  2015. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 574.

Eggertsson, Gauti, Ragnar Juelsrud, Lawrence H. Summers, and Ella Getz Wold,
 "Negative Nominal Interest Rates and the Bank Lending Channel," 2019. NBER Working
 Paper No. 25416.

Foerster, Andrew T., "Financial crises, unconventional monetary policy exit strategies,
  and agents' expectations," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2015, 76, 191 ­ 207.

Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack, "The Finan-
 cial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases," International
 Journal of Central Banking, 2011, 7, 3­43.

Gar´
   in, Julio, Robert Lester, and Eric Sims, "Are Supply Shocks Contractionary at
 the ZLB? Evidence from Utilization-Adjusted TFP Data," The Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 2019, 101 (1), 160­175.

Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi, "A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy," Jour-
 nal of Monetary Economics, 2011, pp. 17­34.

   and , "QE 1 vs. 2 vs. 3 . . .: A Framework for Analyzing Large-Scale Asset Purchases
  as a Monetary Policy Tool," International Journal of Central Banking, 2013, 9(S1), 5­53.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick, "Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,"
 Journal of Financial Economics, 2012, 104 (3), 425­451.

Greenwood, Robin and Dimitri Vayanos, "Bond Supply and Excess Bond Returns,"
 The Review of Financial Studies, 01 2014, 27 (3), 663­713.

Guerrieri, Luca and Matteo Iacoviello, "OccBin: A Toolkit for Solving Dynamic Models
 with Occasionally Binding Constraints Easily," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2015, 70
 (C), 22­38.

Hamilton, James D. and Jing Cynthia Wu, "The Effectiveness of Alternative Mone-
 tary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment," Journal of Money, Credit, and
 Banking, 2012, 44 (s1), 3­46.


                                           43
Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, "The Effects of Quantita-
 tive Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy," Brookings Papers
 on Economic Activity, 2011, 2, 215­265.

Kuttner, Kenneth N., "Outside the Box: Unconventional Monetary Policy in the Great
 Recession and Beyond," Journal of Economic Perspectives, November 2018, 32 (4), 121­
 46.

Laubach, Thomas and John C. Williams, "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"
  The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2003, 85 (4), 1063­1070.

Mau, Ronald, "Purchases and Sales of Long Bonds as a Monetary Policy Instrument,"
 2019. Working Paper.

McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jon Steinsson, "The Power of Forward Guid-
 ance Revisited," American Economic Review, October 2016, 106 (10), 3133­58.

Mouabbi, Sarah and Jean-Guillaume Sahuc, "Evaluating the Macroeconomic Effects
 of the ECB's Unconventional Monetary Policies," 2017. Working paper.

Orphanides, Athanasios and John C. Williams, "Monetary Policy with Imperfect
 Knowledge," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2006, 4 (23), 366­375.

Ray, Walker, "Monetary Policy and the Limits to Arbitrage: Insights from a New Keyne-
 sian Preferred Habitat Model," 2019. Working Paper.

Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters, "Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
 Bayesian DSGE Approach," American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (3), 586­606.

Swanson, Eric T., "The Federal Reserve is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on
 Nominal Interest Rates," 2018. Working Paper.

  , "Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on
  Financial Markets," 2018. working paper, University of California, Irvine.

   and John C. Williams, "Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium-
  and Longer-Term Interest Rates," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (10), owner =
  Tony,), 3154­3185.

Taylor, John B., "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Con-
  ference Series on Public Policy, 1993, 39, 195­214.


                                          44
Ulate, Mauricio, "Going Negative at the Zero Lower Bound: The Effects of Negative
 Nominal Interest Rates," 2018. Working Paper.

Vayanos, Dimitri and Jean-Luc Vila, "A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure
 of Interest Rates," 2009. Working paper, London School of Economics.

Walsh, Carl, "Speed Limit Policies: The Output Gap and Optimal Monetary Policy,"
 American Economic Review, March 2003, 93 (1), 265­278.

Woodford, Michael, "Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability," Journal of Money, Credit
 and Banking, August 2001, 33 (3), 669­728.

Wu, Jing Cynthia and Fan Dora Xia, "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Mon-
 etary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 2016, 48
 (2-3), 253­291.

   and , "Negative Interest Rate Policy and Yield Curve," 2018. NBER Working Paper
  No. 25180.

   and Ji Zhang, "A Shadow Rate New Keynesian Model," 2017. NBER Working Paper
  No. 22856.

   and , "Global Effective Lower Bound and Unconventional Monetary Policy," Journal
  of International Economics, 2019, 118, 200­216.




                                          45
A      Full Model and Derivations
A.1      Households
There exist a continuum of households of unit measure. These households behave identically and for what
follows we omit household indexes. Our setup follows Gertler and Karadi (2013). Within each household
there are two types of members ­ workers and intermediaries. At any point in time a fixed fraction of
household members are workers and a fixed fraction are intermediaries. Intermediaries stochastically exit
and become workers with probability 1 -  and are replaced with an equal number of workers. These new
intermediaries are given a fixed amount of startup net worth.
     Lifetime utility for a household is given by:
                                      
                                                j
                                                                              L1+
                                                                               t+j
                                 Et                 ln (Ct+j   - bCt+j -1 ) -                                  (A.1)
                                      j =0
                                                                              1+

where   (0, 1) is a discount factor and b  [0, 1) is a measure of internal habit formation.  > 0 is a scaling
parameter and  is the inverse Frisch elasticity. Ct is consumption and Lt is labor supply.
    A household faces the following nominal budget constraint:
                                                                        d
                  Pt Ct + Dt - Dt-1  M RSt Lt + DIVt - Pt X - Pt Tt + (Rt-1 - 1)Dt-1                           (A.2)

In (A.2), Pt is the price of goods and Dt-1 is the (nominal) stock of deposits with which a household enters
            d
a period. Rt  is the gross nominal interest rate on deposits. M RSt is the nominal remuneration a household
receives from supplying labor to labor unions (discussed below). DIVt denotes nominal dividends from
ownership in all non-financial firms as well as net worth from exiting intermediaries. X is a (real) transfer
paid out to new intermediaries as startup net worth. Tt is a lump sum tax paid to a government.
    The first order conditions for the household are
                                                          1               1
                                      µt     =                 - b Et                                          (A.3)
                                                    Ct - bCt-1        Ct+1 - bCt
                                                    µt+1
                                t,t+1        =                                                                 (A.4)
                                                       µt
                                  Lt         =      µt mrst                                                    (A.5)
                                       1     =       d
                                                    Rt   Et t,t+1 - 1
                                                                  t+1                                          (A.6)

(A.3) defines the marginal utility of consumption, µt . The stochastic discount factor, t,t+1 , is given by
(A.4). (A.5) is a standard labor supply condition, where mrst = M RSt /Pt . The first order condition for
deposits is (A.6), where t = Pt /Pt-1 is the gross inflation rate.


A.2      Financial Intermediaries
Write the net worth accumulation equation, (2.5), in real terms by dividing both sides by the aggregate price
level, noting that t = Pt /Pt-1 :

            F    d                   B    d
  t ni,t = Rt - Rt -1 Qt-1 fi,t-1 + Rt - Rt-1 QB,t-1 bi,t-1
                                                                           re      d              d
                                                                        + Rt -1 - Rt-1 rei,t-1 + Rt-1 ni,t-1   (A.7)

which implies

  t,t+1 t+1 ni,t+1 =
            t,t+1 t+1 - 1
                      t+1
                               F
                              Rt      d            B      d              re   d          d
                                +1 - Rt Qt fi,t + Rt+1 - Rt QB,t bi,t + Rt - Rt rei,t + Rt ni,t                (A.8)




                                                               46
    An intermediary's value function, (2.8), can be written as

            Vi,t   =    max       (1 -  ) Et t,t+1 ni,t+1 +  Et t,t+1 Vi,t+1                                         (A.9)
                                                      F      d -1             B      d -1
                   =    max       (1 -  ) Et t,t+1   Rt+1 - Rt t+1 Qt fi,t + Rt+1 - Rt t+1 QB,t bi,t


                           re
                        + Rt     d
                              - Rt - 1          d -1
                                   t+1 rei,t + Rt t+1 ni,t +  Et t,t+1 Vi,t+1                                       (A.10)


A Lagrangian with the constraints (2.9) - (2.10) is

                                                  F      d -1             B      d -1
  Li,t = max(1 + t ) Et       (1 -  )t,t+1       Rt+1 - Rt t+1 Qt fi,t + Rt+1 - Rt t+1 QB,t bi,t +


        re
       Rt     d
           - Rt - 1          d -1
                t+1 rei,t + Rt t+1 ni,t +  t,t+1 Vi,t+1             - t t (Qt fi,t +  QB,t bi,t ) + t (rei,t - re
                                                                                                               ¯ i,t )


where t and t are Lagrangian multipliers. The first order necessary conditions are given in (2.11) - (2.13).
    To derive expressions for the auxiliary variables t and t in (2.14) - (2.15), we guess that the value
function is linear in net worth as in (2.16). Combining this guess with a binding constraint on (2.9) yields
(2.17). (2.17), (A.8), and the first order conditions yield:

                            Et [t,t+1 t+1 ni,t+1 ]
                        = Et [t,t+1 t+1 - 1  F      d
                                        t+1 Rt+1 - Rt ](Qt fi,t + QB,t bi,t )
                                           -1    re      d                         -1 d
                          + Et [t,t+1 t+1 t +1 Rt - Rt ]rei,t + Et [t,t+1 t+1 t+1 ]Rt ni,t
                            t                t
                        =       t t ni,t -       rei,t + Et [t,t+1 t+1 - 1   d
                                                                       t+1 ]Rt ni,t
                          1 + t            1 + t
Rewrite the value function in (A.9) using (2.14) and (2.16):

                       t t ni,t    = max Et [t,t+1 ni,t+1 t+1 ]
                                       t                t
                                   =       t t ni,t -       rei,t + Et [t,t+1 t+1 - 1   d
                                                                                  t+1 ]Rt ni,t
                                     1 + t            1 + t
Assume
                                                     rei,t   ret
                                                           =
                                                     di,t    dt

     (2.10) implies re
                    dt = t when the constraint binds, and aggregation
                      t
                                                                                  i   rei,t =     ret
                                                                                                i dt di,t   holds automat-
ically. This leads to
                                             t            t ret
                            t  t       =          t t -           + Et [t,t+1 t+1 - 1   d
                                                                                  t+1 ]Rt
                                           1 + t        1 +  t nt
Simplify,
                                                                                  t ret
                                     t t   =   (1 + t ) Et [t,t+1 t+1 - 1   d
                                                                      t+1 ]Rt -                                     (A.11)
                                                                                  nt




                                                            47
(A.11) is the same as (2.15). Use (2.14) and (2.16), (A.11) can be rewritten as

Vi,t                                                  Vi,t+1             t ret
       =    (1 + t ) Et t,t+1 - 1  d
                              t+1 Rt 1-+                             -
ni,t                                                  ni,t+1             nt

       =    (1 + t ) (1 -  ) Et t,t+1 - 1  d                     -1   d                         -1   d
                                      t+1 Rt +  (1 -  ) Et t,t+1 t+1 Rt (1 + t+1 ) Et+1 t+1,t+2 t+2 Rt+1 + ...

                t ret
            -
                nt


Since t+j  0 j , the derivative of the value function with respect to net worth satisfies:

Vi,t                                                                                                                             t ret
        (1 + t ) (1 -  ) Et t,t+1 - 1  d                     -1   d              -1   d
                                  t+1 Rt +  (1 -  ) Et t,t+1 t+1 Rt Et+1 t+1,t+2 t+2 Rt+1 + ...                              -
ni,t                                                                                                                             nt
                                                  t ret
       =    (1 + t )(1 -  )(1 +  +  2 + ...) -
                                                  nt
                        t ret
       =    1 + t -
                        nt
where we use the household's first order condition in (A.6).
                                                                             Vi,t                          1
   When neither constraint binds, then t+j = t = 0, and                      ni,t       = 1, so that t =   t .   When t+j > 0
                                                                  Vi,t
for any j and the reserve requirement is non-binding,       > 1. When both constraints bind the size of the
                                                                  ni,t
derivative of the value function with respect to net worth relative to unity is indeterminate.


A.3        Labor Market
There are two layers to the labor market. A unit measure of labor unions, indexed by h  [0, 1], purchase
labor from households at M RSt and repackage it for sale to a representative labor packer. Ld,t (h) is labor
sold to the labor packer, and Ld,t (h) = Lt (h) for each union. The labor packer combines differentiated labor
into final labor available for production, Ld,t , via a CES technology with elasticity of substitution w > 1.
The demand curve facing each union is
                                                                         -   w
                                                          Wt (h)
                                           Ld,t (h) =                            Ld,t                                   (A.12)
                                                           Wt
Wt (h) is the wage paid for union h's labor and Wt is the aggregate wage, which satisfies:
                                                              1
                                           Wt1-   w
                                                      =           Wt (h)1- w dh                                         (A.13)
                                                          0


Labor Union Profit of a typical labor union in nominal terms is
                                    DIVL,t (h) = Wt (h)Ld,t (h) - M RSt Lt (h)

Imposing that Lt (h) = Ld,t (h) and using the demand curve, (A.12), this can be written:

                           DIVL,t (h) = Wt (h)1- w Wt w Ld,t - M RSt Wt (h)- w Wt w Ld,t

    Labor unions are subject to a Calvo-style nominal rigidity. Each period, there is a 1 - w probability
that a union may adjust its wage, with w  [0, 1]. Non-updated wages may be indexed to lagged inflation
at w  [0, 1]. A labor union given the opportunity to set the wage Wt (h) in period t must take into account
the possibility that it will be stuck with this wage for some time. In particular, the probability that a wage
chosen in t is still relevant in t + j is j
                                          w . The possibility of indexation results in the nominal wage in t + j




                                                          48
                                                                                                                     w
                                                                   t+j -1                                P
for a union who has not updated since period t being: Wt (h) P      t-1
                                                                           . The problem of a labor union
updating in period t is to choose a wage to maximize the present discounted value of real profits, where
discounting is by the household's stochastic discount factor and the probability of non-wage adjustment:


                                                  (1-   w ) w
                                       Pt+j -1                               w -1
   max Et           j
                    w t,t+j                                     Wt (h)1- w Pt+j wt+j Ld,t+j -
                                                                                  w

  Wt (h)
             j =0
                                        Pt-1
                                                                                                                     -   w w
                                                                                                        Pt+j -1
                                                                                    mrst+j                                     Wt (h)- w Pt+
                                                                                                                                           w
                                                                                                                                            j wt+j Ld,t+j
                                                                                                                                                w

                                                                                                         Pt-1

where t,t+j = t,t+1 ...t+j -1,t+j .
   The first order condition is
                                                                     (1-      w )w
                  -                                 Pt+j -1                               w -1
  (   w - 1)Wt (h)
                       w
                           Et          j
                                       w t,t+j                                          Pt+j wt+j Ld,t+j =
                                                                                               w


                                j =0
                                                     Pt-1
                                                                                                                                   -   w w
                                                          -       w -1
                                                                                                                         Pt+j -1
                                                  w Wt (h)                    Et          j
                                                                                          w t,t+j mrst+j                                     Pt +
                                                                                                                                                w
                                                                                                                                                 j wt+j Ld,t+j
                                                                                                                                                     w


                                                                                   j =0
                                                                                                                          Pt - 1

The reset wage is the same across all labor unions. Hence, drop the h index, and the optimal price Wt can
be written as:
                                                      w   F1,t
                                             Wt =
                                                    w - 1 F 2,t

where F1,t and F2,t are recursive representations of the infinite sums above:

                                          F1,t = mrst Pt w wt w Ld,t + w t,t+1 -
                                                                               t
                                                                                                             w w
                                                                                                                    F1,t+1
                                                        w -1                               (1-               w )w
                                          F2,t = Pt            wt Ld,t +
                                                                 w
                                                                                   w t,t+1 t                        F2,t+1
                              
      Written in real terms, wt = Wt /Pt , it satisfies:


                                                        wf1,t
                                       wt     =                                                                                                          (A.14)
                                                   w - 1 f2,t
                                                                                                                     w
                                                                                                          t+1
                                       f1,t   =   mrst wt w Ld,t + w Et t,t+1                                            f1,t+1                          (A.15)
                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                             w


                                                                                                              w -1
                                                                                                t+1
                                       f2,t   =   wt w Ld,t + w Et t,t+1                                             f2,t+1                              (A.16)
                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                   w




where wt = Wt /Pt is the aggregate real wage from (A.13), and f1,t = F1,t /Pt w and f2,t = F2,t /Pt w -1 .

                                                                                            1
Aggregation Integrate (A.12) across h, noting that                                          0
                                                                                                Ld,t (h)dh = Lt . Using the demand function for
a union's labor, (A.12), yields
                                                                                w
                                                                     Lt = Ld,t vt                                                                        (A.17)
         w
where   vt   is a measure of wage dispersion:
                                                                          1                     -   w
                                                             w                     wt (h)
                                                            vt =                                        dh
                                                                      0             wt




                                                                                   49
Note that this can be written in terms of real wages since it is a ratio. Because of properties of Calvo
wage-setting, we can write this as
                                                  -                                                            -
                  w
                                              
                                             wt       w            1
                                                                                 t-1 Wt-1 (h)
                                                                                  w                                w

                 vt   =    (1 - w )                       +                                                            dh
                                             wt                1-w                   Wt
                                                  -   w                                                  1                             -   w
                                             wt                                                                        Wt-1 (h)
                      =    (1 - w )                       + - w
                                                            t-1
                                                                            w
                                                                                Wt w Wt-
                                                                                       -1
                                                                                         w
                                                                                                                                               dh
                                             wt                                                          1-w            Wt-1

which may be written as
                                                               -       w
                                                       wt
                              w
                             vt = (1 - w )                                 +  w - w
                                                                                t-1
                                                                                                 w
                                                                                                     Wt w Wt- w w
                                                                                                            -1 vt-1
                                                       wt

Expressing this in real terms gives
                                                           -   w                                     w                   w
                            w                     wt                                 t                     wt                 w
                           vt = (1 - w )                            + w                                                      vt                     (A.18)
                                                  wt                                  w
                                                                                     t-1                  wt-1                  -1


    From (A.13), we have
                                                                                     1
                                                               1-                                                        1-
                          Wt1-       = (1 - w ) (Wt )                                        
                                                                       w                      w                               w
                                 w
                                                                           +                 t-1 Wt-1 (h)                         dh
                                                                                  1-w

Via a law of large numbers, this is
                                                                           1-                 (1-        w)
                              Wt1-      w
                                             = (1 - w ) (Wt )                    w       w
                                                                                     +  t- 1                  w Wt1- w
                                                                                                                  -1

Dividing both sides by Pt1-      w
                                     gives
                           1-                                          1-                     (1-        w)
                          wt     w
                                       =                 
                                              (1 - w ) (wt )                w           w
                                                                                 +  w t - 1
                                                                                                                        1- w
                                                                                                              t w - 1 w t-1                         (A.19)


A.4      Production
There are several layers on the production side of the economy. A representative wholesale firm transforms
capital and labor into output, Ym,t . New physical capital, It , is produced by a competitive capital goods
producer. Wholesale output is sold to a continuum of retail firms. Retail firms are indexed by f  [0, 1].
These retail firms simply repackage wholesale output via Yt (f ) = Ym,t (f ) and then sell their output to a
competitive final goods firm. The final output good, Yt , is a CES aggregate of retail outputs with elasticity
of substitution p > 1. Retailers thus face the demand curve:
                                                                                         -   p
                                                                           Pt (f )
                                                   Yt (f ) =                                     Yt                                                 (A.20)
                                                                            Pt
    In (A.20), Pt (f ) is the price of retail output. The price of the final output good, Pt , satisfies:
                                                                            1
                                                      1-
                                                  Pt       p
                                                               =                Pt (f )1- p df                                                      (A.21)
                                                                        0


A.4.1     Retailers
The nominal profit of a retail firm is

                                         DIVR,t (f ) = Pt (f )Yt (f ) - Pm,t Ym,t (f )




                                                                           50
Equating Ym,t (f ) = Yt (f ) with the demand function, we get:

                                               DIVR,t (f ) = Pt (f )1- p Pt p Yt - Pm,t Pt (f )- p Pt p Yt

    Each period, a retailer faces a constant probability, 1 - p , of being able to adjust its price. Consider
the problem of a retailer given the opportunity to adjust in period t. When it sets a price, it must take into
account that the price chosen in t will still be in effect in period t + j with probability jp . Indexation to
                                                                                                                                               p
                                                                                 t+j -1                                               P
lagged inflation means that an unupdated price in period t + j will be: Pt (f ) P t-1
                                                                                          . When choosing a
price, the retailer maximizes the present discounted value of real profits returned to the household, where
discounting is by the household's stochastic discount factor augmented by the probability of non-adjustment:
                                                                    (1-    p ) p                                                                    -   p p
                                   1-                    Pt+j -1                        -1                      -                         Pt+j -1                -1
max Et              j
                    p t,t+j Pt (f )
                                                p                                     p
                                                                                   Pt + j Yt+j - Pm,t+j Pt (f )
                                                                                                                                  p                             p
                                                                                                                                                              Pt+ j Yt+j
Pt (f )
             j =0
                                                          Pt-1                                                                             Pt-1

The first order condition is
                                                                          (1-   p ) p
                         -                                 Pt+j -1                           -1
   (   p   - 1)Pt (f )       p
                                 Et          j
                                             p t,t+j
                                                                                           p
                                                                                        Pt + j Yt+j =
                                      j =0
                                                            Pt-1
                                                                                                                                                    -   p p
                                                                                    -    p -1
                                                                                                                                          Pt+j -1
                                                                          p P t (f )            Et          j
                                                                                                            p t,t+j Pm,t+j
                                                                                                                                                                p
                                                                                                                                                              Pt+ j Yt+j
                                                                                                     j =0
                                                                                                                                           Pt-1

Define variables:
                                                                                                              -    p p
                                                                         µt+j                 Pt+j -1
                                             X1,t =             (p  )j        Pm,t+j                                        p
                                                                                                                         Pt + j Yt+j
                                                         j =0
                                                                          µt                   Pt-1
                                                                                                  (1-   p )p
                                                                         µt+j      Pt+j -1                              -1
                                             X2,t =             (p  )j                                              p
                                                                                                                  Pt+ j Yt+j
                                                         j =0
                                                                          µt        Pt-1

These can be written recursively as:
                                                                                                       -    p p
                                                     X1,t = pm,t Pt p Yt + p t,t+1 t                              X1,t+1
                                                                     -1                              (1-    p )p
                                                     X2,t = Pt p          Yt + p t,t+1 t                           X2,t+1

Note, all retailers set the same price. We call this reset price Pt . Hence, the first order condition can be
written as
                                                       p   X1,t
                                             Pt =
                                                     p - 1 X2,t
                                                                    -1
Defining x1,t = X1,t /Pt p , x2,t = X2,t /Pt p                           , and p     
                                                                                t = Pt /Pt gives


                                                                     p   x1,t
                                                    pt     =                                                                                                       (A.22)
                                                                   p - 1 x2,t
                                                                                                                    p
                                                                                                       t+1
                                                x1,t       = pm,t Yt + p Et t,t+1                                        x1,t+1                                    (A.23)
                                                                                                       t p
                                                                                                             p -1
                                                                                                t+1
                                                x2,t       = Yt + p Et t,t+1                                        x2,t+1                                         (A.24)
                                                                                                t p
                      Pm,t
where pm,t =           Pt .




                                                                                        51
Aggregation Integrate the demand for retail output, (A.20), across retailers, noting that Yt (f ) =
             1
Ym,t (f ),   0
                 Ym,t (f )df = Ym,t . This yields
                                                                                p
                                                                            Yt vt = Ym,t                                                                         (A.25)
where
                                                                                1                    -   p
                                                                  p                     Pt (f )
                                                                 vt =                                        df
                                                                            0            Pt
This is a measure of price dispersion. Using properties of Calvo pricing with indexation to lagged inflation
yields:
                                                                                                                            -   p
                                                                                1                p
                             p                                -                                 t- 1 Pt-1 (f )
                            vt    =            (1 -   p ) (pt)
                                                                    p
                                                                        +                                                           df
                                                                            1-p                      Pt
                                                                                                                  1                       -   p
                                                                -               -                    -                        Pt-1 (f )
                                  =            (1 - p ) (pt)
                                                                    p       p p
                                                                        + t-1           p
                                                                                Pt p Pt-1                                                         df
                                                                                                              1-p              Pt - 1

Via a law of large numbers, this reduces to
                                                                                                                        p
                                                      p                    -                             t                    p
                                                     vt   = (1 -   p ) (pt)
                                                                                        p
                                                                                            + p          p                   vt -1                               (A.26)
                                                                                                         t -1


    Similarly, the aggregate price index, (A.21), may be written as:
                                                                                                 1
                                  1-                                        1-                                (1-       p)
                                 Pt        p
                                                 =        (1 - p ) (Pt )            p
                                                                                        +                 p
                                                                                                         t- 1                Pt-1 (f )1- p df
                                                                                                1-p
                                                                            1-                        (1-     p)       1-
                                                 =        (1 - p ) (Pt )            p          p
                                                                                        +  p t - 1                    Pt-1 p
                                 1-    p
Divide both sides by Pt                    to obtain
                                                                                    1-                     (1-         p)           -1
                                                 1        =   (1 - p ) (pt)
                                                                                            p          p
                                                                                                +  p t - 1                  t p                                  (A.27)

A.4.2        Wholesale Firms
Write wholesaler profits, (2.22), in real terms by dividing by the aggregate price level:

                                     -                                                               Fm,t   Fm,t-1 -1                             Fm,t-1 -1
        divm,t = pm,t At (ut Kt ) L1                k
                                   d,t - wt Ld,t - pt It + Qt                                             -                               -             
                                                                                                      Pt     Pt-1 t                                Pt-1 t

Note that Fm,t is the amount of nominal bonds.
   The firm discounts real dividends using the stochastic discount factor of the household, t,t+j . A
Lagrangian with the constraints (2.20) and (2.21) is

                  
                                                         -                                                                                        Fm,t+j   Fm,t+j -1 -1
  Lm,t = Et             t,t+j pm,t+j At+j (ut+j Kt+j ) L1                    k
                                                        d,t+j -wt+j Ld,t+j -pt+j It+j +Qt+j                                                              -          
                 j =0
                                                                                                                                                   Pt+j     Pt+j -1 t+j
                                      Fm,t+j -1 -1
                              -                    + 1,t+j It+j + (1 -  (ut+j ))Kt+j - Kt+j +1
                                       Pt+j -1 t+j
                                                                                                         Fm,t+j   Fm,t+j -1 -1
                                                                    + 2,t+j Qt+j                                -                                      - pk
                                                                                                                                                          t+j It+j
                                                                                                          Pt+j     Pt+j -1 t+j




                                                                                        52
    The first order conditions are
            Lm,t
                    = pm,t (1 - )At (ut Kt ) L- 
                                              d,t - wt = 0                                               (A.28)
           Ld,t
            Lm,t
                    = -p k          k
                         t + 1,t - pt 2,t = 0                                                            (A.29)
             It
            Lm,t                              -
                    = pm,t At (ut Kt )-1 Kt L1
                                             d,t - 1,t  (ut )Kt = 0                                      (A.30)
            ut
            Lm,t                                                 -
                    = Et t,t+1 pm,t+1 At+1 (ut+1 Kt+1 )-1 ut+1 L1
                                                                d,t+1 + 1,t+1 (1 -  (ut+1 ))             (A.31)
           Kt+1
                      -1,t = 0                                                                           (A.32)
            Lm,t      Qt       Qt            1 -1     Qt+1 -1          Qt+1 -1
                    =    + 2,t    - Et t,t+1        +     t+1 + 2,t+1      t+1 = 0                       (A.33)
           Fm,t       Pt       Pt            Pt t+1    Pt               Pt

Define M1,t = 1 + 2,t , M2,t = 1 + 2,t . Then we can eliminate 1,t using 1,t = pk
                                                                                t M1,t from (A.29).
Simplifying the rest of these expressions yields (2.23) - (2.27).

A.4.3     Capital Producer
A representative capital producer generates new physical capital via:

                                                             It
                                             It = 1 - S            It                                    (A.34)
                                                            It-1
It is unconsumed final output. S (·) is an adjustment cost. Profits are discounted by the household's stochastic
discount factor. Nominal dividend earned by the capital producer is

                                                             It
                                      DIVk,t = Ptk 1 - S            It - Pt It
                                                            It-1

In real terms,
                                                             It
                                       divk,t = pk
                                                 t 1-S              It - It
                                                            It-1
The objective is to maximize the present discounted value of profit using the stochastic discount factor of
the household:
                                  
                                                           It+j
                        max Et        t,t+j pk
                                             t+j 1 - S              It+j - It+j
                         It
                                 j =0
                                                         I t+j -1

The first order condition is
                                                                                               2
                                 It             It    It                         It+1   It+1
                 1 = pk
                      t 1-S             -S                   + Et t,t+1 pk
                                                                         t+1 S                           (A.35)
                                It-1          It-1   It-1                         It     It

A.5      Fiscal Authority
A fiscal authority consumes an exogenous and stochastic amount of final output, Gt . It finances this expen-
diture by levying lump sum taxes on the household, with a transfer from the central bank, and by issuing
(nominal) bonds, BG,t .
     Because of the frictions facing financial intermediaries, Ricardian Equivalence does not hold and the mix
of lump sum tax and bond finance is relevant. As a simplification, we assume that there is a fixed quantity
of outstanding real government bonds, i.e. bG,t = ¯  bG , where nominal government bonds grow with the price
level, i.e. BG,t = Pt¯bG . Lump sum taxes endogenously adjust so that the government's budget constraint
holds each period. Let Tcb,t denote the total (real) transfer received from the central bank each period. The
government's budget constraint is:


                                                      53
                          Pt Gt + Pt-1¯
                                      bG = Pt Tt + Pt Tcb,t + QB,t Pt¯
                                                                     bG 1 - -
                                                                            t
                                                                              1
                                                                                                       (A.36)


A.6      Aggregation and Exogenous Processes
The model features three exogenous variables ­ neutral productivity, At ; government spending, Gt ; and the
liquidity process, t . These follow AR(1) processes in the log:

                               ln At   =   A ln At-1 + sA A,t                                          (A.37)
                               ln Gt   =   (1 - G ) ln G + G ln Gt-1 + sG G,t                          (A.38)
                                ln t   =   (1 -  ) ln  +  ln t-1 + s ,t                                (A.39)

Autoregressive parameters are restricted to lie between zero and one and shocks are drawn from standard
normal distributions, with sA , sG , and s denoting the standard deviations of the shocks. G and  are
non-stochastic steady state values; the non-stochastic steady state value of productivity is normalized to
unity.
    Privately issued bonds and government issued bonds must be held by either financial intermediaries or
the central bank. In real terms, the bond market-clearing conditions are:


                                             fm,t   = ft + fcb,t                                       (A.40)
                                              ¯
                                              bG    = bt + bcb,t                                       (A.41)

where ft = i fi,t and bt = i bi,t ,
    Aggregate the balance sheet condition of financial intermediaries in (2.4), and write in real terms (vari-
ables without i indexes are integrated across intermediaries, and dt = Dt /Pt is real deposits):

                                        Qt ft + QB,t bt + ret = dt + nt                                (A.42)
Aggregate net worth dynamics in (A.7):

  n t =  -
         t
           1     F
                Rt    d
                   - Rt                B    d
                       -1 Qt-1 ft-1 + Rt - Rt-1 QB,t-1 bt-1

                                                               re      d            d
                                                            + Rt -1 - Rt-1 ret-1 + Rt-1 nt-1 + X       (A.43)

where  is the fraction of continuing financial intermediaries, and X is the start up funds given to the new
intermediaries.
    Aggregating (2.17) across intermediaries yields:

                                           Qt ft + QB,t bt  t nt                                       (A.44)

where (A.44) holds with equality when (2.9) binds.
   The aggregate resource constraint is standard:

                                              Yt = Ct + It + Gt                                        (A.45)


A.7      Equilibrium
The full set of equilibrium conditions include:
    · financial intermediaries (7 equations): (2.6), (2.7), (2.11) - (2.15)
    · households (4 equations): (A.3) - (A.6)
    · labor market (3 equations): (A.14) - (A.16)



                                                      54
        · production (13 equations): for retail firms, (A.22) - (A.24), for wholesale firms, (2.19) - (2.21), (2.23)
          - (2.27), for capital producing firms, (A.34) - (A.35)
        · fiscal authority (1 equation): (A.36)
        · central bank (2 equations): (3.4), plus its remittance to the fiscal authority, which satisfies:

                               Tcb,t = (1 + Qt )-1                     -1           re  -1
                                                t fcb,t-1 + (1 + QB,t )t bcb,t-1 - Rt-1 t ret-1

                                                                           re    d
        · monetary policy (5 equations): (3.1), plus two equations for Rt     , Rt ((3.2) for conventional policy,
          (3.3) for the conventional ZLB, or (3.7) for NIRP), as well as (5.1) (which nests (3.5) when f = 0)
          and (3.6).
        · aggregation (15 equations): exogenous processes include (A.37) - (A.39). Bond market clearing con-
          ditions are (A.40) - (A.41), and other aggregate conditions are (A.17) - (A.19), (A.25) - (A.27) and
          (A.42) - (A.45).
                                                             F    B    re    d    TR
These are 50 equations for 50 variables                     Rt , Rt , Rt  , Rt , Rt  , Qt , QB,t , t,t+1 , t , t , t , t , t , ret , nt , µt ,
                  
Ct , Lt , mrst , wt , f1,t , f2,t , wt , Ld,t , p                                                     k
                                                 t , x1,t , x2,t , pm,t , Yt , Ym,t , ut , Kt , It , pt , fm,t , M1,t , M2,t , It ,Tt ,Tcb,t , fcb,t , bcb,t ,
                              p w
At , Gt , t , ft , bt , dt , vt , vt .


B          Model Parameterization and Moments
The values assigned to relatively standard parameters of the model are given in Table B.1. Most of the
parameters take on standard values drawn from the literature. The frequency of time is quarterly, and
accordingly the discount factor and steady state depreciation rate on physical capital are set to conventional
values,  = 0.995 and 0 = 0.025. The parameter on the linear term in the utilization cost function, 1 ,
is chosen to be consistent with a steady state normalization of utilization to unity.23 The habit formation
parameter is set to b = 0.7, and the inverse Frisch labor supply elasticity is  = 1. These are both standard
values. The scaling parameter on the disutility of labor, , is chosen to normalize steady state labor input
to unity. The exponent on capital services in the production function takes the standard value of  = 0.33.
The squared term in the utilization adjustment cost function is 2 = 0.01 and the investment adjustment
cost parameter is I = 2, both of which are conventional values.24 The elasticities of substitution for goods
and labor, p and w , are set to be consistent with steady state markups of ten percent. The price rigidity
parameters for both goods and labor, p and w , imply average durations between price and wage changes
of one year. We assume no backward indexation of either prices or wages, so p = w = 0. The model is
solved about a zero inflation steady state. The parameters of the underlying Taylor rule ­ r ,  , and y
­ are standard. The AR parameters governing the productivity and government spending take on standard
values.
   23                                                                                                                        2         2
      The utilization adjustment cost function takes the form:  (ut ) = 0 + 1 (ut - 1) +                                     2 (ut - 1) .
   24                                                                                                                        I                      2
      The functional form for the investment adjustment cost is standard: S (It /It-1 ) =                                    2 (It /It-1 -       1) .




                                                                           55
                                            Table B.1: Calibrated Parameters
       Parameter                   Value or Target       Description
       Standard parameters
                                   0.995                 Discount factor
       b                           0.7                   Habit formation
                                   1                     Inverse Frisch elasticity
                                   L=1                   Labor disutility scaling parameter / steady state labor
                                   0.33                  Production function exponent on capital
       0                           0.025                 Steady state depreciation
       1                           u=1                   Utilization linear term / steady state utilization
       2                           0.01                  Utilization squared term
       I                           2                     Investment adjustment cost
                                   1                     Steady state (gross) inflation
       p                           11                    Elasticity of substitution goods
       w                           11                    Elasticity of substitution labor
       p                           0.75                  Price rigidity
       w                           0.75                  Wage rigidity
       p                           0                     Price indexation
       w                           0                     Wage indexation
       r                           0.8                   Taylor rule smoothing
                                   1.5                   Taylor rule inflation
       y                           0.25                  Taylor rule output growth
       A                           0.95                  AR productivity
       G                           0.95                  AR government spending
       Shock sizes
       sA                          0.0065                SD productivity
       sG                          0.01                  SD government spending
       s                           0.04                  SD liquidity
Note: this table lists the values of calibrated parameters or the target used in the calibration.




                                Table B.2: Unconditional Moments: Model vs. Data
                                            d ln Yt    d ln Ct    d ln It   d ln Lt      t      Credit Spread
                 Volatility      Model       2.93       0.33       4.63      0.92       0.30         0.17
                                 Data        2.10       0.73       3.46      1.15       0.43         0.23
                 Cyclicality     Model       1.00       0.16       0.95      0.50      -0.06        -0.56
                                 Data        1.00       0.48       0.80      0.53      -0.10        -0.23

Notes: this table lists selected moments from the model as well as counterparts in the data. Data moments
are calculated from 1984q1 - 2007q3. Volatilities for output growth, d ln Yt , are standard deviations of
quarterly output growth expressed at annualized percentage rate. Other volatilities are expressed relative
to the volatility of output growth. Cyclicalities are correlations with output growth.

    Moments from the model, along with counterparts in the data, are presented in Table B.2.25 As noted
in the text, given non-shock parameters, we choose the standard deviations of the three exogenous shocks to
  25
    For the data, d ln Yt corresponds to the growth rate of real GDP measured at an annualized percentage
rate. We measure consumption as the sum of (nominal) consumption of non-durables and services, deflated
by the GDP deflator to put it in real terms. Our measure of investment is the sum of (nominal) gross private
fixed investment plus consumption of durables, also deflated by the GDP deflator. Our measure of labor
hours is the index of total hours worked in the non-farm business sector. Inflation is the growth rate of the
GDP price deflator. The credit spread is the Baa-10 Year Treasury spread.


                                                                 56
produce selected moments which roughly align with the data. For these moments we focus on pre-crisis data,
so the model is solved ignoring the possibility of a binding ZLB. The model does a good job at replicating
key moments from the data. Output is slightly too volatile and consumption is slightly too smooth in the
model relative to the data, while investment is a bit too volatile in the model. Nevertheless, qualitatively,
the volatilities of these variables relative to output growth are in-line with observed data. The model does
a good job of matching the relative volatilities of hours, inflation, and the observed credit spread, which in
the model is defined as the difference between yields to maturity on private and government bonds.26 The
model does a good job at matching the cyclicalities of investment, while it underpredicts the cyclicality of
consumption growth.27 The model does an excellent job at matching the cyclicalities of hours and inflation.
It produces slightly too much countercyclicality in the credit spread, but qualitatively it is not far off. In
terms of the relative importance of the different shocks, the productivity shock accounts for roughly 40
percent of the volatility in output growth, the government spending shock 10 percent, and the liquidity
shock the remaining 50 percent.




  26                                                                                   1
     To be precise, RLF                                                         B
                      t is the gross yield to maturity on private bonds, and RLt = QB,t +  is the gross
yield to maturity on government debt. The yield spread is then defined as ln RLF          B
                                                                               t - ln RLt .
  27
     Discrepancies between model and data moments, and in particular that concerning the cyclicality of
consumption, can easily be made smaller by including additional shocks (e.g. preference shocks).


                                                     57
