                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DOES KNOWING YOUR FICO SCORE CHANGE FINANCIAL BEHAVIOR? EVIDENCE
       FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT WITH STUDENT LOAN BORROWERS

                                       Tatiana Homonoff
                                        Rourke O'Brien
                                       Abigail B. Sussman

                                      Working Paper 26048
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26048


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




We gratefully acknowledge Marianne Bertrand, Anat Bracha, Michael Collins, Jacob Goldin,
Sam Hartzmark, Emir Kamenica, Neale Mahoney, Sanjog Misra, Devin Pope, Justin Sydnor,
Oleg Urminsky, George Wu, and participants in seminars at NYU, Rutgers, USC, USMA-West
Point, Washington University in St. Louis, Wharton, Wisconsin, Yale, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York and in the Chicago Booth Behavioral Approaches to Financial Decision-Making
Conference, Cornell IBHF Conference, Boulder Summer Conference on Consumer Financial
Decision Making, the CFPB Research Conference and the Advances in Field Experiments
Conference for conversations and suggestions that have greatly improved the quality of this
project. We also thank Jennifer Chellew, Monica Milone, Ryan Corey, Annat Shrabstein, and
Marie O'Malley from Sallie Mae as well as Joanne Gaskin and Jenelle Dito from FICO for their
assistance throughout the project. Nicholas Herzog provided excellent research assistance. All
remaining errors are our own. This work was supported by the True North Communications Inc.
Faculty Research Funds at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Tatiana Homonoff, Rourke O'Brien, and Abigail B. Sussman. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Knowing Your FICO Score Change Financial Behavior? Evidence from a Field Experiment
with Student Loan Borrowers
Tatiana Homonoff, Rourke O'Brien, and Abigail B. Sussman
NBER Working Paper No. 26048
July 2019
JEL No. D14

                                         ABSTRACT

One in five consumer credit accounts incur late fees each quarter. Evidence on the efficacy of
regulations to improve behavior through enhanced disclosure of financial product attributes is
mixed. We test a novel form of disclosure that provides borrowers with a personalized measure of
their creditworthiness. In a field experiment with over 400,000 student loan borrowers, treatment
group members received communications about the availability of their FICO Score. The
intervention significantly reduced late payments and increased borrowers' FICO Scores. Survey
data show treatment group members were less likely to overestimate their FICO Scores,
suggesting the intervention may correct for overoptimism.

Tatiana Homonoff                                Abigail B. Sussman
New York University                             University of Chicago
Robert F. Wagner School of Public Service       Booth School of Business
295 Lafayette Street, 2nd Floor                 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
New York, NY 10012                              Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                        abigail.sussman@chicagobooth.edu
tatiana.homonoff@nyu.edu

Rourke O'Brien
Yale University
Department of Sociology
493 College Street
New Haven, CT 06511
Rourke.obrien@yale.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at AEARCTR-0002871
Consumers struggle when making nancial decisions.               These diculties often translate to


costly mistakes across several domains of household nance, from investment and retirement


savings decisions to mortgage choice and debt management (Benartzi and Thaler, 2001;


Choi et al., 2009; Gross and Souleles, 2002; Ponce, Seira and Zamarripa, 2017).                In the


context of consumer credit, one common and costly behavior is failing to make minimum


payments on time. Past-due accounts can lead to a variety of downstream consequences such

                                                                    1
as penalty fees, higher interest rates, and lower credit scores.        Recent estimates indicate that


approximately 20 percent of consumer credit accounts incur late fees each quarter (CFPB,

                                                                                                2
2015), amounting to more than $11 billion per year in penalty fees for late payments.


    Given the direct implications for consumer welfare, improving nancial decision-making


has become a focus in recent decades with actors in the public, private, and nonprot sec-


tors implementing a wide range of interventions. Recent legislation has focused on improving


consumer decisions by providing enhanced disclosures such as those mandated in the Credit


Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure (CARD) Act of 2009 and in state reg-


ulation of payday lending.      These disclosures typically aim to simplify information about


nancial products such as interest rates, repayment terms, or penalty fees.


    Our intervention tests a novel form of disclosure that provides borrowers with information


about themselves rather than about attributes of nancial products. Specically, we provide


individuals with a personalized, quantiable, and behaviorally-responsive measure of their


creditworthiness: their FICO Score. We present evidence from a large-scale eld experiment


with over 400,000 clients of Sallie Mae, a national nancial institution specializing in student


loans. Beginning in June 2015, Sallie Mae oered borrowers access to unlimited views of their


FICO Score. This was part of a broader initiative the FICO Score Open Access Program


to increase consumer access to their Scores through partnering nancial institutions. As of


2018, more than 250 million consumer accounts included free access to FICO Scores.

   1 https://www.americanexpress.com/us/content/nancial-education/how-late-payments-aect-your-
credit-score.html;     https://www.discover.com/credit-cards/resources/what-happens-if-you-dont-pay-a-
credit-card
   2 https://www.wsj.com/articles/amex-raises-its-fee-for-late-payments-1480069802



                                                   2
   We exogenously vary the likelihood of viewing one's FICO Score page by randomly as-


signing borrowers to receive direct communications about the program's availability.       To


estimate the eect of the intervention on nancial outcomes, we examine individual-level


credit report data provided by TransUnion. Borrowers assigned to the treatment group re-


ceived quarterly email messages notifying them that an updated FICO Score was available


to view through Sallie Mae's website and provided instructions on how to view their Score.


During the rst year of the intervention, 32 percent of treatment group members viewed


their personalized page at least once, an 8 percentage point increase over the control group.


   We nd that the intervention led to a signicant decrease in the likelihood of having a


late payment one year after the intervention. Specically, treatment group members were


0.7 percentage points less likely to have an account that was 30 days or more past due, a


4 percent decrease relative to the control group. This change in payment behavior is quite


large, especially given that less than half of treatment group members ever opened the email


and an even smaller fraction ever logged in to view their score. The intervention also led


to a net positive outcome for the borrower's creditworthiness as indicated by an increase


in the borrower's FICO Score (a statistically signicant increase of 0.7 points) and reduced


the proportion of subprime borrowers by 0.4 percentage points. These eects largely persist


across the full two year study period.


   A key component of our intervention entails prompting individuals to view their personal


FICO Score page, which is not included in the email message.         This page includes the


borrower's FICO Score along with two reason codes detailing key factors contributing to


their Score. While the intent-to-treat estimates are the policy relevant estimates for nancial


institutions considering a similar email campaign, we also investigate the eect of viewing


one's FICO Score on nancial behaviors by using treatment status as an instrument for the


likelihood of viewing one's FICO Score page. Our estimates suggest that borrowers who were


induced to view their FICO Score page as a result of our intervention are 9.0 percentage


points less likely to have a 30-day late payment, contributing to an 8.2 point increase in the




                                              3
FICO Score itself and a 5.1 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of being classied as


a subprime borrower. For comparison, removal of a bankruptcy ag leads to a FICO Score


increase in the range of 10 to 15 points (Dobbie et al., 2016; Gross, Notowidigdo and Wang,


Forthcoming).   While we cannot disentangle the eects of viewing one's Score separately


from viewing the associated reason codes, we provide evidence that treatment eects are not


driven solely by additional information provided in the reason codes.


   We complement ndings from this eld experiment by analyzing responses to a survey


conducted by Sallie Mae one year after the start of the intervention, completed by a small


subset of our borrower population.   The survey asked participants questions about their


FICO Score knowledge and general nancial literacy. We nd that treatment group mem-


bers were more likely to accurately report their FICO Score. Specically, treatment group


members were less likely to overestimate their FICO Scores. This is consistent with liter-


ature on overoptimism and overcondence (Kahneman and Tversky, 1996; Fischho, Slovic


and Lichtenstein, 1977; Svenson, 1981) and suggests the intervention may lead to behavior


change in part by allowing people to properly calibrate their creditworthiness. In contrast,


we nd no dierences in general nancial literacy or the ability to identify actions associated


with improving creditworthiness across experimental groups.


   We test whether repeated email reminders are necessary to maintain the eects on -


nancial outcomes we observe in the rst year of the intervention by using a separate sample


 our discontinued sample  who only received emails for the rst three quarters of the


intervention. We nd no signicant dierences in nancial outcomes between the main treat-


ment group and the discontinued sample, evaluated a full year after the discontinued sample


stopped receiving communications, suggesting no additional positive eect of repeated re-


minders on nancial behavior. Additionally, we tested whether the content of the message


impacted FICO Score views or nancial outcomes by varying whether the quarterly email


contained (1) instructions on how to view their Score; (2) instructions plus additional in-


formation about economic consequences of FICO Scores; or (3) instructions plus additional




                                             4
information about peer behavior. We saw no dierences as a function of the specic message


received.


   Our intervention design builds on several promising strategies that focus on improving


nancial outcomes. One strategy aims to improve decision-making through enhanced disclo-


sures. In the context of payday lending, Bertrand and Morse (2011) found that disclosures


clarifying interest costs reduced borrowing. Motivated by these insights, recent legislation 


such as the CARD Act and the Truth-in-Lending Act (TILA)mandate the use of enhanced


disclosures for a range of nancial products.           However, research suggests that complexity


or confusion over the information provided in these disclosures inhibits their ecacy (Car-


penter et al., 2017).    For example, Lacko and Pappalardo (2010) nd that mortgage cost


disclosures required by TILA are ineective, with many consumers misunderstanding key


terms.   Similarly, Seira, Elizondo and Laguna-Muggenburg (2017) nd no evidence that


TILA-type information disclosures change consumer behavior.               Agarwal et al. (2014) nd


that the CARD Act's 36-month disclosure requirement led to minimal changes in payment

                   3
behavior overall.      This is consistent with ndings on the role of simplication of informa-


tion in improving consumer choice in the context of medicare prescription drug plans (Kling


et al., 2012) and EITC take-up (Bhargava and Manoli, 2015).


   Reminders have also been shown to help people accomplish desired actions such as build-


ing savings or repaying debt (Cadena and Schoar, 2011; Karlan et al., 2016; Bracha and


Meier, 2019).    Consistent with an account of limited attention (Bordalo, Gennaioli and


Shleifer, 2013; Chetty, Looney and Kroft, 2009; Malmendier and Lee, 2011), reminders op-


erate by making previously known information salient at the right moment.                  In two very


dierent contexts, Bracha and Meier (2019) and Cadena and Schoar (2011) nd evidence


that reminding individuals to pay their bills on time leads to reductions in delinquencies

                                    4
and positive nancial outcomes.          Karlan et al. (2016) focus on a dierent nancial behavior,

   3 This component of the CARD Act required lenders to state the amount consumers would need to pay
each month to repay their bill in full in three years. Notably, changes that were observed were primarily
driven by an increase in the share of accounts paying exactly the 36-month amount.
   4 The positive eects observed in Bracha and Meier (2019) are limited to individuals with the lowest



                                                   5
personal savings, and also nd positive eects of reminder messages.


    A related literature suggests that correcting for an existing bias or other cognitive limita-


tion may improve nancial decision-making. For example, people are often overly condent


about their own knowledge and ability (Kahneman and Tversky, 1996; Fischho, Slovic and

                                                                                                       5
Lichtenstein, 1977; Svenson, 1981).          This has consequences in a variety of domains.                In


the context of creditworthiness, Perry (2008) nds that more than 30 percent of people


overestimate their credit scores, suggesting that overoptimism could contribute to poor -


nancial decision-making. This miscalibration of one's own creditworthiness may have direct


consequences for consumer nancial outcomes.


    One common thread across these distinct approaches to improving outcomes for con-


sumers is the ecacy of strategies that include personalized information.                     For example,


Seira, Elizondo and Laguna-Muggenburg (2017) nd that among the range of disclosures


considered, the only message that inuenced credit behavior was a warning that highlighted


borrowers' low credit scores. Similarly, the most eective reminder message in Karlan et al.


(2016) included information on the individual's personal savings goals.                This is consistent


with prior research showing that individuals are responsive to negative feedback about their


nancial behaviors. For example, Agarwal et al. (2008) nd individuals who incur credit card


fees take steps that serve to reduce fees incurred over time. Moreover, Bracha and Meier


(2019) show that providing individuals with delayed  and therefore potentially inaccurate


 information about their creditworthiness may have unintended consequences.


    By providing individuals with quarterly messages to view their current FICO Score, our


intervention incorporates several of the promising elements from these literatures: reminders,


clearly communicated information, and personalized feedback. Our intervention also high-


lights the promise of interventions designed to correct for cognitive biases.

baseline credit scores. This intervention also included reminders about creditworthiness and the consequences
of low credit scores.
   5 For example, Biais et al. (2005) show that overcondent traders are more likely to demonstrate the
winner's curse, and Camerer and Lovallo (1999) show that overestimating chances of success in a new
venture can lead to increased market entry and nancial loss.




                                                     6
   The paper is structured as follows. Section I provides background on FICO Scores and


the Open Access initiative. Section II presents an overview of the eld experiment. Section


III provides a description of our data.   Section IV presents ndings on the eect of the


intervention on viewing behavior and nancial outcomes. Section V discusses mechanisms.


Section VI concludes.




I. Background on FICO Scores and Open Access Initiative

FICO Scores, a product of the Fair Isaac Corporation, are commonly used by nancial


institutions to make consumer credit decisions. FICO Scores are calculated using information


collected by the major credit bureaus and are constructed using a proprietary algorithm that


incorporates information about an individual's outstanding debt, payment history, length of


credit usage, mix of credit used, and applications for new credit (see Appendix Figure A.1).


Although the FICO Score is traditionally used to assess creditworthiness by lenders, the


Score has become increasingly utilized outside of the nancial services sector (Bartik and


Nelson, 2016; Cliord and Shoag, 2016; Dobbie et al., 2016).


   In recent years there has been a push by policymakers, regulators and nancial service


providers to increase consumer access to their credit information, including credit reports


and credit scores. In November 2013, FICO joined this eort by launching the FICO Score


Open Access Program. Through this initiative, institutions that purchase FICO Scores for


use in risk management make those Scores available directly to the consumer. All nancial


institutions that participated in the program made FICO Scores available to their customers


free of charge via a password protected website. Alongside the FICO Score itself, institutions


were required to include two reason codes that explain the key factors contributing to the


individual's Score, such as limited credit history or account delinquency. As of January 2018,


FICO had partnered with 8 of the top 10 credit card issuers and more than 100 nancial


institutions including Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Chase and Citi, to provide free access




                                              7
                                                                                     6
to more than 250 million consumer credit and loan accounts in the US.




II. Experiment Overview

On June 24, 2015, Sallie Mae, a national nancial institution specializing in student loans,


joined the FICO Score Open Access Program and began providing free Score access to


customers through their website. Consistent with requirements of the Open Access Program,


clients who logged in to the website saw a visual display that included their FICO Score


beside a barometer showing the range of possible FICO Scores and two reason codes (Figure


1).


      While all customers had the ability to log in and view this information, many borrowers


may not have been aware of the new program. To test the eect of providing information


about a borrower's FICO Score, we experimentally vary knowledge of FICO Score availabil-


ity through additional communication about the program across the 406,994 student loan


borrowers who held a loan with Sallie Mae at the start of the FICO Score Open Access


program and continued to hold that loan for the following two years.




A. Experimental Conditions

Prior to the roll-out of the FICO Score Open Access Program at Sallie Mae, borrowers


were randomly assigned to one of four experimental groups  three treatment groups and


one control group. Roughly 90 percent of our sample was assigned to one of the treatment

                                                                                               7
groups, while the control group contained the remaining 10 percent of the sample.                  Borrowers


assigned to the treatment groups received quarterly email communications from Sallie Mae


alerting them to the availability of their FICO Score and providing instructions on how

   6 http://www.co.com/en/newsroom/co-score-open-access-reaches-250-million-consumer-nancial-
credit-accounts
   7 Sallie Mae limited the control group to 10 percent of the sample in an eort to maximize the number of
clients receiving information about Score availability while still preserving the ability to estimate the eect
of the intervention.




                                                      8
to access the information while control group members did not receive any communication


about the program beyond what was stated on Sallie Mae's website.


    All emails included a short description of the FICO Score and informed borrowers that


their Score was available to view. The emails also included a link to log in to view the Score


through Sallie Mae's website.      Treatment group members received these communications


once per quarter on the date that Scores were updated informing them that their FICO


Score had been updated and, again, providing a link to log in to view the Score. Due to

                                                                                            8
privacy considerations, no personalized information was included in the email itself.


    Borrowers in the treatment group were randomly assigned to receive one of three email


messages: (1) baseline, (2) economic consequences, or (3) social inuence. In the baseline


condition, borrowers received only the information described above (Figure 2). The two ad-


ditional conditions included the same information as the baseline email as well as additional


messaging. In the economic consequences condition (Appendix Figure A.2a), clients received


an email that was intended to emphasize the impact of the FICO Score on economic out-


comes (e.g., When you apply for credit  whether it's a credit card, car loan, student loan,


apartment rental, or mortgage  lenders will assess your risk as a borrower...). Building on


research demonstrating the eectiveness of messaging informing individuals of prosocial ac-


tions of their peers (Allcott, 2011; Ayres, Raseman and Shih, 2013; Cialdini and Goldstein,


2004; Kast, Meier and Pomeranz, 2012), the social inuence condition (Appendix Figure


A.2b) included messaging informing readers that their peers were taking actions to improve


their credit (e.g., Many of your peers are building strong nancial futures. You can, too, by


eectively managing your student loans.). Our main analyses focus on variation between


the control group and all treatment groups combined. However, Section V.D.i investigates


the relative eectiveness of the dierent treatment messages.

   8 This requirement was not specic to Sallie Mae.   Our understanding is that the FICO Score Open
Access Program requires FICO Score information to be displayed on a password protected website rather
than displayed in an email.




                                                 9
B. Experiment Timeline

The three treatment groups in the main sample received eight quarterly emails starting in


June of 2015. Each treatment group received their assigned message for three consecutive


quarters (June, September, and December of 2015). However, beginning in 2016, all three


treatment groups received only the content included in the baseline email message. In other


words, clients in the economic consequences and social inuence conditions began receiving


the baseline message starting in March of 2016; clients in the baseline condition continued to


receive the baseline message. The control group never received any direct communications


about the program.


   The experimental design included a separate population of 37,393 borrowers  the dis-


continued sample  that received quarterly emails for only three quarters. This sample was


also split into three treatment message groups, and received quarterly email communica-


tions in June, September, and December of 2015. Our main analysis focuses on the 326,609


treatment group members who received quarterly communications through the end of the

                                9
intervention in June of 2017.       We use the discontinued sample to test whether continued


communication has an impact on FICO Page views and on subsequent nancial outcomes


in Section V.C.




III. Data

A. Email and FICO Score Page View Data

Over the course of the study period, Sallie Mae tracked whether a borrower opened our


treatment emails as well as each time a borrower viewed the FICO Score page on the web


portal which users access online by logging in with their username and password. We use this


information to construct weekly and quarterly indicators for whether the borrower viewed


our treatment messages or their FICO Score page throughout the study period. Our data

  9 See Appendix Figure A.3 for a summary of the experimental timeline.




                                                 10
on email open rates ranges from June 24, 2015 to June 9, 2016, while our FICO Score page


view data ranges from June 26, 2015 (two days after the intervention began) to June 12,


2017.




B. Credit Bureau Data

Each quarter, Sallie Mae receives updated credit report information for each of their bor-


rowers as part of routine business practice.        The credit report information is provided by


TransUnion, one of three major national credit reporting agencies, and is used to calculate


the borrowers' FICO Score. The FICO Score is then made available to the borrower through

                              10
the Open Access program.           Since all borrowers in our sample hold a private student loan,


FICO Scores existed for all borrowers in our sample.


   In addition to the FICO Score itself, the quarterly credit le includes information on


other nancial outcomes including late payments and credit account activity at the individual


borrower level. The late payments data includes indicators for whether the individual had


any trade account that was more than 30, 60, or 90 days past due in the last six months.


An account is considered late if the borrower fails to make the minimum payment on-time.


The credit account data includes the number of revolving trade accounts (e.g., credit cards),


credit utilization (i.e., the percent of available credit used), and the total credit balance


amount.


   Table 1 presents summary statistics on demographics and baseline credit measures for


our sample population as of June 2015 (i.e., prior to the launch of the experiment) by


experimental condition. All individuals in our sample are student loan borrowers, with just


over half still in school. Due to their young age (the average age in our population is 25),


sample members are relatively new to credit with an average credit history of only 6.5 years.


At the start of the experiment, the average FICO Score was 674, slightly lower than the

  10 Because the FICO Score Sallie Mae provides is based on this information from Trans Union, the Score
made available to the borrower does not change within each quarter.




                                                  11
                            11
national average of 700.           Just under 70 percent of the sample had at least one revolving


trade account with the average borrower holding 2.5 revolving trade accounts.                   Borrowers


with at least one revolving trade account utilize just under 40 percent of their account limit.


Roughly 14 percent of borrowers have had at least one account balance 30 or more days past


due within the prior six months with half of those borrowers holding at least one account


90 days or more past due. Individual demographics and baseline credit history are balanced


across the control and treatment conditions, consistent with the randomized design.




C. Financial Literacy Survey Data

In addition to collecting credit report data on the sample population, Sallie Mae conducted


the FICO and Financial Literacy Survey to identify eects of the FICO Score Open Access


Program on respondent nancial literacy and FICO Score-specic knowledge. In June 2016,


one year after the program began, Sallie Mae solicited survey responses from all current

                                            12
borrowers in the experimental sample.            These data were linked to each borrower's treatment


status to evaluate the eect of the intervention on survey responses.




i. Survey Questionnaire

The survey contained questions on the borrower's awareness and use of various nancial


communications and products provided by Sallie Mae with a specic focus on the FICO


Score Open Access Program.            Questions asked each borrower about the number of FICO


Score views in the last year, familiarity with the concept of a FICO Score, and awareness of

                              13
her personal FICO Score.            Importantly, these self-reported Scores could then be linked to


an individual's actual FICO Score to assess the accuracy of the self-report. Additionally, the


survey contained a wide variety of questions to assess the borrower's general nancial literacy

  11 www.co.com/en/blogs/risk-compliance/us-average-co-score-hits-700-a-milestone-for-consumers/
  12 Responses were solicited via email and borrowers had up to one month to participate. Sallie Mae sent
email reminders encouraging borrowers to take the survey but did not provide an incentive for participating.
  13 Possible responses included FICO Score ranges of 0-299, 300-449, 450-549, 550-649, 650-749, 750-850
and more than 850, or respondents could state that they did not know their FICO Score.




                                                     12
including awareness of positive credit behaviors. Additional details of these questions are in


Appendix C. Lastly, participants responded to a series of demographic questions focusing on


academic details such as college type, year and eld of study, and student loan details.




ii. Survey Response

Of the more than 400,000 borrowers who were asked to participate, only 3,511 individuals


completed the survey. While this low response rate is in line with previous survey requests


sent by the lender, it raises some questions about the external validity of this data source.


Appendix Table A.1, Panel A reveals several small but signicant dierences between survey


respondents and non-respondents in baseline demographic and credit data drawn from the


June 2015 TransUnion credit report. For example, survey respondents were slightly older


(27 versus 25), more likely to be out of school (54 versus 45 percent), and had a higher FICO


Score (696 versus 676) than non-respondents.


   While the comparison of baseline characteristics reveals some dierences between respon-


dents and non-respondents, an examination of treatment status by survey response shows


no such dierences.      Appendix Table A.1, Panel B shows that borrowers assigned to the


treatment condition were equally likely to participate in the survey: 89.0 percent of survey


respondents were assigned to the treatment condition versus 89.4 percent of non-respondents.


So while our sample of survey respondents is unlikely to be representative of our full sample


population, these results suggest that experimental comparisons within this select sample


are still likely to be internally valid.




IV. Main Results

A. Dynamics of Email Open Rates and FICO Score Page Viewing Patterns

We begin our analysis by investigating whether borrowers in the treatment group opened our


quarterly emails and, if so, whether these communications led to an increase in the likelihood



                                             13
of viewing their FICO Score page. We utilize administrative data from Sallie Mae on daily


email open rates and FICO Score page views.


   Figure 3 presents email open rates for treatment group members by week for the rst


year of the intervention. Quarter labels correspond to the weeks in which the intervention


emails were released. Figure 3a displays email open rates by week, while Figure 3b presents


the percent of treatment group borrowers who had ever opened a treatment email by the


week in question. Email open rates were highest in the week of the email release with very


few borrowers opening the email after two weeks of the sent date. Twenty-one percent of


treatment group members opened the rst email and 48 percent of treatment group members


opened at least one of the quarterly emails by the end of the rst year of the intervention. This


means that over half of borrowers in our treatment sample never received the information


contained in our treatment messages.


   Figure 4 mirrors Figure 3, but presents patterns of weekly FICO Score page views, rather


than email open rates. Since all Sallie Mae clients had access to their FICO Score through


the website regardless of treatment status, we present data for both treatment and control

        14
groups.


   Figure 4a shows that less than half a percent of control group members viewed their FICO


Score page in most weeks with 12.3 percent of control group members viewing at least once


by the end of year one and 19.0 percent by the end of the two-year intervention. This suggests


that even in the absence of email communications about the program, some borrowers were


aware of the availability of FICO Scores and did view them. However, the gures also show


that receiving a quarterly email boosts FICO Score page views even further.                    Treatment


group members saw a large spike in the number of FICO Score page views in the rst week


after each email was sent ranging between three and six percent of borrowers viewing their


Scores in the week of the email release. Additionally, these eects do not fade over time:


continued viewing is driven by a combination of borrowers who have already viewed their

  14 Note that our estimates of the fraction of borrowers viewing their Scores will be lower bound estimates
since we did not capture Score views on the rst two days of the campaign, see Section III.




                                                    14
Scores doing so again as well as borrowers checking their Score for the rst time late in the


study period, as shown in Figure 4b. By the end of the rst year of the intervention, 21.4


percent of treatment group members viewed their Score at least once, increasing to 31.4


percent by the end of the second year.


   Table 2 presents the corresponding regression estimates of the eect of the treatment on


FICO Score page views. Columns 1 and 3 show that treatment communications led to an


increase of 8.1 and 12.4 percentage points in the likelihood of viewing one's FICO Score page


by the end of years one and two, respectively. Columns 2 and 4 show that the intervention


also led to signicant increases in the number of page views. Appendix Table A.2 presents


corresponding estimates at the quarter level.


   While these estimates suggest that our intervention led to a signicant increase in the


likelihood of viewing one's Score through the Sallie Mae's website, this does not necessarily


tell us about the eects of the intervention on overall views. For example, treatment and


control group members could be equally likely to have viewed their Scores during the study


period, but the intervention simply caused treatment group borrowers to view their Scores


through Sallie Mae's website rather than through a dierent source. We address this concern


in Appendix B using survey data on views from all sources during the rst year of the


intervention and nd treatment eects on the likelihood of ever having viewed one's FICO


Score through any source that are nearly identical  8.0 versus 8.1 percentage points.




B. First-Year Eects on Financial Outcomes

In this section, we examine the eect of the intervention on individual nancial outcomes


captured by the TransUnion credit report. For each outcome, we rst estimate a reduced


form regression comparing outcomes by experimental group using rst-dierences to control


for an individual's credit history prior to the experiment  the intent-to-treat (ITT) estimate.


The regression model is as follows:




                                              15
                                            Yi = 0 + 1 Ti + i                                    (1)



   where the dependent variable is the dierence in the nancial outcome between the


quarter prior to the experiment (June 2015) and the post-intervention quarter of interest


and   Ti   is an indicator for individual   i   being randomly assigned to the treatment condition.


Therefore, the coecient of interest,        1 ,   can be interpreted as the causal impact of sending


quarterly emails about FICO Score availability on the within-person change in credit record


outcomes, i.e., the dierence-in-dierences estimate comparing treatment and control groups


before and after the start of the intervention. For our main specication, we consider the


rst-year impacts of the intervention; Section IV.C considers longer-term impacts.


   A key component of our intervention is information about the availability of one's FICO


Score.     However, as detailed above, only 48 percent of individuals in the treatment group


ever opened an email message from Sallie Mae in the rst year of the intervention; and


treatment group members were only 8 percentage points more likely to have ever viewed


their FICO Score page than control group members. While the ITT estimates (presented in


Panel A of our main results tables) are the policy relevant estimates for nancial institutions


considering a similar email campaign, we also present estimates from an analysis in which


we use treatment status as an instrument for ever opening an email (Panel B) and for ever


viewing one's FICO Score page (Panel C). The former provides an estimate of the treatment-


on-the-treated eects of our informational messages, while the latter aims to isolate the eect


of viewing one's FICO Score page, rather than simply reading the email.


   The validity of these instrumental variables (IV) estimates depends on whether the ad-


ditional informational content included in the intervention impacts nancial behavior. We


investigate the potential eect of several intervention components other than the FICO Score


in Section V.C. and nd no evidence that they directly aect nancial outcomes. While this


does not prove the validity of the exclusion restriction, it provides suggestive evidence that


(at least for the components we study) the additional nancial information contained in the



                                                     16
treatment emails did not lead to a change in nancial behaviors.




i. Late Payments

We begin our analysis by considering the eect of our intervention on the prevalence of late


payments. Repayment behavior has important implications for borrowers' creditworthiness


and overall nancial health.       Each payment period, borrowers have the option of paying


o their balance or rolling over some or all of their debt to the following period.             Not all


borrowers may be able to pay their full balance at each billing period, nor may they want to


if the interest rate on their credit card is lower than the cost of other credit alternatives (such


as payday loans). However, failing to make a minimum payment  which is typically only


between 1 and 4 percent of the total balance (Keys and Wang, 2019)  can lead to negative

                                                                                         15
outcomes such as penalty fees, higher interest rates, and lower credit scores.                Late fee

                                                                       16
penalties alone cost consumers more than $11 billion per year.              Therefore, many borrowers


may benet from successfully paying o their minimum balance each month.


    Table 3 Column 1 presents the eect of the intervention on the change in likelihood of


having at least one trade account balance past due for over 30 days within the past six


months. Panel A shows that treatment group members were signicantly less likely to have


an account that was 30 days or more past due  a 0.7 percentage point decrease. Given that


only 17.5 percent of control group members had a balance 30 or more days past due at the


end of year 1, this is a relatively large (4 percent) reduction.


    As mentioned above, Panels B and C present two alternative estimates which use treat-


ment status as an instrument for the likelihood of opening an email and viewing one's FICO


Score page, respectively. We nd that opening the treatment email is associated with a 1.5


percentage point decrease in the likelihood of having an account 30 days or more past due.


Turning to Panel C, we nd that borrowers who were induced to view their FICO Score page

  15 https://www.americanexpress.com/us/content/nancial-education/how-late-payments-aect-your-
credit-score.html;     https://www.discover.com/credit-cards/resources/what-happens-if-you-dont-pay-a-
credit-card
  16 https://www.wsj.com/articles/amex-raises-its-fee-for-late-payments-1480069802



                                                   17
as a result of the intervention are roughly half as likely as the control group to have a late


payment (a reduction of 9.0 percentage points).




ii. FICO Score

We next turn to the eect of the treatment on the FICO Score itself, a summary metric


that captures the net eect of the intervention on creditworthiness. Appendix Figure A.1


describes some of the key components impacting an individual's FICO Score, for example,


payment history (i.e., whether balances are paid on time) accounts for 35 percent of the


Score.   The signicant impact of our intervention on late payments suggests that we may


expect to see an increase in the FICO Score itself; however, it is possible that the positive


eect of reduced late payments is oset by other unobserved negative nancial behaviors,


leaving the net eect ambiguous.


   Table 3 Column 2 presents the estimated eects of the treatment on the individual's


FICO Score. Borrowers in the control group have an average FICO Score of 676 at the end


of year 1. Our results show that receiving the quarterly emails signicantly increased the


average FICO Score of treatment group members by two-thirds of a point. Our instrumental


variables estimates show that opening an email is associated with a 1.4 point increase, while


borrowers who were induced to view their FICO Score page saw an 8.2 point increase.


   To calibrate the size of the eect, the removal of a bankruptcy ag leads to FICO Score


increases on the order of 10 to 15 points (Dobbie et al., 2016; Gross, Notowidigdo and


Wang, Forthcoming). Separately, Appendix Figure A.1 shows that length of credit history


accounts for 15 percent of the FICO Score; therefore, the relationship between credit history


length and FICO Score provide us with another benchmark. In our sample, we nd that an


additional year of credit history is associated with a 1.1 point increase in FICO Scores, an


eect that is only slightly larger than our ITT estimate of the eect of the intervention.


   It is important to underscore that the FICO Score is designed as a measure of credit-


worthiness to be used in underwriting and is therefore not necessarily an accurate measure



                                             18
of nancial health or well-being. However, nancial institutions frequently use FICO Scores


when making lending decisions or determining borrowing terms. For example, Gross, No-


towidigdo and Wang (Forthcoming) nd that a 10-point increase in credit scores is associated


with a third of a percentage point decrease in the regular purchase APRs on new credit cards


for consumers with credit scores between 600 and 700. Credit information is also used in


other contexts.   For example, credit reports are frequently used as inputs by landlords to


determine eligibility for rental apartments or by employers in hiring decisions (Bartik and


Nelson, 2016; Cliord and Shoag, 2016; Dobbie et al., 2016).


   However, dierential treatment as a function of credit scores is not always linear: banks


frequently change lending terms at discrete cutos. For example, Federal Housing Authority


loans (e.g., those issued through Fannie Mae) require a minimum credit score of 620 for most

                                  17
conforming xed-rate mortgages,         a common threshold used to dene a subprime borrower.


   Table 3 Column 3 looks at the eect of the intervention on having a FICO Score above


620. The treatment led to a signicant increase of just under half a percentage point in the


likelihood of having a Score over this threshold with a treatment-on-the-treated estimate of


0.9 percentage points. Borrowers who were induced to view their FICO Score page saw an


increase in the likelihood of being above the threshold of 5.1 percentage points.




iii. Other Credit Outcomes

We next explore the impact of the intervention on other outcomes reported on borrowers'


credit reports. Table 4 examines the eect of our intervention on general measures of credit


usage including the likelihood of having an account, number of accounts, account balance,


and credit utilization.   Our analysis focuses on revolving trade activity (most commonly,


credit card accounts). These are trade accounts that are plausibly easy to open or close in


response to learning about one's FICO Score unlike, for example, a mortgage or an auto


loan.   The rst column presents estimates of the eect of the treatment on the likelihood

 17 https://www.fanniemae.com/content/guide/selling/b3/5.1/01.html#Minimum.20Credit.20Score.20Requirements




                                               19
of having any open revolving credit account. We nd that the intervention caused a small


but signicant increase of 0.3 percentage points in the likelihood of having at least one


account (on a base of 76 percent among control group members)  an important step towards


establishing a credit history.   We observe a similarly small but signicant increase in the


number of accounts held (an increase of 0.01 accounts) and an insignicant increase in the


total balance. We also nd that the eect of the treatment on credit utilization is small and


not statistically signicant.


   We perform a multiple hypothesis correction following List, Shaikh and Xu (2016) that


includes all outcomes examined in Tables 3 and 4.      While all of the outcomes considered


in our main analysis Table 3 remain signicant after this correction, the estimated eect


of treatment on likelihood of having an account and number of accounts are no longer


signicant.




C. Heterogeneity of Treatment Eects

i. Baseline FICO Score

One question is whether the intervention was eective for the people who needed help the


most  those with lower FICO Scores  or whether the treatment only moved behavior


among those who were already performing well on this metric.        In Figure 5, we examine


heterogeneity of the treatment eect on having a late payment and on FICO Score by pre-


intervention FICO Score decile.


   Figure 5a shows that, while the point estimates for the eect of the treatment on late


payments are negative for all deciles, the treatment eect is largely consolidated among


borrowers in the second decile (borrowers with baseline FICO Scores between 600 and 638).


Specically, while the treatment led to an average decrease in late payments of 0.4 percentage


points across the other nine deciles, the treatment led to a decrease of 3.2 percentage points


for borrowers in the second decile. Consistent with payment history serving as a key input


for FICO Scores, Figure 5b also nds the largest eects on FICO Scores for borrowers in


                                              20
the second decile, although the dierences across deciles are not as pronounced as for late


payments.


   These patterns may be partly due to the fact that late payments are concentrated in


the bottom two deciles. Fifty-ve percent of borrowers in the bottom two deciles have late


payments at baseline compared to only 3 percent in the other eight deciles combined.       It


is somewhat surprising that we do not see similarly large eects among borrowers in the


rst decile. However, one key dierence between borrowers in these bottom two deciles is


the propensity to have a late payment 90 days or more past due (i.e., to have a delinquent


account). Two-thirds of the past-due accounts in the rst decile are 90 days or more past


due compared to only one-third in the second decile.    This suggests that our intervention


might be particularly helpful for borrowers who have engaged in negative nancial behaviors


but do not have the most deeply entrenched nancial problems.




ii. Other Borrower Characteristics

It is also possible that the treatment had dierential eects on borrowers of dierent age


groups. Younger borrowers are less likely to have nancial experience and may be less aware


of how to improve their own creditworthiness; therefore, we might expect that our inter-


vention would be particularly successful in this population. Alternatively, older borrowers


may respond more to the intervention since they have more actions available to take as a


result of having more established nances. A related yet distinct categorization of borrowers


is whether they are in school versus out of school. For example, borrowers who are out of


school are likely to be working and may have more nancial responsibilities. While these


two sets of borrower characteristics are correlated, 30 percent of borrowers who are still in


school are above the median age.


   Appendix Table A.3 Columns 1 and 2 present treatment eects by age for late payments


and FICO Score, respectively, comparing borrowers who are above or below the median age


of 23 years old at the start of the intervention. Columns 3 and 4 present treatment eects for




                                             21
the same outcomes by student status, comparing borrowers who are still in school with those


who are out of school. We nd no signicant dierences in treatment eects by age or student


status for either nancial outcome, though the point estimates suggest that the eects are


slightly larger among borrowers hypothesized to have more nancial responsibilities, i.e.,


older borrowers and those who are out of school.




D. Long-Term Eects

The estimated treatment eects presented thus far are evaluated one year from the start of


the intervention, from June 2015 to June 2016. To examine both the longer-term treatment


eects and how the eects evolve over time, Figure 6 presents ITT estimates quarterly for


the full two-year study period from June 2015 to June 2017.


   Figure 6a presents quarterly treatment eects for the likelihood having a late payment of


30 or more days past due. Our results show that the size of the treatment eect is greatest


approximately 12 to 15 months from the start of the intervention.      After 15 months, the


treatment eect attenuates and by the end of the two-year period is no longer statistically


signicant.   Figure 6b presents the estimated eect of the treatment on borrowers' FICO


Scores in each quarter. Here again we see the estimated coecient is largest one year from


the start of the intervention, however, the eect remains fairly consistent through the end of


the two-year study period.




V. Mechanisms

The previous section shows that our informational campaign led to a reduction in late pay-


ments and an increase in FICO Scores.      In the current section, we investigate potential


mechanisms driving these eects.




                                             22
A. Personal FICO Score Knowledge

Previous research has shown that people are often overly condent about their own knowl-


edge and ability in a range of domains (Kahneman and Tversky, 1996; Fischho, Slovic


and Lichtenstein, 1977), including evidence of overestimation in the context of credit scores


(Perry, 2008). One potential mechanism by which the intervention could operate is by cor-


recting biases in perceptions of one's own FICO Score. We examine this possibility using


information from our second data source, the FICO and Financial Literacy Survey, which


asked respondents several questions about their knowledge of personal nancial information,


specically, their own FICO Score. Respondents were asked if they knew their FICO Score


and, if so, were asked to indicate their Score within a 100 to 150 point range. Using data


from our administrative credit reports, we can then verify the accuracy of these self-reported


Scores. Consequently, our denition of accuracy corresponds to knowing the correct 100 to


150 point range.


   Column 1 of Table 5 shows that while over three-quarters of control group members


reported knowing their FICO Score range, treatment group members were 4.3 percentage


points more likely to report knowing their Score. A larger dierence emerges when comparing


the accuracy of these responses to the corresponding data from respondents' TransUnion


credit reports.   Column 2 shows that treatment group members are 7.1 percentage points


more likely to report an accurate FICO Score range on a base of 51.5 percent accuracy


among control group members  a 14 percent increase. Columns 3 and 4 decompose this


gap between reported and accurate knowledge to examine the eects of the intervention on


the likelihood of overestimating versus underestimating one's FICO Score, respectively. We


nd that receiving a treatment message signicantly decreased the likelihood of borrowers


reporting an overestimate of their FICO Score by 3.4 percentage points, but had no signicant

                                                                   18
impact on the likelihood of underestimating one's Score.

  18 We test whether the degree of debiasing as reected in the survey corresponds to the degree of behavioral
change in the eld by modeling the association between FICO Score knowledge and late payments in the
control group. We nd control group members who accurately reported their FICO Score in the survey were




                                                     23
    These ndings suggest that the intervention provided borrowers with important feedback


that they could use to calibrate their personal creditworthiness. Our ndings are consistent


with existing evidence of overoptimism in knowledge of personal creditworthiness (Perry,


2008) and with evidence that over-condence and over-optimism negatively aect perfor-


mance in other areas (Biais et al., 2005; Camerer and Lovallo, 1999). Our evidence suggests


that debiasing these misperceptions may lead to improvements in nancial behaviors.




B. Reason Codes

As mentioned in Section II, all nancial institutions that made FICO Scores available through


the Open Access initiative were required to include two reason codes that provided an expla-


nation of the primary factors contributing to their Score along with the FICO Score itself.


Although our estimate of the eect of the FICO Score page as a whole is the relevant esti-


mate for evaluating the impact of the FICO Score Open Access initiative, in this section we


explore the relative eectiveness of these two components: the FICO Score and the reason


codes.


    In our sample of borrowers, the top three categories of reason codes shown to borrowers


pertain to credit history length (e.g., Length of time accounts have been established), debt


levels (e.g., Proportion of loan balances to loan amounts is too high), and late payments


(e.g., Number of accounts with delinquency). Some reason codes refer to specic actions a


borrower can take to improve her Score. For example, at baseline 34 percent of our sample


was shown a reason code directly related to late payments, one of our focal outcomes. On


the other hand, 30 percent of borrowers receive information with no direct implications for


action (e.g., Length of time accounts have been established).


    Table 6 estimates treatment eects on late payments separately for those who received


(versus did not receive) a delinquency reason code (Column 1) as well as for those who

less likely to have a late payment. Conversely, those who overestimated their Score were more likely to have
a late payment than those who did not. A back of the envelope calculation suggests that the FICO Score
knowlege pathway accounts for between one-quarter and one-half of the treatment eect on late payments.




                                                    24
received any actionable (versus not actionable) reason code (Column 2) at the start of the


intervention.    The sign on the interaction term coecient in Column 1 suggests that the


treatment eects on late payments are larger for individuals with baseline delinquency reason


codes. Yet, the intervention also led to a statistically signicant decrease in the likelihood


of having a late payment at the end of the rst year among treatment group members with


no delinquency reason code at baseline. Column 2 also shows signicant treatment eects


for borrowers who did not receive any actionable reason code at baseline.


    While we cannot rule out that reason codes had an independent eect on nancial behav-


ior, these ndings suggest that the reason codes are not the           only   component of the viewing


page driving behavior change. Additionally, this suggests that the decrease in late payments


is unlikely to be solely driven by individuals reconciling previous past due accounts, but


that the intervention reduced the likelihood that an individual would enter into delinquency

                 19
going forward.




C. Repeated Reminders

Consistent with an account of limited attention (Bordalo, Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2013;


Chetty, Looney and Kroft, 2009; Malmendier and Lee, 2011), another possibility is that our


intervention did not provide borrowers with any new information, but acted as a repeated


reminder (Cadena and Schoar, 2011; Karlan et al., 2016).              In this section, we examine a


separate sample  our discontinued sample  who were randomly assigned to received


quarterly email communications for only three quarters rather than throughout the two-year


intervention as in our main treatment sample. This sample allows us to test the impact of


additional email communications on viewing rates and nancial outcomes to determine if


repeated reminders led to improved outcomes.


    Figure 7 presents weekly FICO Score page view rates for the control group, discontin-

  19 A parallel analysis that considers the eect of the treatment by whether a borrower had a late payment
at baseline (rather than baseline delinquency reason code) shows similar patternswe observe signicant
treatment eects on late payments even among those without a late payment on their credit report at the
start of the intervention.



                                                   25
ued sample, and the main treatment sample. The gure shows that the FICO Score page


view rates for the main treatment sample and the discontinued sample are virtually indis-


tinguishable for the rst three quarters of the email campaign, which is expected since the


two groups received the same treatment during this time period. However, starting in March


2016when the discontinued sample stopped receiving email communicationsthe discon-


tinued group's view rates began to closely track the control group rather than the treatment


group.


   Table 7 shows the regression estimates for the eect of the main versus discontinued


treatment on viewing and nancial behaviors. Column 1 presents treatment eects for the


two treatment samples on the likelihood of viewing one's Score before March 2016, the last


quarter in which the two groups had received the same treatment. Unsurprisingly, we see


no dierence in treatment eects between the two groups prior to March 2016.           However,


starting in the following quarter we see the two groups diverge. Column 2 shows that one year


after the discontinued group stopped receiving the quarterly emails, the treatment eects on


viewing rates for the main sample were twice as large as those for the discontinued group 


10.9 versus 5.3 percentage points.


   While our results show that individuals who continue to receive reminders to view their


FICO Score page are more likely to do so than individuals who received reminders for a


limited time, it is not necessarily true that repeated reminders will lead to larger changes in


behavior. For example, borrowers may take a discrete action upon rst viewing their Score


 e.g., signing up for automatic payment on a credit card  that could then have a persistent


positive eect on nancial outcomes.


   Table 7 Columns 3 and 4 present treatment eects on the likelihood of having a late


payment and borrower FICO Score, respectively, for the two samples one year after the


discontinued group stopped receiving communications.        As we saw in Section IV.C, the


eects for the main treatment group are attenuated, but largely persistent almost two years


after the program's inception. Similarly, the estimates for the discontinued sample are only




                                              26
slightly smaller than those in the main treatment group: there is no statistically signicant


dierence between the nancial outcomes of those who continued to receive emails and those


who stopped receiving emails a year prior.


   These results are consistent with a story in which the long term eects on nancial out-


comes come from a one-time change in behavior rather than a sustained behavioral change.


An alternative story that is also consistent with these results is that individuals who view


their Score only after receiving repeated reminders are less likely to respond to the treat-


ment. We explore the relationship between the timing of viewing patterns and changes in


nancial outcomes in Appendix Table A.4. Columns 1 and 2 exclude borrowers who viewed


their FICO Score page for the rst time in year 2 while columns 3 and 4 exclude those who


viewed their Score for the rst time in year 1. We consider the eect of our treatment in


these two samples on the likelihood of ever having a late payment in year 1 (Columns 1 and


3) and separately in year 2 (Columns 2 and 4). We nd that treatment eects in year 1 are


only signicant for the sample that includes borrowers who viewed their FICO Score page in


year 1; the results for this sample are somewhat smaller in year 2 (consistent with Figure 6).


However, we see small and not statistically signicant results in both years for the sample


that excludes borrowers who viewed their Score in the rst year of the intervention. This


suggests that borrowers who wait to view until later in the intervention are less likely to


change their behavior in response to the information provided.




D. Additional Informational Content in Email

In addition to the ability to view one's FICO Score page, the treatment email message


includes content describing the importance of the FICO Score as well as hyperlinks to addi-


tional information about FICO Scores and general nancial literacy. If this additional infor-

                                                                                                        20
mation contributes to changes in nancial behavior, our IV estimates will be overstated.

  20 Similarly, the exclusion restriction for our estimates which instrument for ever opening an email from
Sallie Mae will be violated if receipt of the message impacts nancial behavior even if the email is never
opened.




                                                    27
In this section we investigate the potential eect of this additional informational content on


nancial behavior.




i. Treatment Eects by Message Type

The results in Section IV focus on the eect of receiving any treatment message. However,


two experimental groups received additional information in their email messages for the


rst three quarters of the intervention.    Borrowers in the social inuence and economic


consequences treatment groups received information about peer credit behavior and nancial


consequences of low FICO Scores, respectively.     If borrowers were unaware of how FICO


Scores impact the cost of credit, the economic consequences message may prompt additional


changes in behavior. At the same time, borrowers may be additionally motivated to improve


their FICO Score if they are told people like them are doing so (Allcott, 2011; Ayres, Raseman


and Shih, 2013; Cialdini and Goldstein, 2004; Kast, Meier and Pomeranz, 2012).


   Figure 8 mirrors the analysis in Figure 4, but displays FICO Score page view rates


separately for the three treatment messages for the rst year of the intervention. The gure


shows that the viewing rates  both within a given week and the likelihood of ever viewing by


a given week are very similar across treatment messages. If anything, the baseline message


very slightly outperformed the two messages that contained additional information, though


this dierence is quite small and not statistically signicant.


   Table 8 presents treatment eects for late payments and FICO Score separately by treat-


ment message type: baseline, economic consequences, and social inuence. The F-test for


equality of treatment eects across the three messages suggests that the estimates are not


signicantly dierent across treatment groups. This is somewhat unsurprising given the rela-


tively similar FICO Score page view rates across the three treatment groups. While research


has shown nudges of this type can be eective in some contexts, we nd no evidence that


the additional message content impacted behavior.




                                             28
ii. General Financial Information

One other possibility is that the intervention may have translated to dierences in nancial


knowledge by providing links to general nancial education resources. For example, these


resources could make people more familiar with the concept of a credit score or good types


of credit behavior. To the extent that borrowers were previously unaware that a metric like


a credit score existed, that awareness could have, in and of itself, led them to take actions


to improve it.


   Appendix Table A.5 uses data from the FICO and Financial Literacy Survey which con-


tains questions on knowledge of several nancial concepts including knowledge of good credit


behaviors, familiarity with FICO Scores, and a nancial literacy quiz to address the eect


of the intervention on general nancial knowledge. We nd no eects of the treatment on


borrowers' ability to correctly identify any individual credit behavior as positive or negative.


It is interesting to note that the control means for accurately identifying each behavior are


quite high  over 90 percent for all but one measure  suggesting that many respondents


were already aware of the activities necessary to improve their credit. We also nd no eects


of the treatment on borrower's general FICO Score knowledge (i.e., condence they could


explain what a credit score is to a friend) or performance on the nancial literacy quiz.




VII. Conclusion

Findings from our eld experiment indicate that viewing one's FICO Score inuences nan-


cial behaviors. Borrowers who were randomly assigned to receive communications informing


them that their Score was available to view were less likely to have late payments and had


higher FICO Scores overall. These eects largely persisted throughout the full two-year in-


tervention. Survey results provide evidence that borrowers in the treatment group were less


likely to overestimate their Score relative to those in the control group. It is particularly en-


couraging that this intervention appears to spur positive behavior change among a relatively




                                               29
young population that is new to credit and may therefore yield long term benets from


immediate behavior changefor example, delinquent behavior remains on an individual's


credit history for up to seven years.


   The FICO Score provides a single number that allows for easy tracking of a disparate set


of actions related to creditworthiness. This personalized, quantied, dynamic measure allows


individuals to monitor and track their progress over time. This holistic nancial metric may


be particularly well suited for goal-setting. For example, a large body of literature documents


goal-setting behavior in which people try to achieve a certain level of performance as a


function of a numeric cue, such as a race nishing time or personal best score in a game


(Anderson and Green, 2018; Locke and Latham, 2002; Pope and Simonsohn, 2011; Allen


et al., 2016). However, these types of goals can best be set and managed when they are able

                                                  21
to be quantied through a single number.                Similar metrics that summarize a broad set of


outcomes may be eective in other areas as well, such as promoting overall health scores


to encourage better health habits or promoting overall eciency scores to encourage better


time management.


   Our ndings demonstrate the potential for targeted, low-cost, scalable interventions to


positively impact nancial decision making and improve consumer nancial welfare. More


generally, our ndings point to possible benets of personalizing nancial interventions,


consistent with individual self-reports that personal experience is a key driver of nancial


learning (Hilgert, Hogarth and Beverly, 2003) and with recent eorts to promote just in


time interventions that are timed to personal nancial events (Fernandes, Lynch Jr and


Netemeyer, 2014).


   One limitation of our experiment is that we are unable to see borrowers' full nancial


pictures. Since we only observe information reported to credit bureaus, we cannot rule out


the possibility that the intervention is encouraging people to prioritize nancial behaviors


that are directly tied to their credit score to the detriment of other aspects of their nancial

  21 For example, see Erez (1977); Seligman and Darley (1977); Walford et al. (1978) for studies in the health
and medical literature documenting positive behavioral responses to monitoring.




                                                       30
lives we do not observe, such as income and savings (Beshears et al., 2019; Medina, 2017;


Sussman and O'Brien, 2016).    While our intervention shows positive eects on behaviors


recorded in credit bureau data, future work should examine the impact of viewing one's


score on other aspects of nancial health.




References
Agarwal, Sumit, John C Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson. 2008. Learn-
  ing in the Credit Card Market. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper


  13822.



Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes
  Stroebel.   2014. Regulating consumer nancial products: Evidence from credit cards.


  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(1): 111164.

Allcott, Hunt. 2011. Social norms and energy conservation. Journal of Public Economics,
  95(9): 10821095.



Allen, Eric J, Patricia M Dechow, Devin G Pope, and George Wu.                       2016.


  Reference-dependent preferences: Evidence from marathon runners.       Management Sci-
  ence, 63(6): 16571672.

Anderson, Ashton, and Etan A Green.              2018. Personal bests as reference points.


  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(8): 17721776.

Ayres, Ian, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih.            2013. Evidence from two large eld


  experiments that peer comparison feedback can reduce residential energy usage.      The
  Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 29(5): 9921022.

Bartik, Alexander Wickman, and Scott Nelson. 2016. Credit Reports as Resumes:
  The incidence of pre-employment credit screening. Unpublished Manuscript.



                                            31
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H Thaler.           2001. Naive diversication strategies in


  dened contribution saving plans.   American Economic Review, 91(1): 7998.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Adair Morse. 2011. Information disclosure, cognitive biases,
  and payday borrowing.    The Journal of Finance, 66(6): 18651893.

Beshears, John, James J Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and
  William L Skimmyhorn.         2019. Borrowing to Save?    The Impact of Automatic En-


  rollment on Debt. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25876.



Bhargava, Saurabh, and Dayanand Manoli.             2015. Psychological frictions and the


  incomplete take-up of social benets: Evidence from an IRS eld experiment.    American
  Economic Review, 105(11): 34893529.

Biais, Bruno, Denis Hilton, Karine Mazurier, and Sébastien Pouget. 2005. Judge-
  mental overcondence, self-monitoring, and trading performance in an experimental nan-


  cial market.   The Review of Economic Studies, 72(2): 287312.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2013. Salience and consumer
  choice.   Journal of Political Economy, 121(5): 803843.

Bracha, Anat, and Stephan Meier. 2019. Misjudge the Nudge?          The (Mixed) Eect of


  Reminders on Creditworthiness. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper.



Cadena, Ximena, and Antoinette Schoar. 2011. Remembering to Pay?           Reminders vs.


  Financial Incentives for Loan Payments. National Bureau of Economic Research Working


  Paper 17020.



Camerer, Colin, and Dan Lovallo. 1999. Overcondence and excess entry:         An experi-


  mental approach.    The American Economic Review, 89(1): 306318.

Carpenter, Jerey P, Emiliano Huet-Vaughn, Peter Hans Matthews, Andrea
  Robbett, Dustin Beckett, and Julian C Jamison.            2017. Choice Architecture to


                                            32
  Improve Financial Decision Making.       Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Oce of
  Research Working Paper.

CFPB. 2015. The Consumer Credit Card Market. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft.             2009. Salience and taxation: Theory


  and evidence.    The American Economic Review, 99(4): 11451177.

Choi, James J, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2009.
  Reinforcement learning and savings behavior.     The Journal of Finance, 64(6): 25152534.

Cialdini, Robert B, and Noah J Goldstein. 2004. Social inuence:            Compliance and


  conformity.   Annual Review of Psychology, 55: 591621.

Cliord, Robert, and Daniel Shoag.           2016. No More Credit Score: Employer Credit


  Check Bans and Signal Substitution. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper


  16-10.



Dobbie, Will, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Neale Mahoney, and Jae Song. 2016. Bad
  Credit, No Problem?     Credit and Labor Market Consequences of Bad Credit Reports.


  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 22711.



Erez, Miriam.     1977. Feedback: A necessary condition for the goal setting-performance


  relationship.   Journal of Applied Psychology, 62(5): 624.

Fernandes, Daniel, John G Lynch Jr, and Richard G Netemeyer. 2014. Financial
  literacy, nancial education, and downstream nancial behaviors.      Management Science,
  60(8): 18611883.



Fischho, Baruch, Paul Slovic, and Sarah Lichtenstein.             1977. Knowing with cer-


  tainty: The appropriateness of extreme condence.      Journal of Experimental Psychology:
  Human perception and performance, 3(4): 552.


                                              33
Gross, David B, and Nicholas S Souleles.           2002. An Empirical Analysis of Personal


  Bankruptcy and Delinquency.    Review of Financial Studies, 15(1): 319347.

Gross, Tal, Matthew J Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang. Forthcoming. The Marginal
  Propensity to Consume over the Business Cycle.      American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics.

Hilgert, Marianne A, Jeanne M Hogarth, and Sondra G Beverly.                   2003. House-


  hold Financial Management: The Connection Between Knowledge and Behavior.           Federal
  Resserve Bulletin, 89: 309.

Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky.              1996. On the reality of cognitive illusions.


  Psychological Review.

Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zin-
  man. 2016. Getting to the top of mind:    How reminders increase saving.      Management
  Science, 62(12): 33933411.

Kast, Felipe, Stephan Meier, and Dina Pomeranz. 2012. Under-Savers Anonymous:
  Evidence on Self-Help Groups and Peer Pressure as a Savings Commitment Device. Na-


  tional Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18417.



Keys, Benjamin J, and Jialan Wang. 2019. Minimum payments and debt paydown in
  consumer credit cards.   Journal of Financial Economics, 131(3): 528548.

Kling, Jerey R, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shar, Lee C Vermeulen, and
  Marian V Wrobel. 2012. Comparison friction:          Experimental evidence from Medicare


  drug plans.   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1): 199235.

Lacko, James M, and Janis K Pappalardo. 2010. The failure and promise of mandated
  consumer mortgage disclosures:   Evidence from qualitative interviews and a controlled


  experiment with mortgage borrowers.   The American Economic Review, 100(2): 516521.

                                            34
List, John A, Azeem M Shaikh, and Yang Xu. 2016. Multiple Hypothesis Testing in
  Experimental Economics. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21875.



Locke, Edwin A, and Gary P Latham. 2002. Building a practically useful theory of
  goal setting and task motivation: A 35-year odyssey.   American psychologist, 57(9): 705.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Young Han Lee. 2011. The bidder's curse. The American
  Economic Review, 101(2): 749787.

Medina, Paolina C.       2017. Selective Attention in Consumer Finance: Evidence from a


  Randomized Intervention in the Credit Card Market. Unpublished Manuscript.



Perry, Vanessa Gail. 2008. Is ignorance bliss?     Consumer accuracy in judgments about


  credit ratings.   Journal of Consumer Aairs, 42(2): 189205.

Ponce, Alejandro, Enrique Seira, and Guillermo Zamarripa.                    2017. Borrowing


  on the Wrong Credit Card?     Evidence from Mexico.     The American Economic Review,
  107(4): 13351361.



Pope, Devin, and Uri Simonsohn.           2011. Round numbers as goals:        Evidence from


  baseball, SAT takers, and the lab.   Psychological Science, 22(1): 7179.

Seira, Enrique, Alan Elizondo, and Eduardo Laguna-Muggenburg. 2017. Are In-
  formation Disclosures Eective? Evidence from the Credit Card Market.         American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(1): 277307.

Seligman, Clive, and John M Darley. 1977. Feedback as a means of decreasing resi-
  dential energy consumption.   Journal of Applied Psychology, 62(4): 363.

Sussman, Abigail B, and Rourke L O'Brien. 2016. Knowing When to Spend:                 Unin-


  tended Financial Consequences of Earmarking to Encourage Savings.     Journal of Market-
  ing Research.


                                             35
Svenson, Ola. 1981. Are we all less risky and more skillful than our fellow drivers? Acta
  psychologica, 47(2): 143148.

Walford, S, EAM Gale, SP Allison, and RB Tattersall.             1978. Self-monitoring of


  blood-glucose: improvement of diabetic control.   The Lancet, 311(8067): 732735.




                                           36
                                        Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                        Control      Treatment      Discontinued Sample       F-stat   prob>F
                                               (1)            (2)                       (3)      (4)        (5)
Panel A: Demographics
Age                                           25.0           25.0                      25.0    1.01        0.31
Currently in School (%)                       57.1           56.7                      56.9    2.58        0.11


Panel B: Credit History
Months in Credit File                         77.0           77.5                      77.1    1.41        0.24
Balance Past Due (%)
    30+ Days                                  13.5           13.7                      13.4    1.54        0.21
    60+ Days                                   9.2            9.2                       9.2    0.00        0.94
    90+ Days                                   6.7            6.7                       6.6    0.11        0.74
Revolving Trade Activity
    Any Account (%)                           69.5           69.3                      69.1    0.34        0.56
    Number of Accounts                         2.5            2.5                       2.5    0.07        0.79
    Credit Utilization (%)                    39.6           39.7                      39.9    0.16        0.69
FICO Score                                    674            674                       674     0.27        0.61
N                                           42,964     326,609                       37,393

Source: Sallie Mae and TransUnion, June 2015.

Means shown for the control group (column 1), main treatment sample combined (column 2) and

the discontinued sample (column 3) shown separately.

F-test for equality for main treatment versus control group means.

Balance past due measures assessed over the prior six months.

Credit utilization evaluated only for borrowers with at least one revolving account.




                              Table 2: First Stage: FICO Score Page Views


                                    By Year 1 End                             By Year 2 End
                      Ever View             Number of Views          Ever View        Number of Views
                                 (1)                      (2)               (3)                      (4)
                                                                                                         
Treatment                     0.0813                   0.1931           0.1238                    0.4367
                         (0.0017)                    (0.0051)          (0.0021)                 (0.0098)
Control Mean                  0.124                     0.227            0.192                     0.449
N                         369,601                     369,601          369,601                   369,601

Source: Sallie Mae, June 2015 to June 2017.

Outcomes: ever viewed (columns 1 & 3) and number of views (columns 2 & 4)

by the end of year 1 and 2 of the intervention, respectively.

Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                              
   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01



                                                        37
                              Table 3: Treatment Eects: Main Outcomes


                               30+ Day Late Payment         FICO Score         FICO    >    620
                                                     (1)              (2)                     (3)
Panel A: Intent to Treat
                                                                                                    
Treatment                                      -0.0073            0.6700                0.0042
                                              (0.0021)          (0.2265)              (0.0018)
Panel B: IV for Email Open Rate
                                                                                                    
Ever Opened Email                              -0.0151            1.3926                0.0087
                                              (0.0044)          (0.4708)              (0.0037)
Panel C: IV for FICO Page View Rate
                                                                                                    
Ever Viewed Score                              -0.0896            8.2425                0.0514
                                              (0.0258)          (2.7872)              (0.0219)
Control Mean                                    0.175                 676                   0.822
N                                             369,601            369,601              369,601

Source: Sallie Mae and TransUnion, June 2015 to June 2016.

Outcomes: indicator for having a balance 30+ days past due in past six months (column 1),

FICO Score in points (column 2), and indicator for FICO Score of at least 620 (column 3).

All outcomes are rst-dierences between June 2015 and June 2016.

Panel A: ITT estimate comparing treatment and control groups.

Panel B: instruments ever opening treatment email with treatment status.

Panel C: instruments ever viewing FICO Score page with treatment status.

Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                              
   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                38
Table 4: Treatment Eects: Additional Outcomes on Revolving Credit Account Activity


                              Any Account               # Accounts            % Credit Used          Balance Amount
                                              (1)                    (2)                       (3)                    (4)
Panel A: Intent to Treat
                                                                           
Treatment                               0.0029                    0.0131                    0.0469               22.7892
                                       (0.0017)              (0.0067)                    (0.1803)               (25.8924)
Panel B: IV for Email Open Rate
                                                                           
Ever Opened Email                       0.0060                    0.0273                    0.0909               47.3691
                                       (0.0034)              (0.0138)                    (0.3490)               (53.8185)
Panel C: IV for FICO Page View Rate
                                                                           
Ever Viewed Score                       0.0356                    0.1615                    0.4909              280.3666
                                       (0.0204)              (0.0819)                    (1.8853)           (318.5089)
Control Mean                                0.758                  2.778                    39.542              3717.136
N                                      369,601                369,601                    232,503                 369,601

Source: Sallie Mae and TransUnion, June 2015 to June 2016.

Outcomes: indicator for any open revolving trade account (column 1), number of accounts (column 2),

percent of credit used among borrowers with at least one account (column 3), and balance amount (column 4).

All outcomes are rst-dierences between June 2015 and June 2016.

Panel A: ITT estimate comparing treatment and control groups.

Panel B: instruments ever opening treatment email with treatment status.

Panel C: instruments ever viewing FICO Score page with treatment status.

Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                              
   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01



                                 Table 5: Personal FICO Score Knowledge


                              Reported            Accurate
                              Knowledge        Knowledge              Overestimate           Underestimate
                                       (1)                  (2)                    (3)                    (4)
                                                                                         
      Treatment                     0.0433              0.0712                -0.0343                 0.0065
                                 (0.0224)              (0.0269)               (0.0165)               (0.0192)
      Control Mean                  0.773                0.515                  0.108                  0.149
      N                             3,511                3,511                  3,511                  3,511

      Source: FICO and Financial Literacy Survey, June 2016.

      Outcomes: indicators for reporting awareness of personal FICO Score (column 1),

      recalling accurate personal 100-150 point FICO Score range (column 2), and

      reporting overestimated or underestimated FICO Score (columns 3 & 4).

      Treatment group includes borrowers who received a message at any point in the intervention.

      Each column indicates the proportion of the total population surveyed responding as stated.

      Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                    
         p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01



                                                            39
          Table 6: Treatment Eects by Baseline Reason Code


                                      Late Payment
                                       (1)             (2)
                                                           
Treatment (T)                      -0.0055         -0.0041
                                  (0.0019)        (0.0024)
T x Delinquency Code               -0.0055
                                  (0.0052)
                                             
Delinquency Code                   -0.1113
                                  (0.0049)
T x Actionable Code                                -0.0046
                                                  (0.0037)
                                                             
Actionable Code                                    -0.0280
                                                  (0.0035)
Control Mean                         0.175          0.175
N                                  369,601        369,601

Source: Sallie Mae and TransUnion, June 2015 to June 2016.

Outcomes: indicator for having a balance 30+ days past due in past six months.

All outcomes are rst-dierences between June 2015 and June 2016.

Delinquency Code is an indicator for having a reason code in June 2015

(the pre-intervention quarter) that mentions a delinquent account.

Actionable Code is an indicator for having a reason code in June 2015

that mentions a direct action a borrower could take to improve her FICO Score.

Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                              
   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                             40
      Table 7: Treatment Eects for Main versus Discontinued Sample


                                  FICO Page Views              Financial Outcomes
                         March 2016         March 2017         Late Pay      FICO
                                    (1)               (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                                                       
T: Main                          0.0626           0.1082        -0.0051      0.5310
                              (0.0016)           (0.0020)      (0.0023)    (0.2768)
                                                          
T: Discontinued                  0.0633            0.0530       -0.0035      0.3639
                              (0.0025)           (0.0028)      (0.0031)    (0.3802)
Control Mean                      0.107            0.177          0.188         676
Prob>F                            0.733            0.000          0.503       0.568
N                             406,994            406,994        406,994    406,994

Source: Sallie Mae, June 2015 to March 2017.

Outcomes: columns 1 & 2 are indicators for ever viewing one's page by March 2016

and March 2017, respectively; an indicator for having a balance 30+ days past due

in past six months (column 3) and FICO Score (column 4).

Treatment group members in the discontinued sample received quarterly messages

through March 2016 while treatment group members in the main sample received

messages for an additional ve quarters.

Columns 3 & 4 are rst-dierences between June 2015 and March 2017, one year

after the discontinued sample stopped receiving treatment messages.

F-statistic test for equality of treatment eects between the two treatment samples.

Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                              
   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                            41
      Table 8: Treatment Eects by Experimental Message Type


                      Late Pay              FICO
                              (1)               (2)
                                                    
T: Baseline               -0.0080            0.7177
                         (0.0023)           (0.2505)
                                                       
T: Economic               -0.0068            0.6122
                         (0.0023)           (0.2512)
                                                       
T: Social                 -0.0070            0.6801
                         (0.0023)           (0.2504)
Control Mean                  0.175               676
Prob>F                        0.757           0.849
N                         369,601           369,601

Source: Sallie Mae and TransUnion, June 2015 to June 2016.

Outcomes: indicator for having a balance 30+ days past due in

past six months (column 1) and FICO Score (column 2).

All outcomes are rst-dierences between June 2015 and June 2016.

Treatment groups include borrowers who received messages for eight

quarters separately by message type (baseline, economic consequences,

and social inuence messaging).

F-statistic test for equality of treatment eects across the three email messages.

Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                              
   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                             42
                     Figure 1: Example Sallie Mae FICO Score Page View




Source: Sallie Mae




                         Figure 2: Example Baseline Email Message




Source: Sallie Mae




                                            43
                              Figure 3: Treatment Email Open Rates

               (a) Weekly Open Rate                               (b) Ever Opened by Week




Source: Sallie Mae, June 2015 to June 2016.
Timeline labels correspond to release dates of quarterly communications.




                      Figure 4: FICO Score Views by Experimental Group

               (a) Weekly View Rate                                (b) Ever Viewed by Week




Source: Sallie Mae, June 2015 to June 2017.
Timeline labels correspond to release dates of quarterly communications.




                                                   44
                  Figure 5: Treatment Eects by Baseline FICO Score Decile

                   (a) Late Payments                                   (b) FICO Score




Source: Sallie Mae, June 2015 to June 2016.
Outcomes: indicator for having a balance 30+ days past due in past six months (Panel A) and FICO Score
(Panel B).
All outcomes are rst-dierences between June 2015 and June 2016.




                             Figure 6: Treatment Eects by Quarter

                   (a) Late Payments                                 (b) FICO Score




Source: Sallie Mae and TransUnion, June 2015 to June 2017.
Timeline labels correspond to release dates of quarterly communications.
Outcomes: indicator for having a balance 30+ days past due in past six months (Panel A) and FICO Score
(Panel B).
All outcomes are rst-dierences between June 2015 and the given quarter.




                                                   45
            Figure 7: FICO Score Page Views  Main versus Discontinued Sample

               (a) Weekly View Rate                                (b) Ever Viewed by Week




Source: Sallie Mae, June 2015 to March 2017.
Timeline labels correspond to release dates of quarterly communications.
Treatment group members in the main sample received messages for eight quarters;
treatment group members in the discontinued sample received messages for three quarters.




                      Figure 8: FICO Score Page Views by Message Type

               (a) Weekly View Rate                                (b) Ever Viewed by Week




Source: Sallie Mae, June 2015 to June 2017.
Timeline labels correspond to release dates of quarterly communications.




                                                   46
A Appendix Tables and Figures




                            47
    Table A.1: Treatment Status and Demographics by Survey Response


                         Respondents        Non-Respondents       F-stat    prob>F
                                     (1)                    (2)       (3)            (4)
Panel A: Baseline Characteristics
    Age                            27.1                    25.2   310.20            0.00
    Out-of-School                  54.0                    45.0   115.72            0.00
    FICO Score                      696                    676    435.04            0.00


Panel B: Treatment Status
    Treatment Group                89.0                    89.4      0.89           0.34
N                                 3,511                451,183
Source: FICO Financial Literacy Survey, June 2016; TransUnion, June 2015.

Columns 1 & 2 report means for respondents and non-respondents of the June 2016

survey, respectively.

Columns 3 & 4 report results from the F-test for equality across survey response.




                                           48
                                                             Table A.2: FICO Score Viewing Patterns


                                   Q1               Q2            Q3            Q4           Q5           Q6            Q7            Q8
                                   (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)
     Panel A: Ever View by Quarter End
                                                                                                                                            
     Treatment               0.0146              0.0516        0.0626       0.0813       0.0977       0.1057        0.1082        0.1238
                           (0.0011)         (0.0014)         (0.0016)      (0.0017)     (0.0018)     (0.0019)      (0.0020)      (0.0021)
     Control Mean              0.047              0.076         0.107        0.124        0.141        0.153         0.177         0.192




49
     Panel B: Number of Views by Quarter End
                                                                                                                                            
     Treatment               0.0203              0.0811        0.1302       0.1931       0.2589       0.3093        0.3617        0.4367
                           (0.0016)         (0.0027)         (0.0040)      (0.0051)     (0.0063)     (0.0073)      (0.0088)      (0.0098)
     Control Mean              0.060              0.111         0.178        0.227        0.280        0.322         0.396         0.449
     N                      369,601          369,601          369,601      369,601      369,601      369,601       369,601       369,601

     Source: Sallie Mae, June 2015 to June 2017.

     Quarters in reference to the start of the intervention in column headers.

     Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                   
        p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
                    Table A.3: Subgroup Analysis: Age and Student Status


                                   Past Due       FICO         Past Due            FICO
                                         (2)          (1)              (2)            (1)
                                                                                            
Treatment (T)                        -0.0082     0.8227          -0.0089          0.9691
                                    (0.0035)   (0.3423)         (0.0036)        (0.3800)
T x Below Median Age                  0.0018    -0.2597
                                    (0.0043)   (0.4562)
                                                            
Below Median Age                      0.0185     3.6648
                                    (0.0041)   (0.4298)
T x In School                                                     0.0028         -0.4974
                                                                (0.0044)        (0.4698)
                                                                                            
In School                                                        -0.0043          4.1789
                                                                (0.0041)        (0.4418)
Control Mean                           0.175          676           0.175             676
N                                    369,601    369,601          369,601         369,601

Source: Sallie Mae and TransUnion, June 2015 to June 2016.

Outcomes: indicator for having a balance 30+ days past due in past six months (column 1)

and FICO Score (column 2).

Below Median Age is an indicator for being 23 years old or under at the start of the intervention.

In school is an indicator for being currently in school at the start of the intervention.

All outcomes are rst-dierences between June 2015 and June 2016.

Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                              
   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                 50
                                         Table A.4: Treatment Eects by Viewing Timing


                               Excludes First Viewed in Year 1               Excludes First Viewed in Year 2
                           Past Due, Year 1         Past Due, Year 2   Past Due, Year 1    Past Due, Year 2
                                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)                      (4)
                                                 
     Treatment                           -0.0052             -0.0032            -0.0014                   -0.0014
                                       (0.0022)             (0.0026)           (0.0023)                (0.0027)
     Control Mean                          0.231               0.258               0.231                   0.258




51
     N                                  330,857             330,857             297,070                297,070

     Source: Sallie Mae, June 2015 to June 2017.

     Outcomes: indicator for having a balance 30+ days past due in past six months (column 1) and FICO Score (column 2).

     Columns 1 & 2 exclude borrowers who rst viewed their Score in the rst year of the intervention;

     Columns 3 & 4 exclude borrowers who rst viewed their Score in the second year of the intervention.

     All outcomes are rst-dierences between June 2015 and June 2016 (columns 1 & 3) or June 2017 (columns 2 & 4).

     Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                   
        p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
                                                             Table A.5: Financial Knowledge


                      Positive Behavior                 Negative Behavior                FICO Familiarity                       Fin Lit Test
                  Pay Bills Low CC Bal No CC Many CCs High CC Bal High CC Util Familiar Very Familiar                           All Correct
                        (1)             (2)     (3)      (4)            (5)      (6)      (7)            (8)                    (9)
     Treatment       0.0030        -0.0225 -0.0040    0.0014        -0.0009  -0.0044   0.0104        0.0240                     -0.0001
                   (0.0076)       (0.0213) (0.0144) (0.0137)       (0.0047) (0.0056) (0.0184)      (0.0250)                     (0.0257)
     Control Mean     0.979          0.809    0.923    0.930          0.992    0.990    0.863          0.312                    0.647
     N                3,511          3,511    3,511    3,511          3,511    3,511    3,511          3,511                    3,511




52
     Source: FICO and Financial Literacy Survey, June 2016.

     Outcomes: indicator for correctly identifying positive credit behaviors, such as paying bills on time (col 1) and

     keeping a low balance on credit cards (col 2), and negative behaviors, such as having no credit cards (col 3),

     lots of credit cards (col 4), keeping a high balance on credit cards (col 5), and maximizing credit utilization (col 6),

     indicator for reporting being familiar or very familiar with the concept of a FICO Score (col 7 & 8),

     receiving a perfect score on a three-question nancial literacy test (column 9).

     Treatment group includes borrowers who received a message at any point in the intervention.

     Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                   
        p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
                          Figure A.1: Components of FICO Score




Source: www.myco.com




                     Figure A.2: Example of Additional Email Messages

          (a) Economic Consequences Message        (b) Social Inuence Message




Source: Sallie Mae




                                              53
Figure A.3: Experiment Timeline




              54
B FICO Score Views by Source
As mentioned in Section IV.A, one concern with our administrative data is that it only


contains information on FICO Score views through Sallie Mae's website, not through other


sources. Therefore, the eects we observe on viewing rates may suggest that the intervention


causes borrowers to shift to the lender's website to view their Score rather than through a


dierent source, but does not increase the likelihood of viewing her Score overall. To address


this concern, we use data from the FICO nancial literacy survey to estimate the eects of


the intervention on FICO Score views from any source.


   Appendix Table B.1 presents the eects of treatment status on FICO Score views during


the rst year of the intervention. Column 1 shows the treatment eects on the likelihood


of viewing one's FICO Score viewing through any source, not only the provider's website.


These eects are consistent with behavior we observed by tracking FICO Score page views in


our administrative data. Treatment group members were 8.0 percentage points more likely


to have viewed their Score in the rst year of the intervention than control group members


and the average number of views for this group was 0.3 views higher. These treatment eects


are very similar in magnitude to those estimated using administrative data on views at only


the provider's website in Table 2 (an increase of 8.1 percentage points in the likelihood of


viewing and an increase in the average number of views of 0.2). These survey results suggest


that the treatment was eective at increasing overall FICO Score views and not simply


shifting where individuals viewed their Score.    However, it is important to note that the


control group means are quite dierent: only 12 percent of control group members viewed


their Score through Sallie Mae's website in the rst year of the intervention, while 73 percent


of control group members in the survey reported viewing their Score through any source.




                                             55
                      Table B.1: FICO Score Views Through Any Source


                                     Ever Viewed FICO                # Views
                                                              (1)          (2)
                                                                                 
             Treatment (T)                                 0.0801      0.2976
                                                      (0.0236)        (0.1018)
             Control Mean                                  0.729        2.131
             N                                             3,511        3,511

             Source: FICO and Financial Literacy Survey, June 2016.

             Outcomes: indicator for ever viewed FICO Score (column 1) and number of

             FICO Score views (column 2) through any source in past 12 months.

             Treatment group includes borrowers who received a message at any

             point in the intervention.

             Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                                            
                 p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,       p < 0.01


C FICO and Financial Literacy Survey
A. FICO Score Views

Q: How many times have you viewed your FICO Score within the past 12 months?


   (1) I did not review my FICO             ®   Score within the past 12 months


   (2) 1 time


   (3) 2 times


   (4) 3 times


   (5) 4 times


   (6) 5 or more times


   (7) Not sure




B. Personal FICO Score Knowledge

Q: Do you know what your FICO Score is?


   (1) Between 0 and 299


   (2) 300 - 449


   (3) 450  549




                                                           56
   (4) 550  649


   (5) 650  749


   (6) 750  850


   (7) More than 850


   (8) No  I don't know what my FICO Score is


   (9) No  I don't have a FICO Score


   (10) No  I don't know what a FICO Score is




C. Knowledge of Creditworthy Actions

Q: Which of the following do you think are considered positive credit behaviors - that is


actions that may improve your credit? (Select all that apply)


   (1) Paying your bills on time


   (2) Having no credit cards


   (3) Having a lot of credit cards


   (4) Keeping a high balance on your credit card


   (5) Keeping a low balance on your credit card


   (6) Using as much of your credit limit as possible


   (7) None of the above




D. FICO Familiarity

Q: How familiar are you with the concept of a FICO Score or another credit score?


   (1) Very familiar  I'm condent that I can explain what a credit score is to a friend


   (2) Somewhat familiar  I could explain what a credit score is in very general terms


   (3) Somewhat unfamiliar  I have heard about credit scores, but I don't exactly know


what a credit score is


   (4) Not at all familiar  I have never heard of credit scores




                                             57
E. Financial Literacy

Q1. If a student takes out a $5,000 student loan at 7% interest, will he have to pay back. . . ?


   (1) Less than $5,000


   (2) Exactly $5,000


   (3) More than $5,000


   (4) I'm not sure




   Q2. Imagine that there are two options when it comes to paying back your student loan


and both come with the same interest rate.      Provided you have the needed funds, which


option would you select to minimize your out-of-pocket costs over the life of the loan?


   (1) Option 1 allows you to take 10 years to pay back the loan


   (2) Option 2 allows you to take 20 years to pay back the loan


   (3) Both options have the same out-of-pocket cost over the life of the loan


   (4) I'm not sure




   Q3. When a private student loan, such as the Smart Option Student Loan from Sallie


Mae, is deferred, that is, no payment is required while the student is enrolled in college,


what happens to the interest on this loan?


   (1) Interest doesn't start accruing until the student has graduated and starts repaying


the loan


   (2) Interest is capitalized, that is, the interest that accrues during the deferment period


is added to the principal amount of the loan


   (3) Interest accrues, but nobody has to pay for it


   (4) Other, please specify


   (5) I don't know




                                               58
