                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


         CHEAP TALK AND COORDINATION IN THE LAB AND IN THE FIELD:
                COLLECTIVE COMMERCIALIZATION IN SENEGAL

                                  Fo Kodjo Dzinyefa Aflagah
                                       Tanguy Bernard
                                      Angelino Viceisza

                                      Working Paper 26045
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26045

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019


Funding for this study was provided by the CGIAR Consortium Research Program on Policies,
Institutions, and Markets, the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), and the IFPRI
Mobile Experimental Economics Laboratory. Viceisza is also grateful to the Economics
Department at Duke University where some of this work was completed. Institutional Review
Board (IRB) approval for this study was obtained from IFPRI and the Senegalese National Ethics
Committee for Research in Health (CNERS). This RCT was registered in the American
Economic Association Registry for randomized control trials under trial number 4400. We thank
Elisabeth Sadoulet, Francisca Antman, Dan Ariely, Christopher Barrett, Patrick Bayer, Michael
Carter, Jan Christopher, Claudio Ferraz, Erica Field, Fred Finan, Xavier Gine, Rachel Kranton,
John List, Jeffrey Michler, Suresh Naidu, Joel Sobel, Mohammed Tesemma, Emilia Tjernstroem,
Xiao Yu Wang, and Daniel Weiner for meaningful discussions. We also thank audiences at the
Allied Social Science Association/National Economic Association meetings, Duke University
(Center for Advanced Hindsight, Department of Economics, and Department of Political
Science), the Economic Science Association North American meetings, the Experimental
Methods in Policy Conference, the Food and Agricultural Organization, IFPRI, the NBER
Transforming Rural Africa Conference, SEEDEC, University of Bordeaux (GREThA),
University of Goettingen, University of Paris Dauphine, Vanderbilt University, the Workshop in
Memory of John van Huyck, and the Workshop on Producers' Organizations in Agricultural
Markets at Toulouse Economics for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Fo Kodjo Dzinyefa Aflagah, Tanguy Bernard, and Angelino Viceisza. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cheap Talk and Coordination in the Lab and in the Field: Collective Commercialization in
Senegal
Fo Kodjo Dzinyefa Aflagah, Tanguy Bernard, and Angelino Viceisza
NBER Working Paper No. 26045
July 2019
JEL No. C92,C93,D7,L26,O12,P32,Q13

                                           ABSTRACT

Coordination is central to social interactions. Theory and conventional lab experiments suggest
that cheap talk/communication can enhance coordination under certain conditions. Two aspects
that remain underexplored are (1) the interaction between the number of players (group size) and
communication and (2) how existing findings might play out in the field. We address both of
these by studying a typical naturally-occurring setting that requires coordination; that is, one
where members of agricultural cooperatives seek to jointly sell their output. Combining
artefactual/lab-in-the-field experiments (LFEs), natural field experiments (RCTs), surveys, and
cooperative records, we find that (1) revealing farmers' intended sales (i.e., cheap talk/
communication) yields enhanced collective commercialization (i.e., coordination), particularly in
larger groups; (2) such cheap talk may lead to higher incomes for small-scale farmers; (3)
participants transfer learning from the LFEs thus affecting subsequent behavior in the RCTs (i.e.,
the day-to-day environment). Our results contribute to existing literature by highlighting the
potential for cheap-talk institutions to (1) boost coordination, particularly in settings with greater
strategic uncertainty (e.g., larger farmer cooperatives), and (2) promote collective
entrepreneurship and development.

Fo Kodjo Dzinyefa Aflagah                         Angelino Viceisza
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Maryland                            Spelman College
College Park, MD 20742                            350 Spelman Lane SW
aflagah@econ.umd.edu                              Atlanta, GA 30314
                                                  and NBER
Tanguy Bernard                                    aviceisz@spelman.edu
GREThA, University of Bordeaux
and International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI)
Avenue Léon Duguit
33608 Pessac
France
t.bernard@cgiar.org




Randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/4400
Author website (for future code, data release) is available at www.angelinoviceisza.com/papers
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26045
1       Introduction
Many activities depend on coordination among a sometimes large number of agents; for ex-
ample group projects, the meaning of language, and navigating traffic. From a game theory
standpoint, coordination is required whenever there exist multiple, potentially Pareto ran-
ked, equilibria and theory does not clearly predict behavior. In fact, without prior knowledge
about others' intended actions, strategic uncertainty will likely steer agents away from acti-
vities that require coordination. This in turn leads to coordination failure; that is, agents
choosing risk-dominant strategies over Pareto-dominant ones, thus leading to suboptimal
outcomes (see for example Rosenstein-Rodan, 1943, who discusses how coordination failure
can limit economic investment). Given their relevance to day-to-day situations, coordination
games have featured prominently in the literature.1
    Moreover, with coordination failure at the heart of certain development traps (Wydick,
2007), a key policy question has been how to enhance coordination (Hoff, 2001). For example,
Devetag and Ortmann (2007) point at several factors that may improve coordination: (1)
smaller group sizes (e.g., Van Huyck et al., 1990); (2) lower attractiveness of the secure
relative to the risky action (e.g., Brandts and Cooper, 2006); and (3) certain types of cheap
talk/communication in certain types of games (e.g., Farrell, 1987; Cooper et al., 1992; Farrell
and Rabin, 1996). Yet, as Avoyan and Ramos (2017) argue, while communication has been
lauded for its potential to enhance coordination, there are also instances where it has had
no effect (e.g., Cooper et al., 1992).
    One aspect that has received limited attention is the interaction between the number
of players (i.e., group size) and communication (one exception is Feltovich and Grossman,
2015). In addition, most prior literature on coordination and its drivers (in particular com-
munication) is theoretical and/or based on conventional laboratory experiments.2 Cooper
and Weber (2019) also conclude that coordination games like ours (i.e., threshold games)
and those that relate to problems in organizations (of which farmer cooperatives are an ex-
ample) require further study. So, if we want to better understand drivers of coordination in
day-to-day settings, it is useful to complement existing findings with field evidence.
    In this paper, we explore the impact of cheap talk on coordination and whether this effect
varies with group size, in a field context where strategic uncertainty has historically led to
    1
      Section 3 will discuss our work in the context of prior literature. Some overviews of the experimental
literature on coordination are Ochs (1995), Goeree and Holt (2002), Camerer (2003), Devetag and Ortmann
(2007), Rapoport and Seale (2008), Van Huyck and Battalio (2008), and Cooper and Weber (2019).
    2
      Elfenbein et al. (2018) study cheap talk in a field context ­ charity on eBay ­ that is fundamentally
different from ours. They find that most buyers avoid cheap talk listings when there are credible quality
signals, thus limiting the effect of cheap talk.




                                                     2
coordination failure.3 We study farmer cooperatives that seek to sell members' agricultural
production collectively ­ a setting that represents much of the developing and developed
world. Farmer groups have received quite some attention in policy and research. For example,
the United Nations designated 2012 as the international year of cooperatives, since 85%
of farms worldwide are small family farms and most of them participate in cooperatives.
Barrett (2008) argues that mechanisms aimed at facilitating smallholder organization (e.g.,
cooperatives) are central to stimulating market participation. At the same time, cooperatives
are not always able to achieve the goal of selling collectively (see for example Fafchamps and
Hill, 2005; Aldana et al., 2007; Hellin et al., 2007; Ragasa and Golan, 2014). Our primary
goal is not to promote collective commercialization, as we are agnostic regarding its effective
capacity to increase farmers' income.4 Instead, we seek to understand why, in groups designed
for the purpose of collective commercialization, farmers are unwilling to do so. In particular,
because those same farmers report believing that collective commercialization would lead to
higher incomes if the group were able to aggregate a large enough quantity.
    We hypothesize that the uncertainty surrounding others' likelihood to sell through the
cooperative (i.e., strategic uncertainty) is key to explaining the lack of collective commercia-
lization (i.e., coordination) in these groups.5 So, there may be a role for communication (i.e.,
cheap talk) prior to commercialization. Our intervention thus seeks to address a coordina-
tion dilemma by revealing salient information on the planned actions of all group members
prior to commercialization. This form of communication is quite different from the casual,
mostly one-on-one "chit chat" that group members typically engage in. Based on data from
the context in question (Bernard et al., 2014) as well as prior literature (e.g., Devetag and
Ortmann, 2007), we hypothesize that (1) beliefs about others' sales to the group are key to
one's decision to sell through the group; (2) larger groups have more difficulty coordinating;
and (3) communicating others' intentions to sell through the group (i.e., cheap talk) can
   3
      Throughout, we use the following terms interchangeably: (1) cooperatives, farmer groups, and producer
organizations; (2) farmers, smallholders, members, players, and subjects; (3) cheap talk, communication,
intentions, plans/planned actions; and (4) coordination and collective commercialization/selling.
    4
      Collective commercialization is often promoted in Sub-Saharan Africa on the grounds of imperfect com-
petition between traders in remote and thin markets, which in turn leads to rent extraction from farmers.
By aggregating farmers' production, collective commercialization offers the possibility to (1) reach distant
but larger markets (e.g., due to lower transaction costs, Key et al., 2000) or (2) negotiate better with local
traders. As reviewed by Dillon and Dambro (2017), the empirical evidence is mixed. For example, Bergquist
(2017) finds a low pass-through of price premiums from traders to farmers in Kenya, while Casaburi and
Reed (2017) find a high pass-through in Sierra Leone. Bernard et al. (2008) find positive but limited impacts
of cooperatives in Ethiopia and Ashraf et al. (2009) find positive, but unsustained, impacts in Kenya.
    5
      Bernard et al. (2014) find that among a sample of 27 groundnut-producing cooperatives in Senegal, 67%
of group members believe that, if presented with the opportunity, other members would by-pass sales through
the group and sell individually to a trader for a potentially lower, but more certain payoff. There may of
course be other reasons why cooperatives are (un)able to sell collectively; e.g., Casaburi and Macchiavello
(2015, 2019) and Hill et al. (2014) discuss commitment sanctions and deferred payments respectively.


                                                      3
increase the likelihood of collective commercialization, particularly in larger groups.
    In order to test these hypotheses, we work with a sample of 79 Senegalese groundnut-
producing cooperatives and close to 900 individual group members. First, in a subsample of
these cooperatives, randomly selected group members participate in neutrally framed, high-
stakes coordination games (i.e., artefactual field experiments in the terminology of Harrison
and List, 2004, hereafter, lab-in-the-field experiments/LFEs) where we exogenously vary
(1) the experimental group size, (2) the threshold required for coordination, and (3) the
presence of players' intentions to coordinate (i.e., cheap talk). Second, six months later, we
implement a comparable naturally-occurring intervention (i.e., a natural field experiment
in the terminology of Harrison and List, 2004, hereafter, randomized controlled trial/RCT)
with the full sample of cooperatives. Shortly after the harvest period, we collect all group
members' plans to sell through the cooperative in the upcoming commercialization season. In
a random subset of these cooperatives, members' intentions are revealed in a public meeting
right before commercialization starts. Since these are existing cooperatives, unlike in the
LFEs, it is infeasible to exogenously manipulate the group size and coordination threshold.6
Thus, both the LFEs and the RCT are key for testing our hypotheses. The LFEs provide
a "direct" test, allowing us to assess whether group size proxies for strategic uncertainty
or the likelihood of achieving the threshold. Meanwhile, the RCT forms a "real-life" test,
without the possibility to exogenously vary all parameters of interest. Finally, we supplement
this spectrum of experiments with survey data and cooperative records (i.e., administrative
data).
    Our findings are as follows. First, revealing aggregate intentions (i.e., cheap talk) impro-
ves coordination in both the LFEs and the RCT, particularly in larger groups. These results
are relatively robust to (1) farmers' preferences (in particular, over risk and time), (2) a se-
ries of placebo tests confirming that intentions are balanced at baseline, (3) potential social
desirability bias, which we rule out by comparing survey responses to group-administrative
data, and (4) correcting for multiple hypothesis testing according to the Holm-Bonferroni ap-
proach. In short, this set of findings suggests that cheap talk primarily reduces the strategic
uncertainty around members' likelihood of selling through the cooperative.
    Second, there is suggestive (i.e., weak) evidence that the intervention positively impacts
revenues (welfare) among farmers who produce smaller quantities. Since collective commer-
cialization is both more relevant (due to fixed transaction costs) and more difficult (because
   6
     In the day-to-day context, the membership of farmer groups is likely to be driven by location characte-
ristics (e.g., population density) and group performance. Accordingly, group size is difficult to manipulate.
Moreover, the threshold may be farmer-specific (in that farmers can be heterogenous with respect to their
commercialization capacities) or group-specific (depending on location as well as leaders' commercialization
capabilities). So, the coordination threshold is not readily observable and also difficult to vary.



                                                     4
a larger pool of farmers is needed to achieve coordination) for small-scale farmers, this set
of results suggests that cheap talk may be beneficial where it is most needed. That is, in
larger groups that are comprised of a greater number of small farmers and thus, where there
is greater uncertainty over others' actions.
    Finally, behavior in the "lab" (LFEs) transfers to behavior in the "field" (RCT). We
exploit the random selection of individuals and find that, in the same cooperative, LFE
participants were more likely to engage in day-to-day collective commercialization than non-
LFE participants. In other words, consistent with the literature on transfer (e.g., Cooper
and Van Huyck, 2016) but perhaps contrary to Voors et al. (2012), participants learn from
the LFEs. Similar findings have been documented by Cardenas and Carpenter (2005) and
Turiansky (2017).7 Our study thus also contributes to the literature linking results across the
spectrum of experiments; see for example, Levitt and List (2007), Camerer (2015), Viceisza
(2016) and the references within.8 Like others, our findings support the use of LFEs in
combination with RCTs (and other approaches) to better understand the mechanisms that
are at play. At the same time, researchers should take heed that participation in LFEs may
affect subjects' future behavior (comparable to Zwane et al., 2011, in a survey context).
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 places our study within the
context of the Senegalese groundnut sector and provides further evidence of strategic uncer-
tainty and coordination failure in related cooperatives. Section 3 discusses our framework
and hypotheses in the context of existing literature. Section 4 details our study design and
empirical strategy. Section 5 covers our main findings. Finally, Section 6 concludes.


2       Strategic uncertainty in Senegalese cooperatives
Groundnut production has long been the backbone of the Senegalese economy. At indepen-
dence, the sector employed 87% of the agriculturally active population in rural areas and
occupied 50% of the cultivated land. According to Caswell (1984), groundnut processing
contributed to 42% of all industrial output and groundnuts represented 80% of all export
revenues. Over time, however, revenues from the sector have steadily declined due to (1)
external factors such as lower international prices, the end of preferential tariffs, droughts,
oil shocks, and exchange rates and (2) internal factors such as mismanagement and politics
    7
     This is not too different from the discussions by Charles Holt and co-authors in a series of papers on
(the benefits of) classroom experiments in Journal of Economic Perspectives in the late 1990s.
   8
     Some examples include Barr et al. (2010) who correlate results from dictator games with absenteeism of
school teachers in Uganda; Finan and Schechter (2012) who relate behavior in trust games to individuals'
responses to vote buying in Paraguay; Stoop et al. (2012) who study cooperation among fishermen in the
Netherlands; and Hoel et al. (2017) who use public goods games to relate spousal cooperation to household-
level productive inefficiencies in Senegal.


                                                    5
at various levels of the sector. In the late 1990s, these shocks gradually led to privatization
of all segments of the value chain, after several attempts at restructuring.
    Prior to the above reforms, a dense network of state-controlled cooperatives was the ex-
clusive interface between farmers and other actors. Through these groups, farmers accessed
credit, inputs, and extension services. Each year, the price of groundnut was fixed at the
national level and all marketed production was collected through cooperatives. Following
privatization, the role, functioning, and capacity of producer cooperatives changed signi-
ficantly, in particular with regard to collective commercialization. Although privatized in
2001, Suneor, the principal end-buyer of groundnuts still existed, but procured production
via private traders who were ensured a fixed price upon delivery at the processing plant.
Traders could purchase from cooperatives or from farmers individually. Competitive forces
were expected to support producer prices, but issues of local monopsony and potential collu-
sion led to general dissatisfaction with this system. In 2010, the export-monopoly previously
granted to Suneor was abolished, facilitating the entry of new players who could also procure
groundnuts from cooperatives or individual farmers.
    In short, these reforms led to important changes in farmers' ability to coordinate within
cooperatives. Previously, there were no strategic complementarities between members of
a group: the price per kilogram (kg) of groundnut was the same whether the cooperative
aggregated small or large quantities. At the same time, there was no need to worry about
others' decisions to sell through the cooperative. In the new system, group members be-
came strategic complements since the cooperative could obtain better per-unit prices by
aggregating production and accessing larger, more distant markets/processing plants, or by
negotiating more strongly with local traders. However, farmers could also sell directly to
local traders. So, this presents a tradeoff: While aggregation through the cooperative could
lead to a higher unit price, receipt of such funds would usually be delayed relative to local
traders who pay cash on delivery. Moreover, the price premium obtained from collective
commercialization would also depend on the quantity that other members sell through the
cooperative, which is uncertain when a given farmer is visited by the trader.
    While groundnut cooperatives remain active in input and credit provision, their capacity
to aggregate and sell output has weakened considerably. Bernard et al. (2014) document
commercialization among close to 300 members of 27 groundnut cooperatives whose main,
stated objective is collective commercialization. The data indicate that a great majority
of members sells individually to local traders in spot market transactions.9 In fact, only
11 of the 27 groups had sold collectively in 2011, and for those that did, only half of the
   9
    Less than 7% of farmers deal regularly with the same trader and pre-harvest contracting occurs in less
than 2% of cases.



                                                    6
members participated. This limited involvement contrasts with farmers' perceived potential
for collective commercialization: While 79% of farmers cited problems when attempting
to sell individually (e.g., lack of transportation to reach more lucrative markets, insufficient
knowledge of current prices, and limited production to negotiate better prices), practically all
respondents were convinced that group commercialization could alleviate such constraints.
These perceptions are also consistent with prior literature on transaction costs in market
participation (see for example, Key et al., 2000).
    Bernard et al. (2014) also collect members' aversion to the strategic uncertainty arising
from collective commercialization using a framed version of the instrument by Heinemann
et al. (2009). Subjects were presented with the choice to sell to a trader at a certain price
or sell through the group at a higher but uncertain price that depends on the number of
other members selling through the group. The price offered by the trader was incrementally
raised until subjects switched from selling through the cooperative to selling to the trader.
The results suggest that aversion to strategic uncertainty is negatively correlated with indi-
viduals' effective sales through the cooperative. This correlation clearly dominates that of
other preferences such as risk, time, and social (altruism). When asked about other group
members' likely response to the above strategic uncertainty question, 67% of the sample
believed that those members would by-pass sales through the group and sell individually to
a trader for a potentially lower payoff than they would.
    Overall, reforms in the groundnut sector paved the way for issues of strategic uncertainty
in Senegalese cooperatives. It is for these reasons that we assess the impact of a cheap-
talk/communication intervention.


3     Framework, literature, and hypotheses
3.1    Framework
In line with the above context, our framework is a critical-mass/threshold coordination game.
There are N  N players, each of whom j has a positive endowment Vj  N. All players
simultaneously choose an amount Aj  [0, 1, ..., Vj ] to send to the group (the equivalent
of commercializing collectively) and keep the remainder Vj - Aj (the equivalent of selling
individually/via traders). Any quantity Aj sent to the group, earns a high return H if
all players jointly send a quantity A = j Aj  T to the group, where T represents some
threshold. Otherwise, if they send a quantity A < T , Aj earns a low return L < H .
Whatever a player chooses to keep individually, that is Vj - Aj , earns a medium return M ,
where L < M < H .


                                               7
    As discussed in Sections 1 and 2, there are several reasons why L < M < H may hold.
In particular, changes in government policies and market conditions in Senegal led to farmer
cooperatives losing bargaining power relative to traders. Yet, if able to aggregate sufficient
production and negotiate better contracts, cooperatives would offer better prices (H ) than
traders would at the farm gate (M ). On the other hand, if unable to aggregate/secure
such contracts, farmers would have to resort back to selling individually, i.e., in absence
of the cooperative. Due to waiting times and high fixed transaction costs, this would lead
to lower effective prices (L). So, these payoffs reflect the trade-off that exists between
commercializing collectively through the cooperative and selling individually (primarily via
traders). Moreover, they are consistent with farmers' beliefs about the benefits to collective
commercialization, as discussed in Section 2.
    Accordingly, player i's expected payoff can be expressed as:10

                           (Ai ) = pAi H + (1 - p)Ai L + (Vi - Ai )M

where p = P (A  T ). It is clear that equilibria in this game will be driven by player i's belief,
pi , about the likelihood of the threshold being surpassed, p. In other words, contributions
to the group ­ i.e., how much the farmer chooses to commercialize collectively ­ will depend
on the player's sense of strategic uncertainty in the game. If s/he expects A to surpass T ,
pi = 1, the player should send all of the endowment to the group, i.e., Ai = Vi .11 If s/he
expects A not to surpass T , pi = 0, the player should keep the full endowment, i.e., Ai = 0. If
s/he expects a scenario in between these two extremes, the player should diversify by selling
Ai  {1, ..., Vi - 1} through the cooperative and the remainder individually.
     As discussed in Section 2, farmer cooperatives seem to have been unable to commercialize
collectively in this setting in recent years. Moreover, most members believe that other mem-
bers are more likely to sell individually to traders than collectively through the cooperative.
In short, empirical evidence suggests that p = 0 or close to it. So, a key question is whether
and if so, how this likelihood can be increased, given farmers believe it would be beneficial to
do so. In order to develop related hypotheses, which will form the basis of the study design
discussed in Section 4, we now turn to prior literature on the determinants of coordination.
  10
     Here, we abstract from risk and social preferences by assuming that H, M, L capture players' true payoffs.
In other words, we do not work with the more general "utility" function. In the empirical analysis, we check
for internal validity with regard to a range of characteristics including social, risk, and time preferences.
  11
     If p = 1, (Ai = Vi ) > (Ai < Vi ) since H > M . To see this, note that (Ai = Vi ) = Vi H =
Ai H + (Vi - Ai )H and (Ai < Vi ) = Ai H + (Vi - Ai )M . So, if the threshold is surpassed, any amount sold
individually (to traders) leads to lower returns than if it had been sold collectively (via the cooperative).




                                                      8
3.2     Related literature and hypotheses
There is a relatively extensive theory and lab literature on coordination (in games) and the
potential determinants thereof (see for example Farrell, 1987; Ochs, 1995; Farrell and Rabin,
1996; Crawford, 1998; Goeree and Holt, 2002; Camerer, 2003; Rapoport and Seale, 2008;
Van Huyck and Battalio, 2008, for some overviews). The parts of the literature that relate
most closely to our setting are on (1) coordination games with Pareto-ranked equilibria, which
cover both order-statistic games (e.g., Van Huyck et al., 1990; Van Huyck and Battalio, 2008)
and stag-hunt games (e.g. Cooper et al., 1992; Battalio et al., 2001; Charness and Grosskopf,
2004) and (2) preplay communication/cheap talk (see for example Blume and Ortmann,
2007; Avoyan and Ramos, 2017, and some of the previous references).12
    Devetag and Ortmann (2007) and Cooper and Weber (2019) survey some of this literature
and both point at a range of common factors that may enhance coordination. Among those
are (1) smaller group sizes; (2) certain types of cheap talk/communication in certain types of
games; and (3) lower attractiveness of the secure action relative to the risky one. As Feltovich
and Grossman (2015) note, there has been little work jointly investigating the effect of group
size and cheap talk. In fact, their study is one of the few exceptions.13 It is also closest to
ours, but there are a few key differences. First, their setting is a threshold public-good game
with a dichotomous choice ("contribute" or "not"). Second, their communication takes the
form of one subject/player sending a message that "Everyone should choose [action]". This
is different from how we implement cheap talk, as will be discussed further below. Third,
their group sizes are smaller. Finally, we examine this interaction both in the "lab" and
"field". Particularly in the latter case, there may be pre-existing experiences that impact
the interaction between group size and cheap talk.
    In order to state the main hypotheses that form the basis of the experimental design
in Section 4, we further extend the framework discussed in Section 3.1. Suppose there is a
pre-stage to the game in which all players simultaneously reveal an intended action towards
the group Aj (i.e., N -way communication) prior to taking the "true" action Aj . Player i will
use intentions Aj to inform her/his belief pi about p only if s/he believes those intentions.
While some of the literature on communication has suggested that players may seek to
deceive others, particularly when sending non-costly and non-binding messages, there is no
such incentive in this game. In other words, unlike Prisoner's dilemma/public-good type
  12
     There is also a tangentially related literature on the link between strategic uncertainty and cultural
diversity (see for example, Kets and Sandroni, 2017)
  13
     Balliet (2010) conducts a meta-analysis of 45 social-dilemma experiments and finds a positive interaction
between group size and the effect of communication. However, this interaction is not robust to controlling for
other relevant variables and removal of two outliers (see Feltovich and Grossman, 2015, for a more detailed
discussion/analysis).


                                                      9
games, a player cannot "free-ride" by sending a high intention Aj and then taking a low
action Aj . If a player truly believes that a high signal will cause others to increase their
contributions to the group, this player should align her/his actual contribution with such
intentions. This is the same argument that has been made by for example Farrell and Rabin
(1996) and Crawford (1998); for example, recall the "reassurance" role of cheap talk in
stag-hunt games.
    So, assuming that players believe intentions Aj , these can be quite informative. In parti-
cular, player i will substitute A-i for A-i in order to more precisely assess the likelihood of
surpassing the threshold T . With this extended framework and the above referenced findings
from prior literature in mind, we state the following hypotheses.

    Hypothesis 1. As the group size N increases, player i decreases her/his contribution
to the group Ai , since coordination failure is more likely. In other words, due to strategic
uncertainty, smaller groups are more conducive to coordination.

   Hypothesis 2. Player i will set pi = p = 1 and thus Ai = Vi if revealed intentions are
such that j Aj = A  T . In other words, cheap talk can reduce coordination failure if
aggregate intentions surpass the threshold.

    Hypothesis 3. The effect of cheap talk (i.e., j Aj relative to T ) will increase with the
group size N . In other words, due to strategic uncertainty, cheap talk is more effective in
larger groups. However, the direction of the effect will depend on whether or not aggregate
intentions surpass the threshold. This hypothesis basically combines hypotheses 1 and 2.


4    Study design
With the above context in mind, our study is mainly designed to test whether (1) knowing
others' aggregate intentions about collective commercialization impacts effective sales to the
group and (2) this effect is more salient in larger versus smaller groups. As mentioned in
Section 1, we are unable to exogenously manipulate two key parameters ­ the group size N
and the threshold T ­ in the naturally-occurring environment. As such, group-size effects in
the day-to-day setting could be capturing other (potentially unobserved) characteristics. For
example, larger groups may (1) offer better services to farmers to begin with (e.g., input,
credit, or negotiated prices); (2) be more likely to achieve a given threshold level, ceteris
paribus; and (3) be associated with greater strategic uncertainty due to a greater number
of "moving parts" (i.e., number of players). Accordingly, our design is based on a two-stage

                                              10
empirical strategy. First, we fully test our predictions through controlled, neutrally framed
LFEs in which we are able to observe and manipulate the group size (N ) and coordination
threshold (T ) as well as other aspects such as external uncertainty and the premium for
coordination (H ). Then, we test our results in a naturally-occurring RCT where we do not
manipulate the above parameters. The LFEs and RCT were conducted six months apart
in order to clearly separate outcomes. The timing of these experiments and related data
collection was as follows:

  1. LFEs: From May to June 2013, randomly selected farmers from 28 cooperatives parti-
     cipated in variants of neutrally-framed, high-stakes, threshold coordination games (as
     explained in Section 4.1). A presurvey collecting basic (behavioral) characteristics was
     also administered at this time.

  2. RCT: From November 2013 to February 2014, 79 farmer groups (including 26 of the
     28 that were in the LFEs) participated in variants of intention-revelation treatments
     (as explained in Section 4.2). In particular, intentions were revealed 2-4 weeks prior
     to the start of the actual commercialization period.

  3. Post-survey and administrative data: In June 2014, a follow-up survey was administe-
     red to 10-12 randomly selected members of the cooperative (median size is 24, ranging
     from 4-91) in order to gauge members' sales. Administrative data on individual mem-
     bers' commercialization were also collected from the books/records of the farmer groups
     for the 2014 season.

   Because some groups that were selected for the RCT did not participate in the LFEs,
we are able to control for LFE participation in all RCT-related estimations. Furthermore,
because individuals were randomly selected for the LFEs, we are able to assess whether
participation in this set of experiments affected subsequent behavior in the RCT. Table 1
summarizes the relationship between the LFE and RCT samples.


4.1    LFEs
The LFEs were based on two main treatments (see online appendix for detailed instructions):
(1) a baseline coordination game (BCG) and (2) the same coordination game but with inten-
tions revealed (i.e., communication/cheap talk) prior to play (CCG). These treatments were
randomly assigned across experimental groups of subjects, which were created by randomly
drawing members from existing cooperatives to form sets of players of size N equal to 10 or
20. All players in a given experimental group were members of the same cooperative. Table
2 gives the sample distribution across the BCG and CCG.

                                             11
    In the BCG, each player j had an endowment Vj of six chips. Each chip was worth 2000
West African francs/CFA (the equivalent of approximately 5 US dollars) if held individually.
This was M . So, players were explained at the beginning of the game that they held an
endowment of 12000 CFA. To mitigate windfall/house money effects, this endowment was
framed as payment for the presurvey. The payoff for each chip sent to the experimental
group was dependent on whether or not the threshold (T ) was reached/surpassed. If A  T ,
each chip was worth 3000 CFA (the equivalent of H ); if not, each chip was worth 500 CFA
(the equivalent of L). So, each player had to decide how many of the six chips to send to
the group (Aj ) and how many to keep individually (6 - Aj ), as shown in the panel to the
left of the "big plus" sign in Figure A1.
    The CCG was identical to the BCG with one exception: prior to choosing and committing
to Aj , each player was asked to reveal their intended action Aj to the experimenter; that is,
how much the player planned to send to the experimental group. This intention, which was
confidentially revealed to all other players -j , in random order, on a board in front of the
room, indicated a given player's likely action. However, it was not a binding commitment
and as such, other players did not know with full certainty that Aj would be the same as
Aj . It is in this sense that it was cheap talk and a form of (structured) communication.
    Apart from the BCG and the CCG, we randomly varied N, T, H , and the presence of
external uncertainty as separate treatments. First, we varied H and the presence of external
uncertainty because prior literature has shown that attractiveness of the secure versus the
risky action may impact coordination (recall Section 3.2). Second, we varied T because in
a day-to-day context (in particular, the RCT) group size N is likely to be correlated with
other characteristics such as the perceived likelihood of achieving the threshold. However,
as previously discussed, we are unable to exogenously vary this parameter in the RCT.
Experimental variation in T enables us to better understand what mechanism is at play.
    To see this, consider the following: If the level of T is fixed, it should be easier to
coordinate in large groups than in small groups, since the former are more likely to reach
the threshold. So, communication should be less informative in large (relative to small)
groups for a fixed level of T . On the other hand, if communication is more informative in
large groups, despite the level of T being fixed, this must be because of greater strategic
uncertainty surrounding other players' actions. Similarly, if the average (i.e., per-player)
number of chips needed to surpass the threshold is fixed across small and large groups, but
communication matters differentially across N , this also suggests that strategic uncertainty
is the main mechanism at play. Since we are unable to (1) experimentally control T in the
RCT and (2) fully isolate these mechanisms in the day-to-day environment, we thus rely on
the LFEs as a crucial part of our design in order to argue mechanisms.


                                             12
    Two primary aids were used when explaining the game. First, monetary payoffs were
explained by displaying actual CFA bills on a board at the front of the room, also making
"real stakes" more salient. Second, many hypothetical examples were used. For example,
the experimenter and his assistant as well as pairs of subjects role-played through different
scenarios. We also tested subject understanding by asking specific players to calculate such
payoffs. A substantial part of the LFE sessions was dedicated to the instruction phase.
    In the CCG, the exact same procedure as in the BCG was followed, except that prior
to subjects making their actual decisions (Aj ), the experimenter went around the room
and asked players in private to reveal their intended actions (Aj ). Subjects were explained
that this information would be collected by the experimenter and confidentially displayed in
random order on a separate board at the front of the room. It was made clear that this was
an intended, but non-binding action. Figure A1 also shows the logic behind the CCG. It
was identical to the BCG, except for an additional board (right panel of Figure A1), which
contained randomly ordered intentions Aj and the aggregate A .
    The BCG and the CCG were implemented between subjects (sessions), since introducing
intentions mid-session would have complicated the protocol. The (experimental) group size,
N , was fixed at either 10 or 20 during a session. So, N was varied across sessions/between
subjects. The threshold, T , was 40 or 50 in 10-person groups and 40, 50, 80, or 100 in 20-
person groups. T was varied randomly across rounds. H was either 3000 or 2500 CFA per
chip and was varied randomly across rounds. Whether or not there was external uncertainty
was implemented as follows. Subjects were informed that there was a 50 percent chance that
due to bad luck H would be 1500 CFA per chip (instead of 2500 or 3000). This was varied
across rounds by flipping a coin.
    The experiments were conducted in vacant classrooms of village schools. Each experi-
ment session comprised the following components: (1) a presurvey collecting basic informa-
tion (available from the authors upon request); (2) an introduction covering issues such as
the purpose of the session (that is, to present participants with different decision-making
scenarios) and the fact that participants would be paid for the decisions made during the
session; (3) four rounds of decisions with no feedback, followed by debriefing; (4) a postsurvey
collecting other information (available from the authors upon request); and (5) payment in
private based on one randomly selected round. The sessions lasted 2.5-3 hours and average
earnings were 9,500 CFA (approximately 20 US dollars), relative to a daily wage equivalent
in this region of 5,000 CFA. So, these LFEs were relatively "high stakes".




                                              13
4.2     RCT
We worked with 79 groundnut-producing cooperatives ­ including 26 of the 28 with which
we implemented the LFEs ­ comprising close to 900 individuals. These cooperatives are part
of two umbrella federations (i.e., conglomerates of cooperatives) in the Bassin Arachidier,
which is the main groundnut production zone of Senegal. From November to December
2013, two leaders of each farmer group attended a two-day training conducted by two deve-
lopment specialists. The training focused on the potential, pitfalls, and conduct of collective
commercialization; in particular, strategies for identifying distant buyers, negotiating prices,
and organizing transportation. Participants were instructed to conduct a briefing meeting
with all cooperative members upon returning to their village, to report the gist of what was
covered during the training. Trainees were also provided with standardized booklets to keep
records of each member's contribution to the group's sales in the upcoming commercializa-
tion season. A reward of 10,000 CFA was promised for filling in the booklets with all the
requested information. All groups eventually received such reward.
    After the training, during January 2014, enumerators went to the villages in order to elicit
commercialization intentions from all cooperative members. Prior to doing so, they made
sure that the leaders who had taken part in the training had held the "briefing" meeting. For
each farmer group, all members who produced groundnuts for the 2014 commercialization
season were asked how they intended to use their production. They had to split their
anticipated harvest into (1) individual commercialization, (2) collective commercialization
(via the cooperative), (3) inventories, and (4) other uses. They were told that the purpose
of this survey was to better understand their decisions with regard to groundnut production.
They were also informed that a subsequent group meeting would be held, where a message
would be delivered to them. They were thus invited to attend that meeting.
    The 79 groups were allocated to one of four conditions, depending on the information
that would be disclosed in the subsequent meeting (Table 3 summarizes the RCT design):14

    · In Condition A (the control group), members' intentions were not revealed. Enume-
      rators announced that a follow-up survey would be conducted after the end of the
      commercialization period. This was also announced in Conditions B, C, and D.

    · In Condition B, members' aggregate intentions were revealed.

    · In Condition C, members' aggregate intentions as well as the distribution of intentions
      among members were revealed. I.e., how many members intended to contribute 100kg;
  14
    As discussed in some of the papers referenced in Section 3.2, messages have differential impacts depending
on the "statistics"/content they convey. Hence, the logic for a variant of information treatments.


                                                     14
        how many intended to contribute 200kg, and so on. This was most comparable to the
        CCG in the LFEs.

   · In Condition D, the same information as in C was revealed, but the distribution of
     intentions was disaggregated by ordinary members versus cooperative leaders (defined
     as all members of the management committee which typically comprises 8 to 12 indivi-
     duals). This treatment was inspired by the literature on leadership, which emphasizes
     that leaders' actions can have larger effects than that of regular members, in part be-
     cause they are perceived as having privileged access to information (see for example
     Hermalin, 1998; Potters et al., 2007; Jack and Recalde, 2015).


4.3       Sample description
Table 4 describes the characteristics of individuals who responded to the RCT-related survey
and compares means across groups that received no information about others' intentions and
groups that did. Consistent with the context described in Section 2, our sample essentially
comprises small farmers, with a total farm size of less then five hectares on average. The
full sample cultivates groundnuts, but 58% also produce other crops. Groundnut production
is also relatively small in magnitude, with the previous and current year's average expected
harvest below 1.7 tons. 84% of the farmers indicate that they intend to sell some of their
groundnut harvest through the group in the upcoming commercialization season. On average,
intended sales through the group amounted to 60% of farmers' production.
    Overall, Table 4 does not show clear differences on pre-intervention characteristics across
the two samples. There are, however, indications that generosity (as measured by a hypot-
hetical dictator game) is higher on average for groups where no information was revealed.
For a comparable groundnut-producing sample, Bernard et al. (2014) find that altruism is
negatively related to group sales. So, in this case that might translate into an upward bias
of the information effect. They find, however, that the associated coefficient is quite small
in magnitude, in particular compared to the one associated with individuals' aversion to
strategic uncertainty. As discussed below, all RCT-related estimations will control for this ­
and other ­ individual characteristics that are unbalanced at baseline. Table 4 also indicates
that a greater number of farmers whose group was selected to participate in the LFEs were
in the control group. To the extent that participation in the LFEs affects naturally-occurring
behavior ­ which we assess later on ­ this difference could also introduce some bias. Our
empirical strategy therefore includes this variable among the controls.15
 15
      Table A3 reports the same set of tests across conditions A, B, C, and D. The results are similar.




                                                      15
4.4     Empirical strategy
With the LFE and RCT protocols being comparable, we rely on a common estimation stra-
tegy to assess the impact of others' intentions on the decision to contribute production/resources
to the group. Individuals are indexed by subscript i and groups by subscript g ­ where
"groups" refers to experimental sessions in the LFEs and day-to-day cooperatives in the
RCT. Our basic estimation is as follows:

                                           Aig =  + Ig + ig                                               (1)

where being exposed to others' intentions, which varies at the group level, is captured by a
binary variable Ig (our proxy for A in Section 3.1), and the associated parameter  measures
its effect on the dependent variable of interest (more below). ig is a composite error term
defined as:16
                                        ig = µg + ig

where µg is a group-specific error and ig is the remaining idiosyncratic one. With group
members' decisions to contribute to the group being strategic complements, we allow for
within-group, individual errors to be correlated. Thus, all our standard errors are clustered
at the group-level.17
    While the same estimator is used for both the LFEs and the RCT, interpretation of
the coefficients differs across the two. In LFE-related estimates, the  parameter is the
treatment effect on the treated. In fact, all individuals selected to participate in the game
did participate and no one left before all rounds were completed (although that was allowed
if they wanted to). In the RCT however, only 59% of group members attended the meeting
in which aggregate intentions were revealed (see last row of Table 4). Without exogenous
variation in attendance to the meeting, we estimate equation 1 on the full sample of farmers,
regardless of whether or not they attended. The estimated  parameter therefore captures
our "intent" to reveal or not aggregate intentions; i.e., an intent-to-treat effect.18
    Although we do not find evidence of major imbalances across conditions, we augment
equation 1 with a vector of individual characteristics, Xig , to both account for existing
  16
     In the estimating equations that follow, ig will vary depending on the specification. But, for simplicity
we keep the same notation.
  17
     We rely on the cluster-correlated Huber-White covariance matrix method to compute cluster-robust
standard errors. While our design includes a reasonably large number of clusters, we also computed standard
errors based on more conservative randomized inference tests. Results are available upon request, and similar
to those reported here.
  18
     One could attempt to recover the impact on those who participated in the meeting by dividing the 
estimate by the meeting participation rate. However, this would implicitly assume that the information
provided in the meeting was not shared with non-attending group members, which we cannot guarantee.


                                                     16
imbalances and enhance the precision of our estimates through reduced unexplained variance
in our outcome variable. In LFE-related estimates, this vector of covariates includes the
individual's age, sex, land size, education (dummy for going to a French school versus a
Koranic or no schooling), and measures for risk, time (patience), and social preferences
(generosity/altruism).19 In RCT-related estimates, this includes the individual's age, sex, a
dummy for whether the individual holds a leadership position in the group, the groundnut
harvest (in kg), a dummy for whether the farmer produced other crops, land size, measures
for risk, time, and social preferences, and participation in the LFEs. This leads to the
following estimating equation:

                                     Aig =  + Iig + Xig  + ig                                           (2)

    Finally, in line with our framework, we test for heterogenous treatment effects with
respect to group size by estimating equation 3, where Sg is a dummy for large groups (N =
20) in the LFE estimations and actual group size in the RCT estimations;  is the average
effect of being exposed to aggregate intentions among all individuals in the sample; and 
captures the additional effect of this exposure for individuals in larger groups.

                           Aig =  + Ig + Sg + Ig × Sg + Xig  + ig                                       (3)

    For our main specifications, we estimate the effect of revealing aggregate intentions on
both the extensive margin ­ with the dependent variable Aig being a dummy for whether
the individual contributed any amount to the group ­ and the intensive margin ­ where the
dependent variable Aig is the total amount that one contributed to the group. Both are
consistent with the framework (and notation) discussed in Section 3.
    In the RCT-related estimates, we also run several robustness checks. First, we test for
significance of  and  when the dependent variable is members' intentions. Because in-
tentions were collected prior to any information revelation, we expect these parameters to
be equal to 0. Second, one may be concerned about social desirability bias in individuals'
reporting of collective groundnut sales. For both the intensive and extensive margin estima-
tes, we thus also use effective individual sales from all group members, based on the group's
own administrative data (recall the booklets/cooperative records discussed in Section 4.2);
although such data do not include individual characteristics, Xig . Third, we also run some
  19
    Generosity/social preference was elicited through a hypothetical dictator game (with a greater number
indicating a more generous/altruistic individual). Risk preferences were elicited through a hypothetical
Binswanger (1980)-style lottery (with a lower number indicating a more risk averse individual. Finally,
patience was elicited through typical, hypothetical preference-over-time questions (with a one-day front-end
delay and a higher number indicating a less patient individual).



                                                    17
Tobit (to account for null reports) and inverse hyperbolic sine transformations specificati-
ons. Finally, we correct for multiple hypothesis testing (MHT) using the Holm-Bonferroni
method (see Tables 6 and 10).


5       Results
5.1       Cheap talk and coordination
Tables 5 and 6 present our main results based on specifications 2 and 3. The first two
columns are for the LFEs while the remaining ones are for the RCT. Our falsification test is
presented in columns 3 and 4 where the dependent variable is one's intentions to contribute
to the group, collected ahead of the intervention. In columns 5 and 6, we present the main
results using data from individual surveys, while the last two columns rely on administrative
data collected from the groups' books/records (recalling there are no controls in this case).
    In Table 5 we assess the extensive margin ­ i.e., the effect of revealing others' intentions
on an individual's decision to contribute part of one's resources (i.e., number of chips in the
LFEs, kilograms/kgs of groundnuts in the RCT) or not to the group. We find no direct
effect of revealing aggregate intentions, be it in the LFEs or in the RCT (columns 1 and
5); however, interacting with group size yields support for Hypothesis 3. In the LFEs,
cheap talk (intentions) led to an 11 percentage point increase in the probability that one
invests chips collectively, albeit limited to those sessions with groups of size 20 (as opposed
to 10). The same is true in column 6, where revealing intentions increases the likelihood
that one sold part of one's production through the cooperative by one percentage point for
each additional group member. While insignificant, the direct effect of intentions is negative
(-0.04 for LFEs and -0.08 for RCT), suggesting that the cheap-talk effect on increased
coordination is limited to larger groups. In comparison, no such results are found in the
falsification test (column 4). Further, we can fairly confidently rule out concerns of social
desirability bias in the responses, since the results are very similar when using administrative
data (column 8).
    Results on the intensive margin are presented in Table 6 and show a similar pattern.
While we do find a direct effect of cheap talk on the quantity of chips (column 1) and
groundnuts (column 5) contributed to the group, this effect is only present in larger groups
for both the LFEs (column 2) and the RCT (column 6). No such relationships are found in
our placebo tests (columns 3 and 4) and the administrative data yield results comparable
to those based on the individual survey data (columns 7 and 8).20 We also correct for
 20
      Results are robust to a Tobit model (Table A5) and inverse hyperbolic sine transformation (Table A6).


                                                     18
multiple hypothesis testing (MHT) using the Holm-Bonferroni method (see adjusted p-values
in square [..] brackets). The effects in the LFEs (columns 1 and 2) are no longer significant;
however, the effects in the RCT persist (columns 5-8). The only exception is the direct effect
of cheap talk when using administrative data, but recall that there are fewer (no) control
variables in this specification, which also explains the lower R2 . Following Maniadis et al.
(2014), we also calculate the post-study probability (PSP) associated with the main cheap-
talk effect, i.e., the first and fifth columns of Table 6 for the LFEs and RCT respectively.
Tables A7 and A8 illustrate that for low initial priors (i.e., below 0.2) the accuracy of the
cheap-talk effect can be questioned. However, for moderate to high priors (i.e., above 0.2)
we can be relatively confident that the main cheap-talk effect is accurate. Note that PSPs
above 0.50 are indicated in bold.
    Overall, Tables 5 and 6 provide support for our predictions (in particular hypothesis 3):
Cheap talk (intentions) can enhance coordination in situations of strategic uncertainty and
this mainly seems to occur in larger groups, where coordination is more difficult to start
with.21 While consistent with our framework and prior work on the direct effect of cheap
talk on coordination (recall theoretical and lab findings referenced in Sections 1 and 3.2),
these results do not line up with Feltovich and Grossman (2015) who find that the beneficial
effect of cheap talk decreases as the group size increases. However, as discussed previously,
their findings are based on a threshold public-good game with messages that are different
from ours. In addition, their group sizes are significantly smaller. In our LFEs, 10 is small
and 20 is large, while in the RCT small constitutes less than 24 and large is 24 to 91. This
compares to 2 (small) and 15 (large) in their experiments.
    As previously discussed, we are unable to exogenously vary group size in the RCT.
Therefore, the effect in larger groups (particularly in the RCT) may be associated with
other characteristics and thus, we should be cautious in interpreting the interaction effect.
We address this concern in two main ways. First, we exploit the experimental design in
order to separate the effect of group size from the potentially confounding threshold effect
by using data from the LFEs. Table 7 compares the group-size effect across three main
specifications. Columns 1-2 use data from all LFE sessions, regardless of the threshold level
required to achieve coordination. These are columns 1-2 from Table 6. Columns 3-4 use
data from LFE sessions where the average (i.e., per-player) number of chips required to
achieve the threshold is constant across group size. Finally, columns 5-6 use data from LFE
sessions where the overall threshold is constant across group size. As mentioned in Section
4.1, if communication is more informative in large groups, despite the average number of
  21
     In the upper panel of Table A9, we show that these results cannot be attributed to changes in individuals'
risk, time (patience), and social preferences (generosity), since those are unaffected by the RCT intervention.



                                                      19
chips needed to surpass the threshold or the overall threshold being fixed across group size,
strategic uncertainty is likely to be the main mechanism at play. Indeed, column 6 provides
evidence that it is primarily about group size and its relation to strategic uncertainty. We
also note that while the point estimate in column 4 is not statistically significant, it is positive
and relatively large (in the order of 20 percent relative to the control group/CCG mean).
    Second, Table A4 compares group characteristics across above- and below-median day-
to-day group size. We find limited evidence that these groups systematically differ from
one another, except for being part of different umbrella federations, which we control for in
all specifications. In short, we are reasonably confident that the group size effect is mainly
associated with strategic uncertainty and less so with the threshold required to achieve
coordination (which can be thought of as the amount required to fulfill contracts, for example
when selling to large buyers in the day-to-day environment). We exploit the impacts of
revealing intentions/cheap talk in different ways (recall conditions A­D in the RCT design,
Section 4.2) in Section 5.3


5.2     Collective commercialization and farmers' income
With the increased level of collective commercialization induced by the RCT intervention,
we turn to its potential welfare effect. Specifically, we assess its impact on farmers' total
income from the sale of groundnuts. This includes individual sales as well as those conducted
through the cooperative. Since the intervention started shortly before the harvest, it did not
affect farmers' production choices. Therefore, any effect of the intervention is mediated by
a combination of (1) changes in the way farmers allocate their marketable surplus across
individual versus collective sales and (2) changes in the price that may be obtained from
collective sales due to greater aggregation of the product.
    The results are presented in Table 8. The dependent variable is the total revenue from
selling groundnuts in thousands of FCFA (1000 FCFA was approximately equivalent to US$2
at the time of the study).22 In column 1, we find no evidence of a direct effect of the interven-
tion on farmers' income from groundnuts. In column 2 we extend the model to investigate
whether the intervention differentially affected smaller versus larger farmers. We interact
the treatment variable with the farmer's reported area of land that is dedicated to the pro-
duction of groundnuts. While the direct effect of the intervention is large and positive, the
  22
     We are unable to use the per-unit price as our dependent variable. In fact, farmers tend not to negotiate
prices on a per-kilogram basis, but on the total price for a given quantity. Field work revealed that quantities
collected from farmers were quite noisy and imprecise due to the lack of weighting scales for transactions
that occur at the farm gate or at local markets. As such, we are unable to recover a per-unit price for those
transactions conducted outside the group. Farmers are, however, able to recall how much they earned in
total for each transaction


                                                      20
coefficient associated with the interaction term is negative. In other words, larger farmers
gain less from collective commercialization, in line with the existence of economies of scale
in commercialization albeit with decreasing marginal returns. Finally, column 4 assesses the
robustness of these findings by controlling for various individual and group characteristics.
While the sign of the coefficients remain, they are no longer statistically significant. Nevert-
heless, the coefficient on the direct effect of the intervention does indicate that providing
information on aggregate intentions led to a meaningful increase in groundnut revenues for
farmers in the treatment group.
    These results, combined with those in Section 5.1, point to the potential for a "coordination-
based poverty trap" that is characterized by three key facets. First, smaller (poorer) farmers
have more to gain from collective commercialization. Second, collective commercialization
requires a larger group of such small farmers to achieve coordination (i.e., to surpass the
threshold). Third, it is more difficult to achieve coordination in larger groups. In short, it
is precisely in larger groups consisting of more small farmers that coordination may be both
necessary and more difficult.


5.3     What information matters?
In order to assess whether the content of the information had an impact, we interact the
aggregate intended actions (A ) revealed by study participants with the main treatment;
i.e., whether or not this information was conveyed to the group (Table 9). Higher aggregate
intentions lead to higher quantities sold to the group, but only in cooperatives where such
information was revealed (column 2). First, this confirms that it is not just about "collecting
intentions", but also "revealing them". Second, this finding supports the view that cheap
talk helps farmers overcome coordination failure by shifting their beliefs.23 One caveat to
the analysis is that individual intentions and thus the aggregate, are endogenous, potentially
reflecting other characteristics of the groups in question. The results are robust, however, to
the inclusion of various individual and group characteristics (columns 3 and 4).
     The RCT design also included variations on the type of information that was provided,
which in turn allows us to explore which feature of aggregate intentions primarily enhances
coordination (recall Table 3). Table 10 presents the disaggregated impact of providing in-
formation on groundnut contributions to the cooperative, by informational treatment arm.
Similarly to Table 6, we correct for multiple hypothesis testing (MHT) using the Holm-
Bonferroni method. The adjusted p-values in square [..] brackets suggests that the main
results discussed below are robust, except for the direct effects estimated using administrative
  23
     We did not explicitly elicit individual-level beliefs as that would have significantly complicated the
implementation of the RCT.


                                                    21
data (column 5). As before, our falsification tests in columns 1 and 2 show no relationship
between one's intentions and the later provision of information. Results in column 3 indicate
that provision of information increased group contributions in all three Conditions (B­D),
although with significant differences in magnitude. In particular, while knowing others' ag-
gregate intention leads to higher contributions (Condition B), the effect is more than two
times larger in magnitude if one is also provided with the distribution of others' intentions
(Condition C).24
    Two potential mechanisms may be at play here. First, one may trust a given aggregate
more when it originates from a large number of individuals. For example, if farmers were
to find out that most of the aggregate came from one individual's intended contribution,
it would be reasonable to expect that this individual would be better off selling alone. So,
revealing the distribution of intentions may help individuals refine their expectations. Se-
cond, individuals in the group may exhibit interdependent preferences, with group members'
payoffs entering each others' utility functions, thus giving rise to social norms of equity and
fairness (e.g., Manski, 2000; Sobel, 2005). While these effects may exist even in the absence
of communication, they may be particularly salient when intentions and their distributions
are revealed since they can be interpreted as signaling what other players consider "the right
thing to do" (see for example Bernheim, 1994). Some examples of this type of norm and
information signaling are discussed by Vesterlund (2003), G¨     achter et al. (2010), and Hill
et al. (2012).25
    We find a smaller effect of revealing the distribution of intentions separately for leaders
versus ordinary members (Condition D) in comparison to the overall distribution (Condition
C). As mentioned previously, leaders may be perceived as having superior information relative
to ordinary members. In this case, that could mean that the leader for example has better
knowledge of current market conditions.26 So, it may be somewhat surprising that knowing
leaders' intentions leads to positive, but lower contributions to the cooperative relative to
  24
      In addition to the information that was revealed, our treatments differed from one another in the way
they were implemented. Since RCT Conditions C and D by design revealed "distributions of intentions"
also, their meetings were longer than those of RCT Conditions B and A (the control group). One could
argue that this extra time spent with farmers made the revealed intentions (or collective commercialization
generally) more salient; thus confounding the observed impacts. However, the large effect for RCT Condition
B (relative to A) suggests that there is a direct effect of the information that is provided. In practice, the
meetings for B were less than two minutes longer than those for A. Moreover, if time spent with subjects
were the main explanatory variable here, we would expect the impacts for C and D to be similar and if at
all, for D to have a greater impact than C, which is not the case.
   25
      The latter study in particular discusses how a norm of reciprocity can unravel in the presence of peer-
players' actions (as opposed to signals) in a rural context similar to the one discussed here.
   26
      Using data from 27 groundnut cooperatives in Senegal, Bernard et al. (2014) find that 75% of members
believed that the management committee (i.e., leaders) had better knowledge and information than ordinary
members on where to find good traders and/or current market and farm-gate prices for the region.



                                                     22
knowing the overall distribution (Condition C).
    To further unpack this finding, we conduct an analysis comparable to that in Table 9, but
now by informational treatment arm (see Table A10). First, we assess whether the average
amount that leaders or group ordinary members intend to sell matters. Second, we check
whether leaders' intentions being greater than those of ordinary members matters. In other
words, one reason why the impact of Condition D may be smaller than that of Condition
C is because ordinary members expect leaders to contribute significantly high amounts to
the group and upon learning that leaders' intentions do not match up with this, they reduce
their contributions. Table A10 suggests that the results are inconsistent with the above:
Information about aggregate intentions, the overall distribution, and the distribution by
leaders versus ordinary members matters; however, the actual quantities revealed do not
seem to matter. In other words, the findings do not support the idea that members in
Condition D may have been deceived by the intentions provided/revealed by leaders.


5.4     Participation in games and naturally-occurring behavior
Our design further enables us to assess how participation in the LFE coordination games
affected later behavior in the naturally-occurring RCT. After the LFEs, all participants were
asked to provide feedback regarding the game they had played. We had made sure that the
game was neutrally framed and that there was no reference to collective marketing at any
point. Still, many participants indicated that the coordination setting they had been faced
with closely aligned with the situation they faced when deciding whether or not to sell their
groundnut harvest through the cooperative. Recall that players were randomly selected from
the full list of members for their group, but that each session only gathered players who were
members of the same cooperative.27 Considering the above as well as a related literature
on transfer in coordination games (e.g., Cooper and Van Huyck, 2016), we hypothesize that
experiencing coordination games with members of one's group may affect one's expectations
vis-`
    a-vis group members in subsequent, naturally-occurring, collaborative contexts.
    We test for this in Table 11 where, in addition to the RCT treatment, we assess the
impact of one's participation in the LFEs. We find no such effect in columns 1 and 2, where
the dependent variable is one's intentions to commercialize collectively. In columns 3 and
4, however, we find a positive effect of participating in the LFEs, on top of the treatment
  27
    This decision was mainly driven by the fact that cooperatives are typically defined at the village level.
With villages sometimes being far apart, we thus chose to (1) organize each session in the village school
and (2) avoid further complications such as communicating decisions by phone as done by Hill et al. (2012).
In Table A11 we report tests for equality of characteristics between LFE participants and non-participants
within groups that were selected for the LFEs. Overall, the results show that the two samples are balanced
on most characteristics, except two which we control for in all related estimations.


                                                     23
effects that were previously identified. Importantly, there is no effect at the group level (i.e.,
whether the cooperative was selected for the LFEs), but there is a clear effect for whether
the individual was (randomly) selected for participation in the LFEs. In fact, the results
hold even when restricting our sample to only those cooperatives that were selected for the
LFEs. Furthermore, this effect is independent of the treatment: In column 7, we restrict our
sample to those cooperatives selected for the LFEs, but that belonged to the control group
in the RCT (where no intentions were revealed). The effects are large in magnitude, with
participation in the LFEs leading to an additional 74 kgs of groundnuts being contributed
to the cooperative during the (naturally-occurring) commercialization season.
    In summary, while the LFEs are a useful diagnostic tool to test our hypotheses in a highly
controlled environment, they seem to be more than just that. In our setting, participation in
the LFEs seems to improve farmers' understanding of the strategic complementarities that
exist, which in turn impacts collective commercialization. Alternatively, participation in the
games may have "fine-tuned" selected farmers' expectations about fellow group members'
subsequent behavior. Similar findings have been documented by Cardenas and Carpenter
(2005) and Turiansky (2017) and are consistent with arguments in favor of classroom ex-
periments (see for example a series of papers by Charles Holt and co-authors in Journal of
Economic Perspectives in the late 1990s), all of which support the case for potential learning
through lab experiments/LFEs. Our findings also contribute to the literature on generaliza-
bility of (lab) experiments (see for example Levitt and List, 2007; Al-Ubaydli and List, 2013;
Camerer, 2015; Viceisza, 2016, and the references within) and a growing set of studies that
combine findings from a spectrum of field experiments (see for example Barr et al., 2010;
Finan and Schechter, 2012; Stoop et al., 2012; Hoel et al., 2017).


6     Conclusions
This paper reports a two-tier study that tests select drivers of coordination among members
of farmer cooperatives (groundnut producers) in rural Senegal. We rely on (1) coordination
games (i.e., artefactual lab-in-the-field experiments) in which we can exogenously vary all
parameters of interest and (2) a naturally-occurring randomized controlled trial (i.e., a natu-
ral field experiment) where we cannot exogenously manipulate all parameters but that more
immediately points to policy. The main drivers tested across the two types of experiments
are (1) the presence of cheap talk/communication (in the form of members' revelation of
intended contributions/sales to the group prior to play/commercialization) and (2) its in-
teraction with the group's size (an interaction that remains underexplored according to for
example Feltovich and Grossman, 2015).

                                               24
   Consistent with our framework and select prior literature, we find the following:
  1. Cheap talk seems to increase coordination (specifically, sales through the cooperative),
     but primarily in larger groups. By exploiting the two-tier nature of our experimen-
     tal design, we are able to say with reasonable confidence that this group-size effect
     is primarily the result of reduced strategic uncertainty due to the presence of cheap
     talk. We also find that the content of cheap talk matters. For example, knowing the
     distribution of intentions leads to higher coordination than knowing the mere sum of
     intentions, possibly in line with the literatures on conformity and interdependent pre-
     ferences. Moreover and perhaps more surprisingly, knowing the distribution of leaders'
     intentions (versus that of ordinary members) yields somewhat lower impacts on coor-
     dination than knowing the overall distribution.
     These findings are relatively robust to (1) the use of different datasets (i.e., farmer
     self-reports in surveys as well as administrative booklets collected by farmer coopera-
     tives/groups); (2) several falsification tests that assess the effect of the intervention on
     (a) individuals' intentions collected prior to such intervention and (b) behavioral me-
     asures that should not be impacted by the treatment; and (3) corrections for multiple
     hypothesis testing.

  2. There is suggestive evidence that revelation of intentions leads to higher revenues from
     groundnut sales for smaller farmers. This is in line with certain policies to promote
     collective commercialization in the presence of imperfect (market) competition, parti-
     cularly when it concerns smaller farmers who are less able to negotiate better prices in
     such environments. This evidence also points to the potential for a "coordination-based
     poverty trap" in which coordination is more difficult where it is most needed.

  3. Participation in the LFEs (i.e., lab) impacts subsequent behavior in the RCT (i.e.,
     day-to-day environment). Those randomly selected to participate in the games were
     more likely to engage in collective commercialization, even though the games were
     neutrally framed. We hypothesize that this may be due to one or both of the following
     channels: (1) a "training" effect­i.e., participants better understand issues of strategic
     complementarities/uncertainty­and (2) an "expectation" effect­i.e., participants fine-
     tune their beliefs vis-`
                            a-vis group members when faced with day-to-day situations where
     strategic complementarity matters, for example collective commercialization. This
     finding relates to the literatures on transfer/learning and generalizability across the
     spectrum of (field) experiments.
    We conclude with a question that may be useful for guiding future work: Given the sim-
plicity of this intervention ­ i.e., collecting intentions and publicly revealing (some variants

                                              25
of) them ­ why did these cooperatives, and arguably others in Sub-Saharan Africa and else-
where, not come up with this potential solution to the coordination problem on their own?
In the words of Matsuyama (1997): "If the coordination problem were simple enough that
even the outsider, such as the economist and the bureaucrat, would know how to solve it, it
would have been taken care of a long time ago by those directly involved with the problem."
    If our intervention had missed the mark by reinventing the wheel, we would not have
observed relatively robust and consistent effects of cheap talk, particularly in large groups.
One possible explanation is that the study was carried out by "others" in an environment
that is characterized by important interpersonal ties. So, participants may have been more
willing to reveal their intended actions and believe the revealed intentions than had the
process been implemented by familiar peers who could have had "hidden agendas". If so,
this could in part reflect some lack of management capacity in these cooperatives. Future
research can continue to explore related issues.


References
Al-Ubaydli, O. and J. A. List (2013, November). On the generalizability of experimental
  results in economics: With a response to Camerer. Working Paper 19666, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Aldana, M., J. Ashby, G. Burpee, S. Ferris, G. Heinrich, C. Quiros, T. Remington, and
  K. Wilson (2007). The organization and development of farmer groups for agroenterprise:
  Conclusions from a CRS & RII-CIAT study tour in Asia, Africa and Latin America. CRS
  internal working paper.
Ashraf, N., X. Gin´e, and D. Karlan (2009). Finding missing markets (and a disturbing
  epilogue): Evidence from an export crop adoption and marketing intervention in Kenya.
  American Journal of Agricultural Economics 91 (4), 973­990.
Avoyan, A. and J. Ramos (2017). A road to efficiency through communication and commit-
  ment. Working paper.
Balliet, D. (2010). Communication and cooperation in social dilemmas: A meta-analytic
  review. Journal of Conflict Resolution 54 (1), 39­57.
Barr, A., A. Zeitlin, et al. (2010). Dictator games in the lab and in nature: External validity
  tested and investigated in Ugandan primary schools. Technical report, Centre for the
  Study of African Economies, University of Oxford.
Barrett, C. B. (2008). Smallholder market participation: Concepts and evidence from eastern
  and southern Africa. Food Policy 33 (4), 299 ­ 317.
Battalio, R., L. Samuelson, and J. Van Huyck (2001). Optimization incentives and coordi-
  nation failure in laboratory stag hunt games. Econometrica 69 (3), 749­764.

                                              26
Bergquist, L. F. (2017). Pass-through, competition, and entry in agricultural markets: Ex-
  perimental evidence from Kenya. UC Berkeley Mimeograph .

Bernard, T., L. S`
                 ene, A. C. G. Viceisza, and F. Wouterse (2014). Leaders needed: Experi-
  mental evidence from rural producer organizations in Senegal. Working paper.

Bernard, T., A. S. Taffesse, and E. Gabre-Madhin (2008). Impact of cooperatives on smallhol-
  ders' commercialization behavior: evidence from Ethiopia. Agricultural Economics 39 (2),
  147­161.

Bernheim, B. D. (1994). A theory of conformity. Journal of Political Economy 102 (5),
  841­877.

Binswanger, H. P. (1980). Attitudes toward risk: Experimental measurement in rural india.
  American Journal of Agricultural Economics 62 (3), 395.

Blume, A. and A. Ortmann (2007). The effects of costless pre-play communication: Expe-
  rimental evidence from games with pareto-ranked equilibria. Journal of Economic The-
  ory 132 (1), 274 ­ 290.

Brandts, J. and D. J. Cooper (2006, June). A change would do you good .... an experimental
  study on how to overcome coordination failure in organizations. American Economic
  Review 96 (3), 669­693.

Camerer, C. (2003). Behavioral Game Theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Camerer, C. F. (2015). The promise and success of lab-field generalizability in experimental
  economics: A critical reply to Levitt and List. In G. Frechette and A. Schotter (Eds.),
  Handbook of Experimental Economic Methodology. Oxford University Press.

Cardenas, J. C. and J. P. Carpenter (2005). Three Themes on Field Experiments and Eco-
  nomic Development, pp. 71­123.

Casaburi, L. and R. Macchiavello (2015). Loyalty, exit, and enforcement: Evidence from
  a Kenya dairy cooperative. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 105 (5),
  286­90.

Casaburi, L. and R. Macchiavello (2019, February). Demand and supply of infrequent pay-
  ments as a commitment device: Evidence from Kenya. American Economic Review 109 (2),
  523­55.

Casaburi, L. and T. Reed (2017). Competition in agricultural markets: An experimental
  approach. Working paper.

Caswell, N. (1984). Autopsie de l'ONCAD. Politique Africaine 14 (June), 39­73.

Charness, G. and B. Grosskopf (2004). What makes cheap talk effective? experimental
 evidence. Economics Letters 83, 383­389.

Cooper, D. J. and J. Van Huyck (2016). Coordination and transfer. Working paper.

                                            27
Cooper, D. J. and R. A. Weber (2019). Recent advances in experimental coordination games.
  Working paper.

Cooper, R., D. V. DeJong, R. Forsythe, and T. W. Ross (1992). Communication in coordi-
  nation games. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (2), 731­771.

Crawford, V. P. (1998). A survey of experiments on communication via cheap talk. Journal
  of Economic Theory 78, 286­298.

Devetag, G. and A. Ortmann (2007). When and why? a critical survey on coordination
  failure in the laboratory. Experimental Economics 10 (3), 331 ­ 344.

Dillon, B. and C. Dambro (2017). How competitive are crop markets in Sub-Saharan Africa?
  American Journal of Agricultural Economics 99 (5), 1344­1361.

Elfenbein, D. W., R. Fisman, and B. McManus (2018, March). Does cheap talk affect market
  outcomes? Evidence from eBay. Working Paper 24437, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Fafchamps, M. and R. V. Hill (2005). Selling at the farmgate or traveling to market. American
  Journal of Agricultural Economics 87 (3), 717­734.

Farrell, J. (1987). Cheap talk, coordination, and entry. Rand Journal of Economics 18,
  34­39.

Farrell, J. and M. Rabin (1996). Cheap talk. Journal of Economic Perspectives 10 (3),
  103­118.

Feltovich, N. and P. J. Grossman (2015). How does the effect of pre-play suggestions vary
  with group size? Experimental evidence from a threshold public-good game. European
  Economic Review 79 (C), 263­280.

Finan, F. and L. Schechter (2012). Vote-buying and reciprocity. Econometrica 80 (2), 863­
  881.

G¨
 achter, S., D. Nosenzo, E. Renner, and M. Sefton (2010). Sequential vs. simultaneous
 contributions to public goods: Experimental evidence. Journal of Public Economics 94 (7),
 515­522.

Goeree, J. and C. Holt (2002). Coordination games. Volume 2 of Encyclopedia of Cognitive
 Science, pp. 204?208. London: Nature Publishing Group, McMillan.

Harrison, G. W. and J. A. List (2004). Field experiments. Journal of Economic Litera-
  ture 42 (4), 1009­1055.

Heinemann, H., R. Nagel, and P. Ockenfels (2009). Measuring strategic uncertainty in
  coordination games. The Review of Economic Studies 76 (1), 181­221.

Hellin, J., M. Lundy, and M. Meijer (2007). Farmer organization, collective action and
  market access in Meso-America. CAPRi Working Paper 67.

                                             28
Hermalin, B. E. (1998). Toward an economic theory of leadership: Leading by example.
  American Economic Review , 1188­1206.

Hill, R., E. Maruyama, M. Olapade, and M. Fr¨  olich (2014). Strengthening producer organi-
  zations to increase market access of smallholder farmers in Uganda. Working paper.

Hill, R. V., E. Maruyama, and A. Viceisza (2012). Breaking the norm: An empirical inves-
  tigation into the unraveling of good behavior. Journal of Development Economics 99 (1),
  150­162.

Hoel, J. B., M. Hidrobo, T. Bernard, and M. Ashour (2017). Productive inefficiency in dairy
 farming and cooperation between spouses: Evidence from Senegal. IFPRI discussion paper
 1698.

Hoff, K. (2001). Beyond Rosenstein-Rodan: The modern theory of coordination problems
  in development. In Proceedings of the Annual World Bank Conference on Development
  Economics, 2000, pp. 145­188. Washington DC: World Bank.

Jack, B. K. and M. P. Recalde (2015). Leadership and the voluntary provision of public
  goods: Field evidence from Bolivia. Journal of Public Economics 122, 80­93.

Kets, W. and A. Sandroni (2017). A theory of strategic uncertainty and cultural diversity.
  Working paper.

Key, N., E. Sadoulet, and A. D. Janvry (2000). Transactions costs and agricultural household
  supply response. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 82 (2), 245­259.

Levitt, S. D. and J. A. List (2007). What do laboratory experiments measuring social
  preferences reveal about the real world? The Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, 153­
  174.

Maniadis, Z., F. Tufano, and J. A. List (2014, January). One swallow doesn't make a
 summer: New evidence on anchoring effects. American Economic Review 104 (1), 277­90.

Manski, C. F. (2000). Economic analysis of social interactions. The Journal of Economic
 Perspectives 14 (3), 115­136.

Matsuyama, K. (1997). Economic development as coordination problems. The Role of
 Government in East Asian Economic Development , 134­160.

Ochs, J. (1995). Chapter 3: Coordination problems. Handbook of Experimental Economics.
  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Potters, J., M. Sefton, and L. Vesterlund (2007). Leading-by-example and signaling in
  voluntary contribution games: an experimental study. Economic Theory , 169­182.

Ragasa, C. and J. Golan (2014). The role of rural producer organizations for agricultural
  service provision in fragile states. Agricultural Economics 45 (5), 537­553.



                                            29
Rapoport, A. and D. A. Seale (2008). Chapter 34 coordination success in non-cooperative
  large group market entry games. Volume 1 of Handbook of Experimental Economics Re-
  sults, pp. 273 ­ 295. Elsevier.

Rosenstein-Rodan, P. N. (1943). Problems of industrialisation of eastern and south-eastern
  europe. The Economic Journal 53 (210/211), 202­211.

Sobel, J. (2005). Interdependent preferences and reciprocity. Journal of economic litera-
  ture 43 (2), 392­436.

Stoop, J., C. N. Noussair, and D. van Soest (2012). From the lab to the field: Cooperation
  among fishermen. Journal of Political Economy 120 (6), 1027­1056.

Turiansky, A. (2017). Collective action in games as in life: Experimental evidence from canal
  cleaning in Haiti. Mathematica Policy Research Report.

Van Huyck, J. and R. Battalio (2008). Chapter 51 coordination failure in market statistic
  games. Volume 1 of Handbook of Experimental Economics Results, pp. 454 ­ 462. Elsevier.

Van Huyck, J. B., R. C. Battalio, and R. O. Beil (1990). Tacit coordination games, strategic
  uncertainty, and coordination failure. American Economic Review 80.

Vesterlund, L. (2003). The informational value of sequential fundraising. Journal of Public
  Economics 87 (3), 627­657.

Viceisza, A. C. G. (2016). Creating a lab in the field: Economics experiments for policyma-
  king. Journal of Economic Surveys 30 (5), 835­854.

Voors, M., T. Turley, A. Kontoleon, E. Bulte, and J. A. List (2012). Exploring whether
  behavior in context-free experiments is predictive of behavior in the field: Evidence from
  lab and field experiments in rural Sierra Leone. Economics Letters 114 (3), 308­311.

Wydick, B. (2007). Games in Economic Development. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
 sity Press.

Zwane, A. P., J. Zinman, E. Van Dusen, W. Pariente, C. Null, E. Miguel, M. Kremer, D. S.
  Karlan, R. Hornbeck, X. Gin´e, E. Duflo, F. Devoto, B. Crepon, and A. Banerjee (2011).
  Being surveyed can change later behavior and related parameter estimates. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (5), 1821­1826.




                                             30
Tables

                    Table 1: Sample distribution across RCT and LFEs


                      # of Cooperatives       # of farmers in survey        # farmers in admin data
 Was in LFEs?         No       Yes            No          Yes               No            Yes
RCT Condition A       10          7           114             80            320             207
RCT Condition B       15          6           173             68            640             201
RCT Condition C       14          6           160             59            360             276
RCT Condition D       14          7           156             72            418             331
    Total             53          26          603            279            1738            1015
                            Condition A is the control group in the RCT
             Conditions B, C, and D are treatment variations (see Section 4.2 or Table 3)




                     Table 2: Distribution of BCG and CCG variations

                            Variable       BCG            CCG      Total
                            # Sessions      28              28       56
                            # Rounds        112            110      222
                            # Players       429            410      839
                            # Observations 1716           1600     3316
                              BCG = Baseline Coordination Game
                            CCG = Communication Coordination Game




                                   Table 3: RCT treatments

   RCT Condition                             What is revealed?
        A                        ­                 ­                   ­
        B               Aggregate intentions       ­                   ­
        C               Aggregate intentions Distribution              ­
        D               Aggregate intentions Distribution      Leader vs. Member
    In all conditions, there was a training; intentions were collected; and a survey was conducted.




                                                 31
                                    Table 4: Balance tests with respect to the binary treatment - farmer level

                                                                     N          All   No communication         Communication        P-value of diff.
         Age                                                       882    46.27                      45.81                 46.40                0.58
         Sex (1=male; 0=female)                                    873     0.67                       0.70                  0.67                0.43
         Leader (1=yes, 0=no)                                      873     0.18                       0.22                  0.18                0.19
         Size of land (ha)                                         873     4.25                       3.89                  4.36                0.69
         Risk (1 to 5)                                             873     2.80                       2.81                  2.80                0.96
         Generosity (1 to 7)                                       873     2.92                       3.19                  2.84             0.00***
         Patience (1 to 5)                                         873     2.52                       2.50                  2.52                0.87
         Federation (1=CCPA, 0=FEGPAB)                             873     0.52                       0.47                  0.54                0.13
         PO exposed to lablike exp.: 1=yes; 0=no                   882     0.32                       0.41                  0.29             0.00***
         2013 harvest (kg)                                         873 1,680.85                   1,868.76              1,627.16                0.32




32
         Expected 2014 harvest (kg)                                873 1,628.10                   1,593.37              1,638.02                0.86
         Intended to coll. com. : 1=yes, 0=no                      873     0.84                       0.80                  0.85                0.10
         Intentions coll. com. (kg)                                873   966.43                     830.39              1,005.30                0.25
         Intentions indiv. com. (kg)                               873   148.05                     200.95                132.93                0.34
         Intentions consumption (kg)                               873   141.75                     207.62                122.93                0.09
         Intentions seeds stock (kg)                               873   303.12                     265.67                313.81                0.49
         Farmed other crops : 1=yes, 0=no                          873     0.57                       0.59                  0.57                0.55
         Attended int. revelation meeting: 1=yes; 0=no             882     0.59                       0.56                  0.59                0.44

     p-values in the last column are reported based on two-tailed t-tests and the standard errors are clustered at the group level. All variables were
     measured before the intervention, that is before revealing intentions. Generosity/social preference was elicited through a hypothetical dictator game
     (with a greater number indicating a more generous/altruistic individual); risk through a hypothetical Binswanger (1980)-style lottery (with a lower
     number indicating a more risk averse individual); and patience through typical, hypothetical preference-over-time questions (with a one-day front-end
     delay and a higher number indicating a less patient individual).
                               Table 5: Extensive margin: treatment effect on the probability of collective action


      Dependent variable        Contributed to group        Intended to contribute to group         Contributed to group        Contributed to group
      Source                            LFE                       RCT - survey data                  RCT - survey data           RCT - admin. data
                                 1           2                 3               4                      5           6               7          8
      Treatment                  0.03          -0.04          0.06                0.05                 0.07         -0.08        0.15          -0.21
                                (0.03)        (0.04)        (0.03)**              (0.06)              (0.05)        (0.09)       (0.10)        (0.21)
      Size of Group              0.03          -0.02          0.00                0.00                 0.01          0.00        -0.00         -0.01
                                (0.03)        (0.04)         (0.00)               (0.00)            (0.00)***       (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)**
      Treatment X Size                         0.11                               0.00                               0.01                      0.01
                                             (0.05)**                             (0.00)                            (0.00)*                  (0.01)**




33
      Control group mean        0.89          0.89            0.80                0.80                 0.13          0.13        0.27          0.27
      R2                         0.05         0.06            0.10                0.10                 0.16          0.16        0.08          0.09
      N                         3,316         3,316           873                 873                  873           873        2,752         2,752

     Notes:* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the group level. Columns 1 and 2 use data from the LFEs. The
     dependent variable is the number of chips. The size in those specifications is a dummy variable that is 1 if the experimental session was run with 20
     farmers and 0 if it was run with 10 farmers. Columns 3 and 4 use farmers' intended sales (of groundnuts) to the group, which were collected prior
     to the RCT interventions. Columns 5 and 6 use the self-reported (survey) collective commercialization. Columns 7 and 8 use administrative data on
     collective commercialization obtained from the cooperatives (recall booklets). In columns 3­8, size is the actual group size ranging from 4-91 (with
     median size being 24). Controls in the LFE regressions include age, sex, land size, education (dummy for going to a French school versus a Koranic or
     no schooling), generosity, risk aversion measures and time preferences elicited through hypothetical questions (recall Table 4), and dummies for the
     federation and whether the farmer is a leader. Controls in the RCT regressions with survey data include the same variables (except for education)
     and a dummy for whether the farmer produced crops other than groundnuts, all measured pre-intervention.
                  Table 6: Intensive margin: treatment effect on quantities contributed to the group (correcting for MHT)


      Dependent variable         # Chips contributed        Contribution intentions (kg)        Quantity contributed (kg)         Quantity contributed (kg)
      Source                            LFE                     RCT - survey data                  RCT - survey data                RCT - admin. data
      Treatment                   0.40         -0.03        239.66            307.57              121.07           -78.93         129.47           -153.42
                                 (0.19)**      (0.31)       (159.16)          (426.91)          (35.51)***         (63.31)        (70.70)*         (148.10)
                                  [.129]                                                          [.006]                           [.141]
      Size of Group               0.03         -0.31         -5.90             -3.72               7.18             0.75           -1.15            -9.30
                                  (0.24)       (0.27)        (5.57)            (10.15)           (1.85)***         (1.28)          (2.18)          (3.53)**
      Treatment X Size                          0.65                           -2.44                                7.19                            8.83
                                               (0.38)*                         (11.62)                            (2.23)***                        (3.57)**
                                               [.142]                                                               [.009]                          [.062]
      Control group mean          3.03         3.03         830.39            830.39              39.58            39.58          123.79           123.79




34
      R2                           0.09         0.10         0.43              0.43                0.17             0.18            0.08             0.09
      N                           3,316        3,316         873               873                 873              873            2,752            2,752

     Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. Standard errors are clustered at the group level. Holm-Bonferroni adjusted p-values are in square brackets.
     The correction for MHT is done for the direct impact of the treatment and the interaction with group size, across all specifications. Columns 1 and
     2 use data from the LFEs. The dependent variable is the number of chips. The size in those specifications is a dummy variable that is 1 if the
     experimental session was run with 20 farmers and 0 if it was run with 10 farmers. Columns 3 and 4 use farmers' intended sales (of groundnuts) to the
     group, which were collected prior to the RCT interventions. Columns 5 and 6 use the self-reported (survey) collective commercialization. Columns 7
     and 8 use administrative data on collective commercialization obtained from the cooperatives (recall booklets). In columns 3­8, the dependent variable
     is the quantity of groundnuts sold through the group and the size is the actual group size ranging from 4-91 (with median size being 24). Controls
     in the LFE regressions include age, sex, land size, education (dummy for going to a French school versus a Koranic or no schooling), generosity, risk
     aversion measures and time preferences elicited through hypothetical questions (recall Table 4), and dummies for the federation and whether the
     farmer is a leader. Controls in the RCT regressions with survey data include the same variables (except for education) and a dummy for whether the
     farmer produced crops other than groundnuts, all measured pre-intervention. A dummy for whether the individual indicated positive intentions to
     sell through the group is also added.
         Table 7: Isolating the effect of group size from that of the threshold (LFEs)

         Dependent variable                                    # Chips contributed
         Source (recall Section 4.1)                                  LFE
         Treatment                           0.40          -0.03    0.22     -0.03    0.36     -0.02
                                           (0.19)**        (0.31)   (0.21)   (0.30)   (0.24)   (0.29)
         Size of Group                       0.03          -0.31    -0.27    -0.53    -0.00    -0.38
                                            (0.24)         (0.27)   (0.21)   (0.35)   (0.23)   (0.25)
         Treatment X Size                                  0.65              0.53               0.77
                                                          (0.38)*            (0.41)            (0.44)*
         Control group mean                         3.03                 3.09               3.09
         R2                                  0.09          0.10     0.08     0.09      0.11     0.12
         N                                  3,316         3,316     2,116 2,116       2,320 2,320
         Fixed threshold?                            No             Yes - Average     Yes - Overall

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. Standard errors are clustered at the group level. All columns
use data from the LFEs. The dependent variable is the number of chips. The size in all specifications is
a dummy variable that is 1 if the experimental session was run with 20 farmers and 0 if it was run with
10 farmers. Columns 1 and 2 use data from all LFEs regardless of the threshold required for coordination.
Columns 3 and 4 only use data from the LFEs where the average (per-player) number of chips required
to reach the threshold was the same across large and small groups. Columns 5 and 6 only use data from
the LFEs where the overall threshold was fixed across small and large groups. Controls in the regressions
include age, sex, land size, education (dummy for going to a French school versus a Koranic or no schooling),
generosity, risk aversion measures and time preferences elicited through hypothetical questions (recall Table
4), and dummies for the federation and whether the farmer is a leader.




                                                      35
                         Table 8: Effect on revenues from groundnut sales

             Dependent variable                   Revenues from groundnut sales (FCFA)
             Source                                         RCT - survey data
             Treatment                            15.57      185.11         7.91        61.05
                                                  (73.25)   (56.22)***     (51.46)     (39.07)
             Size of land (ha)                     3.48       45.62         0.85        14.28
                                                  (3.55)     (20.68)**     (1.16)      (16.38)
             Treatment X Land size (ha)                       -43.33                   -13.70
                                                             (20.83)**                 (16.47)
             Control group mean                                          233.66
             R2                                    0.01        0.06         0.34         0.34
             N                                     868         868           868         868
             Controls                               No          No           Yes         Yes

Notes: p < 0.1;   p < 0.05;   p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the group level. The dependent
variable in all the regressions is the total revenue from selling groundnuts in thousands of FCFA (1000
FCFA was approximately equivalent to US$2 at the time of the study). The last column adds as control
variables age, sex, land size, generosity, risk aversion and time preference (recall Table 4), cooperative size,
dummies for the federation, whether the farmer is a leader, and whether the farmer produced crops other
than groundnuts, all measured pre-intervention, as well as a dummy for whether the farmer indicated positive
intentions to sell through the group.




                                                      36
                Table 9: Collective commercialization and aggregate intentions

         Dependent variable                                      Contributed to group
         Source                                                   RCT - survey data
         Treatment                                    91.90        -16.87       121.66       50.55
                                                     (37.79)**     (36.80)     (34.92)***    (35.13)
         Aggregate intentions (tonnes)                 3.41        -0.49            0.58      -1.83
                                                     (1.08)***     (0.51)           (1.46)    (1.29)
         Treatment X Aggregate intentions                           4.59                      2.96
                                                                  (1.42)***                  (1.44)**
         Control group mean                                                 39.58
         R2                                            0.08         0.10            0.17      0.18
         N                                             873          873             873       873
         Controls?                                      No           No             Yes       Yes

Notes: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the group level. The
dependent variable is the quantity of groundnuts sold through the group. Aggregate intentions (in tonnes)
are obtained as the sum of the individual intentions reported by farmers. Controls include age, sex, land
size, generosity, risk aversion measures and time preferences elicited through hypothetical questions (recall
Table 4), cooperative size, and dummies for the federation, whether the farmer is a leader, and whether the
farmer produced crops other than groundnuts, all measured pre-intervention. A dummy for whether the
individual indicated positive intentions to sell through the group is also added.




                                                     37
                                 Table 10: Effect on quantity sold by treatment condition (correcting for MHT)

               Dependent variable          Contribution intentions (kg)        Quantity contributed (kg)         Quantity contributed (kg)
               Source                          RCT - survey data                  RCT - survey data                RCT - admin. data
               B                           224.66            384.10              76.54           -154.33           94.56          -349.51
                                           (158.64)          (391.49)           (38.01)**        (92.63)*         (83.92)         (178.26)*
               C                           186.43            391.81              169.47          -141.87          117.05          -124.39
                                           (207.98)          (530.65)          (57.39)***        (61.45)**        (88.38)         (175.38)
               D                           207.89             72.79              121.45           46.96           177.40            -4.59
                                           (168.65)          (422.89)           (47.96)**         (71.45)        (84.32)**        (156.30)
               Joint significance (p)                                             [.029]                           [.226]
               Size of Group                -6.20             -4.60               7.39             1.26            -1.17            -8.74
                                            (5.46)            (9.78)            (1.81)***         (1.29)           (2.19)         (3.43)**
               B X Size                                       -5.41                                8.14                            12.89




38
                                                              (10.52)                            (3.48)**                         (4.18)***
               C X Size                                       -7.69                               11.40                             7.70
                                                              (14.01)                            (2.28)***                        (3.60)**
               D X Size                                        4.30                                3.01                             6.28
                                                              (12.43)                             (2.06)                           (3.73)*
               Joint significance (p)                                                              [.000]                           [.019]
               Control group mean          830.39            830.39              39.58            39.58           123.79           123.79
               R2                           0.44              0.44                0.18             0.21             0.09            0.10
               N                            873               873                 873              873             2,752            2,752

     Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. Standard errors are clustered at the group level. Holm-Bonferroni adjusted p-values are in square brackets.
     The correction for MHT is done for the direct impact of the treatment and the interaction with group size, across all specifications. The first two
     columns test the experimental integrity using intentions of collective sales. The other columns use as the dependent variable the total sales, from
     survey (3 and 4) and administrative data (5 and 6) respectively. Size is the actual group size ranging from 4-91 (with median size being 24). Controls
     in the regression with survey data include age, sex, land size, generosity, risk aversion, and time preferences (recall Table 4), and dummies for the
     federation, whether the farmer is a leader, and whether the farmer produced crops other than groundnuts, all measured pre-intervention. A dummy
     for whether the farmer indicated positive intentions to sell through the group is also included for columns 3 to 6.
                                                Table 11: Participation in LFEs and behavior in RCT


      Dependent variable                   Contribution intentions (kg) Quantity contributed (kg)                   Quantity contributed (kg)
      Sample                                                   All Cooperatives                                  Game Cooperatives     Control
                                                                                                                                     Cooperatives
      Farmer was in LFEs                   -136.32           -181.08              68.60            95.83           73.27        92.20           74.17
                                           (367.59)          (174.88)            (63.71)         (43.26)**        (66.81)     (43.83)**       (33.96)**
      Group was in LFEs                     15.19             151.03             110.59            49.44                                        -3.93
                                           (412.55)          (162.18)            (68.91)          (53.55)                                       (17.96)
      Treatment                            151.17             204.15             130.40           122.53          204.01       140.04




39
                                           (264.67)          (152.32)          (38.22)***       (36.01)***       (87.41)**    (66.63)**
      LFEs non participants mean           996.49             996.49              88.40            88.40          181.46       181.46           10.75
      R2                                    0.01               0.44                0.05             0.18           0.04         0.25             0.23
      N                                     873                873                 882              873            279          279              194
      Controls                               No                Yes                  No              Yes             No          Yes              Yes


     Notes: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the group level. In the first two columns, intentions on collective
     commercialization (in kg) are used as the dependent variable. For all other regressions, the dependent variable is the actual quantity sold through
     the cooperative. All regressions include as controls age, sex, land size, generosity, risk aversion, and time preferences (recall Table 4), cooperative
     size, and dummies for the federation, whether the farmer is a leader, and whether the farmer produced crops other than groundnuts, all measured
     pre-intervention.
Appendix

                              Figure A1: LFEs, visual aids




       Table A1: Distribution of N , T , H and uncertainty variations in LFEs

 Variable            N                        T                        HUncertainty
                 10       20      40    50          80 100 2,500 3,000 yes       no
 Variation at   Session level         Round       level     Round level Session level
 Sessions        28       28      56    56          56 56    56     56    28     28
 Rounds          112     110       86   86          24 26    111   111   108     114
 Observations   1,120 2,196      1,160 1,160        478 518 1,658 1,658 1,720 1,596




            Table A2: Correlation between parameter variations in LFEs

                Variable        CCG      N         T       H      Uncertainty
                CCG             1.00
                N               -0.08    1.00
                T               -0.05   0.51* 1.00
                H               0.00     0.00 0.00        1.00
                Uncertainty     0.04    -0.02 -0.01      -0.00         1.00
                        CCG = communication coordination game.
                      * Significantly different from 0 at the 10% level.




                                             40
                               Table A3: Balance tests with respect to the treatment conditions - farmer level

                                                                N       All          A          B           C           D       P-value of diff.
       Age                                                     882   46.27    45.81    46.90               47.98    44.53            0.04**
       Sex (1=male; 0=female)                                  873    0.67     0.70     0.64               0.71     0.65              0.35
       Leader (1=yes, 0=no)                                    873    0.18     0.22     0.18                0.17    0.17              0.60
       Size of land (ha)                                       873    4.25     3.89     5.53               3.67     3.76              0.45
       Risk (1 to 5)                                           873   2.80     2.81     2.72                2.85     2.85              0.79
       Generosity (1 to 7)                                     873   2.92     3.19     2.88                2.64     3.00            0.00***
       Patience (1 to 5)                                       873   2.52     2.50     2.54                2.70     2.32              0.17




41
       Federation (1=CCPA, 0=FEGPAB)                           873    0.52     0.47     0.53               0.54     0.53              0.50
       Group exposed to lablike exp.: 1=yes; 0=no              882   0.32      0.41    0.28                0.27     0.33            0.01***
       2013 harvest (kg)                                       873 1,680.85 1,868.76 1,395.65            1,855.39 1,653.70            0.29
       Expected 2014 harvest (kg)                              873 1,628.10 1,593.37 1,748.09            1,670.35 1,484.56            0.82
       Intended to coll. com. : 1=yes, 0=no                    873   0.84     0.80     0.87                0.84     0.85              0.34
       Intentions coll. com. (kg)                              873 966.43    830.39   966.20             1,068.47 985.15              0.64
       Intentions indiv. com. (kg)                             873 148.05    200.95   205.02              123.58    62.95             0.26
       Farmed other crops : 1=yes, 0=no                        873    0.57     0.59     0.61               0.57     0.53              0.29
       Attended int. revelation meeting: 1=yes; 0=no           882   0.59      0.56    0.56                0.60     0.61              0.70

     The p-values in last column are obtained by running a one-way ANOVA test using STATA, with standard errors clustered at the group level.
                                                Table A4: Comparing large and small cooperatives

                                                                 N       All      Small Cooperatives        Large Cooperatives       P-value of diff.
      Age                                                       882   46.27                46.59                    45.99                  0.60
      Sex (1=male; 0=female)                                    873    0.67                 0.71                     0.64                  0.37
      Leader (1=yes, 0=no)                                      873    0.18                 0.18                     0.19                  0.83
      Size of land (ha)                                         873    4.25                 4.13                     4.36                  0.81
      Risk (1 to 5)                                             873   2.80                 2.74                      2.86                  0.37
      Generosity (1 to 7)                                       873   2.92                 2.89                      2.94                  0.77
      Patience (1 to 5)                                         873   2.52                 2.56                     2.48                   0.61
      Federation (1=CCPA, 0=FEGPAB)                             873    0.52                 0.33                     0.69                0.00***




42
      Coop exposed to lablike exp.: 1=yes; 0=no                 882   0.32                 0.27                      0.36                  0.39
      2013 harvest (kg)                                         873 1,680.85             1,780.21                 1,592.46                 0.54
      Expected 2014 harvest (kg)                                873 1,628.10             1,663.21                 1,596.86                 0.87
      Intended to coll. com. : 1=yes, 0=no                      873   0.84                 0.81                      0.87                 0.08*
      Intentions coll. com. (kg)                                873 966.43                972.34                   961.17                  0.96
      Intentions indiv. com. (kg)                               873 148.05                170.02                   128.50                  0.58
      Farmed other crops : 1=yes, 0=no                          873    0.57                 0.59                     0.56                  0.55
      Attended int. revelation meeting: 1=yes; 0=no             882   0.59                  0.62                     0.55                  0.11

       p < .01,   p < .05, p < .1 p-values in the last column are reported from two-tailed t-tests and the standard errors are clustered at the group
     level. Cooperatives are divided at the median size (24 members) into large and small. All the variables were measured before the intervention, that
     is before revealing intentions. Recall Table 4 for definitions of generosity/social preferences, risk preferences, and patience/time preferences.
                Table A5: Effect on collective commercialization - Tobit model

                   Dependent variable                    Contributed to group
                   Source                                 RCT - survey data
                   Treatment                  278.60        -622.40    460.23      -88.53
                                              (295.31)      (550.79)   (258.33)*   (512.10)
                   Size of Group               27.50         -2.87      25.79       7.97
                                             (6.20)***      (15.59)    (6.50)***   (15.38)
                   Treatment X Size                         31.70                  18.94
                                                            (16.94)*               (16.57)
                   Control group mean                            39.58
                   Pseudo R2                    0.03         0.03      0.04         0.04
                   N                            882          873       873          873
                   Control                       No           No       Yes          Yes

Notes: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01. The table shows the estimations of the main equation of
interest (collective commercialization on treatment) using a Tobit model for the null quantities reported.
The dependent variable is the quantity of groundnuts sold through the group. Controls include age, sex, land
size, generosity, risk aversion measures and time preferences elicited through hypothetical questions (recall
Table 4), and dummies for the federation, whether the farmer is a leader, and whether the farmer produced
crops other than groundnuts, all measured pre-intervention. A dummy for whether the individual indicated
positive intentions to sell through the group is also added.




                                                       43
 Table A6: Effect on collective commercialization - inverse hyperbolic sine transformation

                    Dependent variable                   Contributed to group
                    Source                                RCT - survey data
                    Treatment                    0.42        -1.13         0.64        -0.52
                                                (0.39)       (0.68)       (0.34)*      (0.63)
                    Size of Group                0.05        -0.00         0.05        0.01
                                               (0.01)***     (0.02)      (0.01)***     (0.02)
                    Treatment X Size                         0.06                      0.04
                                                           (0.02)**                  (0.02)*
                    Control group mean                           39.58
                    R2                           0.10        0.11      0.17            0.17
                    N                            882         873       873             873
                    Control                       No          No       Yes             Yes
                                     * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01


Notes: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the group level. The dependent
variable is the quantity of groundnuts sold through the group, transformed by the inverse hyperbolic sine.
Controls include age, sex, land size, generosity, risk aversion measures and time preferences elicited through
hypothetical questions (recall Table 4), and dummies for the federation, whether the farmer is a leader, and
whether the farmer produced crops other than groundnuts, all measured pre-intervention. A dummy for
whether the individual indicated positive intentions to sell through the group is also added.



     Table A7: PSP estimates: LFE cheap-talk effect in Table 6 - column 1 ( = 0.66)

                                  k=1       k=2         k=5      k = 10 k = 15
                          
                          0.01    0.118 0.084 0.043              0.025         0.018
                          0.02    0.212 0.156 0.082              0.048         0.037
                          0.05    0.410 0.323 0.188              0.116         0.089
                          0.1     0.595 0.502 0.328              0.217         0.172
                          0.2     0.767 0.694 0.524              0.384         0.318
                          0.3     0.850 0.795 0.653              0.516         0.444
                          0.35    0.877 0.830 0.703              0.573         0.501
                          0.55    0.942 0.917 0.843              0.753         0.695
                                                  (1- k )
                          Note: P SP =   (1- k ) +[1-(1-)k ](1- )
                                                                  ,   where:
                          typical power = 1 -  ,       = 0.05,         = a prior
                          k represents the number of independent researchers
                          working on specific associations in a field
                          (i.e., competition)



                                                     44
Table A8: PSP estimates: RCT cheap-talk effect in Table 6 - column 5 ( = 0.99)

                       k=1       k=2       k=5       k = 10 k = 15
                
                0.01   0.167 0.094 0.043             0.025    0.018
                0.02   0.288 0.173 0.083             0.048    0.037
                0.05   0.510 0.351 0.189             0.116    0.089
                0.1    0.688 0.533 0.329             0.217    0.172
                0.2    0.832 0.719 0.525             0.384    0.318
                0.3    0.895 0.815 0.655             0.516    0.444
                0.35   0.914 0.847 0.704             0.573    0.501
                0.55   0.960 0.926 0.844             0.753    0.695
                Note: See Table A7 for definition of P SP .




                                          45
   Table A9: Robustness check: effect of the treatment on patience, generosity and risk

     Dependent variable (recall Table 4)             Patience          Generosity             Risk
     Source                                                           RCT - survey
     Binary treatment
     Treatment                                     -0.15     -0.14     0.08     0.09      0.17     0.40
                                                   (0.11)    (0.28)    (0.10)   (0.20)   (0.11)    (0.33)
     Size of Group                                 -0.00     -0.00     0.00     0.00     -0.00     0.00
                                                   (0.00)    (0.01)    (0.00)   (0.01)   (0.00)    (0.01)
     Treatment X Size                                        -0.00              -0.00              -0.01
                                                             (0.01)             (0.01)             (0.01)
         2
     R                                              0.07      0.07     0.08     0.08      0.04     0.04
     N                                              873       873      873      873       873      873
     Treatment arms
     B                                             -0.12     -0.04     0.11     0.16      0.18     0.44
                                                   (0.13)    (0.32)    (0.12)   (0.26)   (0.13)    (0.35)
     C                                             -0.29     -0.22     0.04     -0.03     0.08     0.30
                                                  (0.14)**   (0.32)    (0.12)   (0.25)   (0.16)    (0.37)
     D                                             -0.04     -0.15     0.08     0.16      0.23     0.48
                                                   (0.14)    (0.32)    (0.13)   (0.24)   (0.14)*   (0.38)
     Size of Group                                 -0.00     -0.00     0.00     0.00     -0.01     0.00
                                                   (0.00)    (0.01)    (0.00)   (0.01)   (0.00)    (0.01)
     B X Size                                                -0.00              -0.00              -0.01
                                                             (0.01)             (0.01)             (0.01)
     C X Size                                                -0.00              0.00               -0.01
                                                             (0.01)             (0.01)             (0.01)
     D X Size                                                 0.00              -0.00              -0.01
                                                             (0.01)             (0.01)             (0.01)
     Control group mean                             1.84      1.84     3.10     3.10      2.15     2.15
     R2                                             0.07      0.07     0.08     0.08      0.04     0.04
     N                                              873       873      873      873       873      873

Notes:* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0. Standard errors are clustered at the group level. Recall Table 4 for
definitions of generosity/social preferences, risk preferences, and patience/time preferences. All dependent
variables were measured after the intervention and in the same way they were measured before the inter-
vention. Their values pre-intervention are used as controls in the regressions. Additional controls include
age, sex, land size, and dummies for the federation, whether the farmer is a leader, and whether the farmer
produced crops other than groundnuts, all measured pre-intervention.




                                                     46
                Table A10: Collective commercialization and leader's intentions

 Dependent variable                                                     Contributed to group
 Source                                                                  RCT - survey data
 B                                                            73.39       108.56        57.59        88.06
                                                              (48.97)    (43.60)**      (44.72)    (40.47)**
 C                                                           133.66       169.72        148.73      181.64
                                                            (56.57)**   (54.83)***     (60.85)**   (58.72)***
 D                                                           125.63       144.68        70.84       117.12
                                                             (63.79)*    (59.99)**      (43.04)    (45.77)**
 Average intentions leader                                     0.06        0.07
                                                              (0.04)      (0.04)*
 Average intentions simple member                             -0.04        -0.06
                                                              (0.03)      (0.03)*
 D X Average intentions leader                                 0.06        0.03
                                                              (0.07)       (0.08)
 D X Average intentions simple member                         -0.10        -0.06
                                                              (0.07)       (0.08)
 Difference intentions leader - simple member  0                                        46.66        49.67
                                                                                        (49.42)     (45.38)
 D X difference  0                                                                      43.34        6.62
                                                                                        (72.45)     (71.19)
 Size of Group                                                 7.14        6.97             7.52     7.19
                                                            (2.03)***    (2.18)***     (1.96)***   (1.92)***
 Control group mean                                                                 39.58
 R2                                                            0.15        0.19             0.14     0.18
 N                                                             868         868              868      868
 Control                                                        No         Yes               No      Yes

Notes: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the group level. The
dependent variable is the quantity of groundnuts sold through the group. Average intentions are used as an
explanatory variable. This information was only revealed in the RCT Group D. Controls include age, sex,
land size, generosity, risk aversion measures and time preferences elicited through hypothetical questions
(recall Table 4), and dummies for the federation, whether the farmer is a leader, and whether the farmer
produced crops other than groundnuts, all measured pre-intervention. A dummy for whether the individual
indicated positive intentions to sell through the group is also added.




                                                   47
                         Table A11: Comparing farmers attending games to farmers not attending, within LFE coops

                                                                                                   Farmers in games
                                                                                N        All         No        Yes         P-value of diff.
                    Age                                                        279   45.05    46.85    44.44                    0.07*
                    Sex (1=male; 0=female)                                     279    0.65     0.61     0.66                     0.45
                    Leader (1=yes, 0=no)                                       279    0.19     0.10     0.23                   0.00***
                    Size of land (ha)                                          279    3.96     3.36     4.17                     0.26
                    Risk (1 to 5)                                              279   2.96     2.79     3.02                      0.19
                    Generosity (1 to 7)                                        279   3.16     3.01     3.21                      0.30
                    Patience (1 to 5)                                          279   2.44     2.46     2.43                      0.87
                    Federation (1=CCPA, 0=FEGPAB)                              279   0.40     0.52     0.36                      0.14




48
                    2013 harvest (kg)                                          279 1,807.42 1,537.59 1,899.52                    0.40
                    Expected 2014 harvest (kg)                                 279 1,432.58 1,585.80 1,380.28                    0.65
                    Intended to coll. com. : 1=yes, 0=no                       279   0.86     0.86     0.87                      0.91
                    Intentions coll. com. (kg)                                 279 916.64 1,052.35 870.32                        0.61
                    Intentions indiv. com. (kg)                                279   71.65    54.79    77.40                     0.56
                    Farmed other crops : 1=yes, 0=no                           279    0.66     0.68     0.66                     0.80
                    Attended int. revelation meeting: 1=yes; 0=no              279   0.72      0.59     0.77                   0.00***

     Notes:   p < .01,   p < .05, p < .1 p-values in the last column are reported from two-tailed t-tests, and the standard errors are clustered at
     group level. Only cooperatives that took part in the LFEs are considered here. All members did not take part, and those who took part were chosen
     randomly. The table compares those two categories of farmers, within cooperatives exposed to LFEs. All the variables were measured before the
     intervention, that is before revealing intentions. Recall Table 4 for definitions of generosity/social preferences, risk preferences, and patience/time
     preferences.
