                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               STRATEGIC SORTING:
                       THE ROLE OF ORDEALS IN HEALTH CARE

                                    Richard J. Zeckhauser

                                     Working Paper 26041
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26041


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019




Lorae Stojanovic provided excellent research assistance. Albert Nichols, Maryaline Catillon and
Anselm Dannecker provided insightful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Strategic Sorting: The Role of Ordeals in Health Care
Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 26041
July 2019
JEL No. H21,H24,I13

                                          ABSTRACT

Ordeals are burdens placed on individuals that yield no direct benefits to others. They represent a
dead-weight loss. Ordeals ­ the most common being waiting time ­ play a prominent role in
health care. Their goal is to direct scarce resources to recipients receiving greater value from
them, hence presumed to be more willing to bear an ordeal's burden. Ordeals are intended to
prevent wasteful expenditures given that health care is heavily subsidized, yet avoid other forms
of rationing, such as quotas or pricing. This analysis diagnoses the economic underpinnings of
ordeals. Subsidies to nursing home versus home care illustrate.


Richard J. Zeckhauser
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu
1. Ordeals and the Special Nature of Health Care


In economic terminology, ordeals are burdens placed on individuals that yield no direct benefits

to others. An ordeal causes what economists call a dead-weight loss (DWL). Some examples of

ordeals include requirements that food stamp recipients go through tedious procedures to

enroll, that doctors fill out elaborate forms before expensive procedures, or that disabled

individuals have to stay in nursing homes to receive subsidies not available for home care.

Positing that the ordeal is purposeful, the goal in each case, often unstated, is to direct scarce

resources to more deserving recipients. In many cases, "deserving" means "fewer and more

desperate." Stigma may also serve as an ordeal, even if unintended. Thus, for example, there

may be some shame associated with receiving care at a free clinic.


The artist who is a child of affluent parents may opt not to go through tedious procedures to get

food stamps; the doctor may decide not to fill out forms if the value of the procedure to the

patient is not worth the administrative burden; an incapacitated individual with an at-home

caregiver may receive more comfortable but much less subsidized home care; and a middle

class individual may steer clear of any stigma from care at the free-clinic. Ordeals are often

imposed in traditional commercial settings, such as by an employer assessing the commitment

of employees, but our concern is with ordeals in the healthcare arena. The ultimate saved

resource is usually dollars from the government or from a nonprofit organization concerned

with social welfare.


The vast majority of resources in our society ­ such as television sets, apartments, and lawyer

hours ­ are allocated to the individuals who are willing and able to pay market prices. But


                                                                                                     2
health care has a different status in American society, and even more so in most other

developed nations. Health care is broadly viewed as a right or an entitlement. At time of

purchase, expenditures on health care are massively subsidized by others. The United States

government pays the overwhelming bill for the poor and the elderly. Most middle-class

individuals have health plans that are heavily subsidized by their employers and by tax policy.

The consumption of almost all expensive health care is covered by some form of insurance.

Hence, a cascade of subsidies spills into most significant healthcare purchases.


The philosophy that underlies identifying health care as special and worthy of heavy subsidy,

both through insurance and through the subsidization of insurance premiums, is not our

concern here. Rather, we are concerned with the second-best policies that follow when

purchases are heavily subsidized. Given that the prices consumers pay are well below the value

of the resources they receive, there will be a strong tendency to have health care overused and

excessively expensive. The worried well will go to the doctor too often. Slightly injured

individuals will go to the emergency room when a walk-in clinic visit would use far fewer

resources. And doctors will order excessive tests, since their patients will suffer little financial

penalty.


Given these wasteful outcomes, governments and healthcare plans have imposed elaborate

sets of rules as to who can seek what care, with what subsidy, and in what setting. Ordeals

comprise one strong component of those rules. The often unstated objective of these

restrictions in general, and of ordeals in particular, is to direct care to those who will benefit




                                                                                                       3
from it the most. 1 However, there may be information that predicts benefit that is

unobservable to, or unacceptable to employ by, those delivering the care. Given this situation,

an ordeal may be a second-best device that does the sorting that could otherwise be

accomplished utilizing full information.


Despite these rules, and the resource-withholding effects of ordeals, our society still spends a

vast amount on health care. It consumed 18% of U.S. GDP in 2017. 2 Other countries, such as

Canada (11.3% of GDP in 2018) 3 and the United Kingdom (10% of GDP in 2016) 4, spent much

less overall. That is despite the fact that, with few exceptions, patients in Canada and the UK

are not subject to the copayments and deductibles for doctor visits and hospital stays that limit

utilization in the United States. Mean per capita spending on health in the U.S. is also much

higher ($9403) than in Canada ($4641) and in the UK ($3377) 5, albeit in part because input

prices for health care are higher. It is not surprising that the waiting time for treatment in

those two countries, an exemplar of an ordeal, is much longer than in the US.




1 Ordeals are a first cousin to what economists refer to as signaling devices. See Spence (1973). A
famous result in the signaling literature is that, even if college offered no value, individuals might still
incur the expense of attending as a way to convey to the market that they are high-quality individuals.
In parallel fashion, less affluent individuals may accept suffering a dead-weight ordeal to qualify for a
valuable benefit, such as subsidized health care.
2 See National Health Expenditure Data (2018).
3 See National Health Expenditure Trends, 1975 to 2018 (2018).
4 See UK Health Accounts ­ Office for National Statistics (2016).
5 See Papanicolas, Woskie and Jha (2018: 1024).


                                                                                                               4
1.1 When a Burden is Not an Ordeal?


When calling medical offices, or other organizations, one often has to work one's way through

an elaborate phone tree. That is surely a burden on the consumer. But if the medical office, or

the other organization is saving more on personnel costs than the caller would pay to engage

with a human, then the burden is not an ordeal. Resources are being saved. The primary

purpose is to serve efficiency, not to discourage utilization. Hence, such a burden is not an

ordeal.


1.2 Alternatives to Ordeals as Rationing Devices in Health Care


Ordeals address the need for rationing, given the massive subsidies for most healthcare

purchases. But there remain some areas of significant medical expenditure where society

continues to rely heavily on the market. In many respects, going to the dentist or to the plastic

surgeon is not unlike going to any of the vast array of doctors. However, ordeals at the former

are much more modest than they are with most physician encounters. One rarely has to wait

long times to see a dentist or plastic surgeon. The respective reasons, I propose, are that dental

insurance is less widespread than medical insurance and usually offers less full coverage, and

that many plastic surgery procedures are considered to be purely cosmetic, and hence are not

covered. No one will be trying to limit the use of services where the consumer pays the full bill.


Viagra presents an interesting subsidies case. In many jurisdictions, it is not covered when used

to promote sexual function. Presumably, and perhaps prudishly, in those locales, Viagra is

classified as an elective treatment, not unlike cosmetic surgery. However, its purchase is

covered if it is employed for many other medical purposes. An efficiency perspective, by


                                                                                                  5
contrast, would cover Viagra for patients with a high willingness to pay. Presumably, an

elaborate application process, perhaps required on an annual basis, could separate the high-

from the low-value users of Viagra.


1.3 Cost-Effectiveness Analysis as an Alternative to Ordeals


Healthcare utilization can be restricted in other ways beyond dollars and ordeals. Policy

analysts and economists often utilize cost-effectiveness analysis to identify which individuals

should be given priority for medical treatments. Two fundamental assumptions underlie the

use of this technique: 1) it is possible to observe and utilize information known about

individuals to quantify the benefits they will receive from a medical procedure; and 2) the

objective of healthcare spending, at least within that context, is to secure the greatest

aggregate benefit ­ that is, total benefit across individuals ­ for the dollars expended.


Health benefits in a cost-effectiveness analysis are measured using a metric such as quality-

adjusted life years (QALYs). 6 Cost-effectiveness analysis is relatively straightforward to apply

within a class of individuals all receiving the same treatment, for example, the use of an

expensive prescription drug. It is more challenging and more controversial to compare across

categories, for example, a bone marrow treatment for cancer and the use of that prescription

drug. Thus, if the former cost $200,000 and yielded one QALY, and the latter cost $20,000 and

yielded 0.2 QALYs, the drug would offer greater cost effectiveness, namely 0.2/$20,000 >




6The use of QALYs as a metric is often debated. See, for example, Goldstein (2016). See also,
Zeckhauser and Shepard (1976).

                                                                                                    6
1/$200,000. 7 Cost-effectiveness analysis merely gives a priority order to treatments, without

addressing the higher-level question of how much money to spend. In an ideal world, spending

would continue until the benefit of the last treatment just exceeded the value of the dollars

required. This prescription leads to subsequent questions, such as those regarding the value of

a QALY and the qualifications of those who determine that value.


Interestingly, cost-effectiveness analysis is employed in the United States to prioritize

preventive services, but not treatments, for example in Medicare (Chambers, Cangelosi and

Neumann 2015). Presumably, that is because treatment deals with identified beneficiaries.

Preventive services, by contrast, only offer modest expected benefits for those at the margin

for receiving them. Hence, the political forces are more powerful in affecting treatment

priorities than prevention priorities. These observations are reminiscent of the more common

discussion of the excess weight given to identified versus statistical lives.


Ordeals, to a significant extent, are able simultaneously to prioritize access to care while

escaping the political forces that would directly influence that ranking of access to treatments.

Any potential beneficiary willing and able to endure the ordeal receives treatment. The

balancing downside of ordeals, as mentioned, is the dead-weight costs that they impose. We

now turn to the way ordeals achieve target efficiency: prioritizing treatment to those getting

the greatest benefit from the resources spent.




7When evaluating cost-effectiveness, it is easier to think of greater being better. Hence, the quotient
considered is effectiveness/cost.

                                                                                                          7
2. Ordeals and Target Efficiency


In most social policy realms, the primary role for ordeals is to improve target efficiency (Nichols

and Zeckhauser 1982). For example, services are allocated to those willing to bear the ordeal,

as opposed to providing the services to everyone or selling them through market processes.

Such an approach is sometimes used in health care. Consider a health clinic seeking to serve

the underserved with four types of potential customers, A, B, C, and D.


Table 1. Intended and Actual Patients at a Health Care Clinic


                                 Mildly Ill                    Significantly Ill

 Middle Class                        A                                 B

 Poor                                C                                D



If the clinic offered appointments based on willingness to pay, as do most commercial services,

groups A and B would be its clients. However, its primary goal is to serve group D. If the clinic

sorts customers by charging nothing and letting a waiting line discourage low-value clients, only

patients in group D will come. A and C patients are not sick enough to make the ordeal worth

bearing. B patients value their time too highly and will pay for swifter care elsewhere. The

desired outcome is achieved.


Of course, this initial sorting should also be accompanied by a triage process at the clinic if

there is significant further heterogeneity in the group D population. An emergency patient,

perhaps having a heart attack, should be moved to the head of the line. Triage can also be


                                                                                                    8
conducted on the costs of waiting: high waiting-cost individuals get served early. Thus, patients

in severe pain might get priority; pregnant women might get moved up.


Many ordeals in health care are employed to control utilization. Given that we vastly

undercharge for health care at the point of service, even for rich people, adding an ordeal to a

money price has the potential to move society back toward the ideal where the value of a

service equals its cost.


Almost anyone who is told to see a specialist about a condition would like to be able to do so in

the next few days. Being made to wait, possibly for weeks, sorts out the people whose

condition would have improved without care. It is not surprising that, in Canada, the wait time

to see an oncologist is 3.8 weeks, but to see an orthopedist for a back problem is as high as 39.0

weeks. 8 That is because back problems often get better on their own, 9 whereas there is the

likelihood that unattended cancer will grow and spread. With cancers, or other conditions that

worsen as time passes, wait time is hardly an appropriate sorting device.


It is important to note that waiting time for health care comes in two forms: waiting at a service

facility to be served, such as by sitting at a doctor's office; and waiting until one can get an

appointment. We shall refer to them respectively as idle wait (IW) and schedule wait (SW). IW




8 See Waiting your turn: wait times for health care in Canada, 2018 Report.
9 Coste et al. (1994) found that recovery from acute lower-back pain was more rapid than previously
described: 90% of patients recovered within two weeks and fewer than 2% developed chronic lower-
back pain. It is important to note that the Coste et al. analysis focused on patients with a less than 72-
hour history of pain; this has become a focus for criticism of that paper. However, this aspect of its
analysis may reflect the low percentage of actual pain the worried well experience that evolves into a
legitimate chronic condition.

                                                                                                             9
is an ordeal of boredom and inconvenience. SW is an ordeal of pain, discomfort, potential lost

wages, and/or possible deterioration before one can receive treatment.


2.1 Deficiencies in the Waiting Line as a Sorting Ordeal


Waiting lines, whether of IW or SW, are probably the most commonly employed ordeal in

health care. Those lines would achieve target efficiency if those who would benefit most from

service were always those willing and able to wait, and if waiting did not have other deleterious

effects. Those assumptions are not always correct.


For example, some people who would benefit greatly from care might have high costs of

waiting. This would be the case, for example, with a severely sick single mother with three

young children. That would also be true for an equivalently sick high hourly earner who is

unable to substitute a monetary payment for wait time. 10

Conversely, some individuals simply have low waiting costs. They might find sitting in a doctor's

office and reading a magazine to be a relatively pleasant experience.11 Individuals with low

wait costs will, even when their conditions are mild, secure medical treatment that sorts

patients by a waiting ordeal. In short, waiting time can be effective in promoting target

efficiency, that is, in bringing in the high-benefit patients, if all individuals have roughly

equivalent wait costs. It will perform poorly if those costs are highly variable, as for example if,




10 In many contexts, it would be efficient to employ both ordeals and monetary payments to sort
patients.
11 If the artist cited in relation to the food-stamp example likes to sketch portraits or to compose poetry

while waiting, that person's waiting cost may be negligible.

                                                                                                         10
apart from medical condition, anxious patients incur high costs from SW while serene patients

incur low costs.


Willingness and ability to wait may also interact negatively with the severity of individuals'

conditions. Thus, Carter et al. (2012) found that patients in Canada waiting for the treatment of

eating disorders were more likely to drop out of the queue if they experienced longer wait

times. As a result, some of the patients who needed care the most ­ those with the riskiest

medical histories ­ missed receiving treatment.


Individuals may also be poorly equipped to understand a system that sorts patients by waiting

time. Eastwood (2008) found that, in New Brunswick, back-pain patients waiting for a

consultative appointment on potential surgery feared that calling the office to inquire about

their place in the queue would place them lower on the waiting list. Desperate to receive care,

these same patients upgraded their telephone services to ensure they would not miss calls

from the consultative staff.


Using waiting lines to help allocate resources signals equal treatment and solidarity, and the

comforting feeling that resources are going to those who need them the most. Absent analytic

thought, such feelings can sometimes lead us astray in policy prescriptions. As many cities

become ever more gridlocked, the absence of congestion pricing costs society dearly. A driver

who would pay $2 to make a trip now when streets are busy, rather than lightly traveled later

might be imposing a $50 waiting time on others, and might be deterred if charged merely a fifth

that amount. If congestion-charge monies collected were rebated to all drivers, all might be

much better off.


                                                                                                 11
The allocation of kidneys for transplantation provides a healthcare example where the use of

waiting time may sort poorly. Beyond considerations of match and location, priority for a

kidney goes to those who have been waiting the longest.12 The condition of patients

deteriorates as they wait. Hence, long-waiting patients who get a kidney secure fewer

expected QALYs than patients who receive a kidney more quickly. Presumably, ethical

extrapolation from other contexts helped to create this system. Prioritizing longer-waiting

patients also keeps hope alive, as opposed, for instance, to a system prioritizing recency.

However, a system that prioritized most kidneys by recency, but allocated a small fraction by

duration would both boost QALY gains from the transplant system and still keep hope alive. 13


In short, wait time ordeals are far from a perfect sorting mechanism. The critical question in

any context is how they perform relative to other methods, the most common alternative being

monetary payment, for prioritizing care.


2.2 Ordeals Apart from Inconvenience


Inconvenience, such as waiting time or paperwork, is almost certainly the most common form

of ordeal in health care. However, any burden that involves a dead-weight loss could serve the

purpose. Criminal gangs, fraternities, and some military units require the performance of

dangerous and/or arduous acts by those who might want to join, thereby sorting by intensity of

preference, and in some instances by skill. But a danger imposition would not make sense for


12
   There is one exception. In an effort to match long living recipients with long-living kidneys, individuals
with an estimated post transplant survival (EPTS) score below 20%, where low is good, are given priority
for kidneys from deceased donors expected to be in the top 20% in terms of longevity.
13
   This assumes that those waiting and hoping get a less-than-linear value from the likelihood of getting
a kidney. The probability-weighting function from Prospect Theory HAS precisely this property. See
Kahneman and Tversky (1979: 280­284).

                                                                                                           12
health care. However, a less pleasant treatment experience, say in terms of ambience, might

help to sort.


The design and use of in-kind programs for medical care is an area where the government

spends $1 trillion per year. 14 Yet, economists are quick to point out the disadvantages of in-

kind versus cash transfers, e.g., subsidizing nursing home care, as opposed to giving cash

payments to incapacitated individuals. However, in-kind transfers, such as specific medical

treatments, can have an advantage in targeting, being of greater benefit to people with

particular conditions. Lieber and Lockwood (2019) evaluated the tradeoff between lesser

benefits and superior targeting in the context of Medicaid benefits for home care. They

concluded that, for plausible assumptions, the better targeting gains outweighed the lesser

benefits losses.


2.3 Pain, Addiction, and Ordeals that Directly Benefit the Patient STOPPED


Some ordeals help the patient sort his own care. Having a patient suffer pain is surely an

ordeal. Weighing against that, addiction to pain killers has become a prominent policy problem

of late. When prescribing pain killers, a responsible physician will be trading off relieving the

patient from severe pain and raising the risk of addiction. Thus, patients are commonly asked:

"How is your pain on a scale from 1 to 10?" If the patient's response is higher on the scale, the

pain relief concern should get greater weight. The patient should get a somewhat more




14
     Calculation from National Health Expenditure Data (2018).



                                                                                                    13
powerful pain killer, possibly for a longer duration. Whether to bear the ordeal of moderate

pain or control it with a pain killer is a decision that must rely on patient input.


The aforementioned wait to get treatment for lower-back pain fits into the same category: the

ordeal is beneficial on net. Patients can learn whether they fall into the category of patients for

whom waiting and suffering, a short-term ordeal, is better than receiving immediate treatment.


2.4 Ordeals to Conserve Resources


Health care, with its heavy subsidies, employs ordeals widely as an efficiency measure to limit

the use of healthcare resources. Such use would be merited even in a nation with a completely

equal income distribution, assuming that it wanted to insure its citizens against significant

health expenses, as efficiency would require.


Many ordeals are designed to tilt individuals to seek care in a cheaper way or a cheaper facility.

Many patients would prefer brand name drugs over their generic equivalents. However, many

states have laws requiring that generics be dispensed unless patients (and/or their physicians)

undertake specific actions ­ a modest ordeal ­ to overcome the generic default.


For example, both Medicare and Medicaid automatically enroll qualified participants in "step

therapy," a tiered formulary ranging from a low-cost generic tier to a very high-cost branded-

specialty tier of drug offerings. Patients are assigned by default to the lowest tier drug that will

treat their condition; they progress up tiers only if deemed medically necessary. 15 The step

therapy system provides two built-in ordeals. First, there is a disincentive to try costly




15
     See What drug plans cover | Medicare (2019).

                                                                                                  14
treatments initially; higher tier options, which are more costly for the government to provide,

typically have higher co-insurance and co-payments incurred by the patient. Second, default

lowest-tier prescriptions can only be overridden if the prescriber files for an exception: this

four-page form with a 72-hour response waiting time serves as a disincentive to prescribing

more costly medications. 16


Dupas et al. (2016) conducted a randomized controlled trial on the distribution of chlorine

solution in Kenya. One study arm gave residents monthly vouchers that they had to walk to a

local market center to redeem, a minor hassle; the other study arm handed it our directly. 17

The result of the walk-and voucher treatment was a significant reduction in the distribution of

chlorine solution, but a trivial reduction in chlorine appropriately used for water treatment to

prevent disease.


If an emergency room frequently has long wait times, patients ­ particularly those with minor

ailments ­ may choose instead to go to a walk-in-clinic where the wait is much shorter. The

utilization of health resources is likely much greater in the emergency room setting.


We have argued that an ordeal is often employed in lieu of a cash payment to sort utilization of

health care, particularly expensive health care. For example, individuals who would otherwise

get care for free might be discouraged by a small co-payment from going to an emergency




16
  See Medicare prescription drug appeals and grievances: exceptions (2019).
17
  Distances varied based on participants' home addresses. No average estimate of distance from the
voucher redemption service was given, but vouchers were redeemable at the nearest market center for
22% of study participants. See P. Dupas et al. (2016: 891).

                                                                                                   15
room. 18 This proved to be the case in a randomized experiment that showed that a small co-

payment operated almost as an ordeal. Selby et al. (1996) found that such a co-payment ­

between $40 and $55 dollars (2019 value) ­ reduced emergency room utilization by 14.6%,

compared to control. Behavioral economics has shown us that, even to a single individual, a

dollar does not always have the same value. Presumably, those discouraged by the small co-

payment at the emergency room compared those co-pay dollars to the prior zero co-pay rather

than to the high cost of providing the care in an emergency room. 19


Interestingly, the government often requires care in an expensive facility, as opposed to home

care, if a patient or her family is to receive reimbursement. A famous case involved Katie

Beckett, a young girl with viral encephalitis, and President Ronald Reagan. Medicare rules

required that Katie live in a hospital to receive care. She and her parents much preferred care

at home. Eventually, Ronald Reagan learned of this situation. He issued the Katie Beckett

Waiver, which allowed severely ill children to receive reimbursement if cared for at home. Such

home care in this case actually saved the government significant dollars. Presumably, Katie

benefitted significantly, since she lived to age 34, much longer than expected (Willson 2012). If

the facility care is much less appealing, even if much more expensive, a requirement that only

facilities receive significant reimbursement ­ a salient case of an ordeal imposed on the patient

­ could actually save the government (or health plan) money. That would be the case if


18
   A small co-payment would be an ordeal if the processing cost was significant relative to the co-
payment amount. The benefit to the purveyor of service would be small or nonexistent. The payment
thus would impose a dead-weight loss.
19
   Pratt, Wise and Zeckhauser (1979: 205), examined telephone price quotes for 39 standardized
products. They found that, when mean price doubled, the standard deviation of quoted prices
increased by 86%. They concluded that individuals were much less willing to spend 15 minutes
searching to save perhaps $10 when the price of an item was $300 rather than $100.

                                                                                                  16
significant numbers of families still opted to provide lightly subsidized or unsubsidized home

care. We explore a situation of this sort with nursing home care.


3. The Economics of Optimal Ordeals


Posit that, for whatever reason, a good is being provided to individuals for a price of 1, but

costs K to produce. To avoid severe inefficiencies, an ordeal is imposed to limit demand. The

ordeal imposes a dead-weight cost D. Thus, a consumer will face the effective price of 1+D. A

key challenge for policy makers is to determine the optimal value of D. The answer depends on

the elasticity of demand for the good, that is, on how the percentage change in the quantity

that is demanded responds to the percentage change in the price. If that response is modest

(big), the optimal ordeal should be small (great), since many (few) people will be consuming the

good who do not value it highly. The optimal ordeal balances the inefficiency of having people

buy the good who value it much less than K against the dead-weight loss of the ordeal.20


Posit that K=10 and that 100 people would buy the good if the price were 10. Here are some

relevant values.


Table 2. Optimal Ordeals and the Elasticity of Demand

       Elasticity                      2               1             0.5             0.2            0.11

 Optimal ordeal size               17.0              8.0             3.5            0.80                   0

 Number of buyers                  30.9           111.1           149.1            140.9           129.2




20
  Even if individuals are identical, an ordeal may sort within individuals, between their high-value and
low-value uses. If one always has to wait a long time in the office for a doctor's appointment, one will
avoid low-value visits.

                                                                                                           17
As the example demonstrates, given a heavily subsidized price, an ordeal makes good sense

when demand is elastic, but not when it is inelastic. No one will have their gall bladder

removed just because the price of the procedure is cheap. Hence, the elasticity is low, and an

ordeal would at best be wasteful. But the demand for various cosmetic surgeries would

respond strongly to price. Hence, if both types of surgery were heavily subsidized, an ordeal

would make sense only for the latter. 21


Quite apart from ethical concerns, or some principle that makes health care a special good

worthy of subsidy, risk spreading provides a solid justification for the subsidization of expensive

medical care. Generally, there is a small probability that an individual will have any use for an

expensive medical procedure. Hence, before that uncertainty is resolved, individuals will want

to buy medical insurance. However, even among those who do need the procedure, some will

value the procedure much more than others. Given the heavy subsidy, an ordeal may make

sense to discourage the relatively low-value users from seeking the procedure.


Posit that there is an expensive surgery that can help individuals with back pain due to

herniated disks. The surgery is only cost-effective for those often in significant pain.

Unfortunately, only patients know their own pain levels. It might be worthwhile to impose an

ordeal before dispensing the treatment. Thus, the individual may be required to engage in

extensive time-consuming exercises over a sustained period as a means to convey that the pain

is significant. The exercises will help the condition, suggesting that they are only a quasi-ordeal


21
  In fact, few cosmetic surgeries, apart from those addressing birth defects or reconstruction, perhaps
because of cancer or burns, are subsidized. One could imagine an ordeal, such as requiring the patient
and the physician to write detailed letters to a strict appeals board, whereby individuals who would
benefit greatly, perhaps due to their psychological needs, might get subsidized cosmetic treatments.

                                                                                                      18
and they may even be more beneficial if the pain is significant. But a major justification for the

ordeal is that it is only likely to be undertaken by those in significant pain.


An ordeal may also be useful even if all individuals have identical preferences, given significant

risk aversion and relatively high elasticity of demand. It may be a more efficient way to pay for

care than imposing greater financial risk. That is because the ordeal is not additive with

payment in the utility function. High values for risk aversion and the elasticity of demand

would make ordeals a desirable instrument to limit utilization. If those values were low,

ordeals would be undesirable. We should also note that if individuals are poor at assessing the

benefit they will get from a procedure, an ordeal attempting to assess value would be still

impose burdens, but would offer little sorting benefit.


Whatever the justification for heavy subsidies to medical care, an accompanying ordeal may

help to screen high-value beneficiaries apart from low-value beneficiaries. 22 Ordeals can have

highly complex consequences, and those consequences can differ substantially across

applications. Given space limitations, we will illustrate in one context.


4. Ordeals and Nursing Homes Versus Home Care


"John died peacefully at home, after a long illness." The news is sad, but a common reaction is:

"What a fortunate individual." Most of us hope to avoid ending our lives in a nursing home.

But many of us have no choice, either because we have no one who can deliver care at home,




22
  And within a single individual, as in the numerical example directly above, an ordeal screens those
individuals' high-value uses from their low-value uses.

                                                                                                        19
and/or because having the government pay for nursing-home care is too attractive relative to

home care, where reimbursement from the government is much more modest.


Nursing home care is a major source of medical expenditure in the United States. In 2018, the

median annual cost of adult day health care was $18,720. By contrast, the cost of a semi-

private room in a nursing home cost $89,292. 23 Care for the elderly is a looming problem in the

vast array of middle-income and affluent countries, since their populations are rapidly aging,

which implies greater need and less availability of care from children.


There is a complex array of ordeals dealing with government-paid nursing home care. First, as

mentioned, there are strict limits on assets and income for both the recipient and the spouse.

Thus, for individuals somewhat above these limits, they must endure the ordeal of spending

down to these limits. It is an ordeal, since the distortion in expenditures benefits no one. The

goal of the ordeal is target efficiency, to keep individuals above such limits from reaping the

benefits of a program designed to help the relatively poor.


Posit that the individual has qualified on the income-and-assets basis. The government pays

much more through Medicaid for an individual in a nursing home than for supplementary home

care. To qualify for this higher level of subsidy, the individual who would prefer to be at home

must accept living in the less desirable nursing home facility. This is the second ordeal. In

effect, the nature of the service itself plays the role of the ordeal. 24




23
  See Cost of long-term care | 2018 cost of care report | Genworth (2019).
24
  A physician friend many years ago worked in the emergency room at Bellevue Hospital in New York.
He remarked on a particularly gruesome ordeal. Down-and-out alcoholics would feign passing out in the
street so they could check into the hospital for a few days for a comfortable bed and decent food. The

                                                                                                   20
We shall explore the case of nursing homes in somewhat greater detail using hypothetical

parameter values. Individuals covered by Medicaid in nursing homes must spend down their

assets to be sufficiently poor that their costs must be covered. Posit that residence in a nursing

home costs $100,000/year. A critical question regards the optimal level of subsidy for home

care. Such payments could cover aides, but might also pay some stipend to family caregivers or

for space in the home.


As the payment for home care increases, more individuals would opt for home care rather than

the nursing home, a clear savings to the government and benefit to the individuals who

switched. The figure below shows the demand curve for home care as a function of the subsidy

differential between the nursing home and home care.




interns would scratch such individuals' breastbones with a hypodermic needle, evidently a very painful
procedure, to deter individuals who were conscious from faking to be unconscious.

                                                                                                     21
22
The level of subsidy does not matter for region A. Those individuals will always go to the

nursing home. Neither does it matter for region D. Those individuals will always choose home

care. Posit that the home care subsidy is $30,000/year, implying a differential subsidy of

$70,000. Individuals in C will choose home care, given this subsidy. Almost all would accept a

much smaller subsidy to avoid the ordeal of the nursing home.


Individuals in B will go to a nursing home. They would need a bigger subsidy before choosing to

get care at home instead. Obviously, the more responsive individuals are to the home-care

subsidy, as is shown by a shallower slope on the demand curve, the larger that subsidy should

be. The subsidy is justified because the government saves significant dollars when individuals

choose home care, and the switchers avoid an ordeal. The subsidy should be greater if

individuals are more responsive, since more will be switching.


Let the number of people in home care be q, the subsidy to nursing homes be s per capita, and

the subsidy to home care be h per capita. The elasticity of demand for home care at quantity q

as a function of the difference between s and h is e = f(q, s-h). Fortunately, the savings when

one more person chooses home care is also s-h. This implies that the optimal subsidy to home

care is where e = 1, where the fractional reduction in government's savings from home care just

equals the fractional increase in people choosing home care.


4.1 Valuing Government Dollars


If the government counted dollars of consumer surplus as equivalent to its own dollars, it would

subsidize home care to the same level as nursing home care. Then, patients would choose their




                                                                                                  23
preferred locales. The ordeal of residing in the nursing home to bolster one's subsidy would

vanish.


Government agencies tend to value their dollars more than consumer dollars for two reasons.

First, most government agencies are concerned with conserving their budgets. They may think

that their mission secures great benefits for the dollars involved, or they may just think that

prudent spending makes them look good. If so, they will strive to keep people out of nursing

homes and in cheaper home care. The ordeal entailed by nursing home living helps them in this

effort. They may increase the payments for home care to increase the relative cost of nursing

homes, and thus encourage resource-saving switching.


Second, if they think in economic terms, they may recognize that there is a dead-weight cost

when government dollars are raised (Saez et al. 2012). Calculating the magnitude of this cost is

a complex task. Using 2005 tax return data, Saez et al. (2012: 42) estimate "the marginal excess

burden per dollar of federal income tax revenue raised is $0.195 for an across-the-board

proportional tax increase, and $0.339 for a tax increase focused on the top 1 percent of income

earners". In the pursuit of efficiency, a government dollar should be valued at (1+marginal

excess burden) relative to a consumer's dollar.


This observation makes the burdens that save government dollars, a very common form of

burden, more desirable. Even if there were no concerns for target efficiency, an efficiency-

seeking government might employ ordeals to discourage the use of services that were priced

below their cost of provision. Many health services fall into this category.




                                                                                                  24
5. Concluding Thoughts


Health care at the point of purchase is heavily subsidized in the United States, and more so in

other developed nations. This creates an inefficiency situation, where individuals will seek care

who would receive little value relative to the resources required. Limiting demand for such

care through ordeals, which are impositions on individuals, such as waiting time, that yield no

benefit to others, offers a second-best solution. Ordeals enable high-value individuals to

receive care while low-value individuals sort themselves out.


Ordeals spring up as a natural response when underpriced resources are made available.

Providers, who are losing money on each unit purchased, find ways to limit demand. Common

ordeals include making purchasers wait and imposing administrative burdens on them in order

to get served. Both are common features in health care.


Prudent policy makers will look for alternatives to heavy dead-weight ordeals as ways to limit

demand. Cost-effectiveness prescriptions simply rule out individuals with characteristics that

indicate low benefit from receiving treatment. An alternative ordeal may be found where the

sorting benefit is the same, but the dead-weight cost is less. For example, a clinic could sort

patients by requiring volunteer hours, a clear external benefit, as a price for receiving

treatment. Or, as mentioned, back patients could be required to do extensive exercises, a

benefit to themselves but one they might not otherwise reap, before becoming eligible for an

expensive surgical procedure.


Ordeals highlight an intriguing principal-agent relationship between doctor and patient, with

the usual complexities of principal-agent relationships. This analysis focused on situations


                                                                                                  25
where the patient, or the patient's family, is the decision maker. However, doctors often play a

major role in determining where and how a patient is treated. Nevertheless, ordeals may still

play a valuable sorting role. Sometimes an ordeal will be suffered by the patient, say who must

wait in line at a medical facility, where the doctor's concern for the patient's welfare does the

sorting. Other times, the doctor will bear the ordeal, say by having to fill out extensive

paperwork to qualify a patient for a procedure.


Ordeals, such as waiting lines or tedious application processes for underpriced resources, spring

up naturally and did so long before any theory explaining their use. But that an ordeal is

natural and existing hardly implies that it is optimal. Moreover, the evolution of ordeals toward

superior arrangements may be sluggish. That evolution is slowed down by the inertia imposed

by those who enjoy the current arrangements and by the disproportionate influence of entities

that are already in place. Those stay-put forces are reinforced by ethical arguments and

behavioral propensities, both of which weigh costs from acts of commission far above costs

from acts of omission.


Although the use of ordeals in a variety of settings stretches back for eons, their widespread

use to sort individuals receiving subsidized healthcare is a relatively recent phenomenon.

Unfortunately, those setting ordeals in healthcare are only loosely concerned with their optimal

use. Too often indeed, ordeals are treated as natural phenomena, with little thought that they

might be replaced or improved.25 Those who foster an ordeal, say the manager of a health plan



25
  Beside inattention, an uncompensated positive externality leads to insufficient efforts to improve
ordeals. If A develops a superior arrangement, B can easily imitate it without paying compensation.
Business practices such as waiting line design cannot be patented.

                                                                                                       26
or head of a hospital, may tally personnel costs, insurance revenues and patient revenues to

the dollar, but never seek even a crude assessment of the costs and benefits deriving from an

ordeal.


Ordeals currently play a prominent and critical role in directing resources to high-value users of

health care. Unlike pricing, the primary instrument of resource allocation in developed

societies, ordeals are scarcely studied, little understood, and often accepted without thought.

Ordeals bring considerable net value to the healthcare system, but conscious attention to their

design and operation could greatly enhance that value.




REFERENCES

Carter, O. et al. 2012. Increased wait-list time predicts dropout from outpatient enhanced
cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT-E) for eating disorders. Behaviour Research and Therapy 50:
487-492.

Chambers, J.D., M.J. Cangelosi and P.J. Neumann. 2015. Medicare's use of cost-effectiveness
analysis for prevention (but not for treatment). Health Policy 119: 156-163.

Coste, J. et al. 1994. Clinical course and prognostic factors in acute low back pain: an inception
cohort study in primary care practice. British Medical Journal 308: 577-580.

Cost of long term care | 2018 cost of care report | Genworth. Accessed March 28, 2019,
https://www.genworth.com/aging-and-you/finances/cost-of-care.html.

Dupas, P. et al. 2016. Targeting health subsidies through a nonprice mechanism: a randomized
controlled trial in Kenya. Science 353: 889-895.

Eastwood, D. 2008. Experience of adults with low back pain awaiting consultation with a spinal
surgeon. 62­63. Library and Archives Canada (Bibliothèque et Archives Canada).

Goldstein, D.A. 2016. Using quality-adjusted life-years in cost-effectiveness analyses: do not
throw out the baby or the bathwater. Journal of Oncology Practice 12: 500­502.

Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky. 1979. Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica 47: 263­291.

                                                                                                 27
Lieber, E.M.J. and L.M. Lockwood. 2019. Targeting with in-kind transfers: evidence from
Medicaid home care. American Economic Review 109: 1461-1485.

Medicare prescription drug appeals and grievances: exceptions. Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Service, March 5, 2019, https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Appeals-and-
Grievances/MedPrescriptDrugApplGriev/Exceptions.html.

Musumeci, M. and K. Young. 2017. State variation in Medicaid per enrollee spending for seniors
and people with disabilities. The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation (blog), May 1, 2017,
https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/state-variation-in-medicaid-per-enrollee-spending-
for-seniors-and-people-with-disabilities/.

National Health Expenditure Data. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Service, December 11,
2018, https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-systems/statistics-trends-and-
reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/nationalhealthaccountshistorical.html.

National Health Expenditure Trends, 1975 to 2018. Canadian Institute for Health Information,
n.d., 4, https://www.cihi.ca/sites/default/files/document/nhex-trends-narrative-report-2018-
en-web.pdf.

Nichols, A.L. and R.J. Zeckhauser. 1982. Targeting transfers through restrictions on recipients.
American Economic Review 72: 372­77.

Papanicolas, I., L.R. Woskie and A.K. Jha. 2018. Health care spending in the United States and
other high-income countries. Journal of the American Medical Association 319: 1024­1039.

Pratt, J.W., D.A. Wise and R. Zeckhauser. 1979. Price differences in almost competitive markets.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 93: 189-211.

Saez, E., J. Slemrod and S.H. Giertz. 2012. The elasticity of taxable income with respect to
marginal tax rates: a critical review. Journal of Economic Literature 50: 3-50.

Selby, J.V. B.H. Fireman and B.E. Swain. 1996. Effect of a copayment on use of the emergency
department in a health maintenance organization. New England Journal of Medicine 334: 635­
642.

Spence, M. 1973. Job market signaling. Quarterly Journal of Economics 87: 355­374.

UK Health Accounts ­ Office for National Statistics. Office for National Statistics, accessed April
22, 2019,
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/healthcaresyst
em/bulletins/ukhealthaccounts/2016.

Waiting your turn: wait times for health care in Canada, 2018 Report. Fraser Institute,
December 4, 2018, http://bit.ly/2rgVT6B.


                                                                                                   28
What drug plans cover | Medicare. The Official U.S. Government Site for Medicare, accessed
April 29, 2019, https://www.medicare.gov/drug-coverage-part-d/what-drug-plans-cover.

Willson, P.D. 2012. Remembering Katie Beckett. Pediatric Nursing 38: 227.

Zeckhauser, R. and D. Shepard. 1976. Where now for saving lives? Law and Contemporary
Problems 40(4): 5­45.




                                                                                             29
