                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    EFFECT OF AN ABRUPT CHANGE IN SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
        POLICY ON ADOLESCENT BIRTH RATES IN ECUADOR, 2008­2017

                                        Omar Galárraga
                                        Jeffrey E. Harris

                                      Working Paper 26044
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26044


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




The authors would like to thank three anonymous referees, Dhaval Dave, Rachel Robinson,
Kathleen Broussard, Vladimíra Kantorová, and participants in the 4th Annual Population Health
Science Research Workshop at University of Pennsylvania (December 2019) and at the
Population Association of America (PAA) virtual meetings (April 2020) for useful discussions
and comments. James Kunhardt (at Brown University, Department of Economics) provided
excellent research assistance. We are grateful also to the Population Studies and Training Center
(PSTC) at Brown University, which receives funding from the National Institutes of Health (NIH:
P2C HD041020), for general support. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Omar Galárraga and Jeffrey E. Harris. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Effect of an Abrupt Change in Sexual and Reproductive Health Policy on Adolescent Birth
Rates in Ecuador, 2008­2017
Omar Galárraga and Jeffrey E. Harris
NBER Working Paper No. 26044
July 2019
JEL No. I12,I18,J13,J18

                                            ABSTRACT

Several countries have implemented "family-centered" abstinence-only policies for teenagers, as
opposed to encouraging utilization and expansion of reproductive health services and education.
Little is known, however, about the effects of these more restrictive policies on adolescent birth
rates at the national level or their differential effects by race and ethnicity. The extant literature is
even scarcer in low-and middle-income countries. We analyze an unexpected policy change in
Ecuador that abruptly reversed course and restricted reproductive health services for teenage
women in 2014. We use a canton- and time-fixed effects difference-in-differences analysis of
Ecuador's 221 cantons with time-varying controls to analyze the impact of the abrupt policy
change on the difference of teen (15-19 years) minus young adult (20-24 years) birth rates. In a
difference-in-difference-in-differences analysis, the policy change increases birth rates by 8.5
births per 1000 women in cantons with higher indigenous concentration. Results are robust to
changes in the comparison population (young adults vs. women in their late 20s or in their early
30s), pre-intervention control periods, population weighting, serial correlation, logarithmic model
specification, adjustments for intervention year, definition of indigenous concentration, and
potential delays in policy implementation.


Omar Galárraga
Brown University
International Health Institute
School of Public Health
121 S. Main St.
Providence, RI 02912
Omar_Galarraga@brown.edu

Jeffrey E. Harris
Department of Economics, E52-422
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
jeffrey@mit.edu
   1. Introduction

   Latin America has the second highest teen birth rate (defined as births per 1,000 women aged 15-19) in the

world, only behind sub-Saharan Africa, which has lower economic development (The Economist, 2019). The

United Nations Population Fund identified eight Latin American and Caribbean countries where 20 to 30% of

women ages 20­24 reported a birth before age 18: Colombia, Bolivia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,

Dominican Republic, Honduras, and Nicaragua. (No data reported for Venezuela.) (UNFPA, 2013).

       Teen pregnancy imposes high economic costs on individuals and societies largely through lower

educational achievement (fewer years of formal schooling; lower probability of graduating from high school),

and higher reliance on family support and public assistance programs (Azevedo et al., 2012; Berthelon and

Kruger, 2011; Buvinic, 1998; Marteleto and Villanueva, 2018). Several studies using a variety of methods point

to the detrimental effects of teen pregnancy, including lower wages and lower access to tertiary education (Diaz

and Fiel, 2016); as well as adverse effects on other family members including siblings (Heissel, 2017).

       Few studies assess the causal effects of health policies on teen sexual and reproductive health (SRH)

outcomes, with most focusing on the United States where teen pregnancy is highest compared to other

developed nations (Kearney and Levine, 2015, 2012). Abstinence-only programs continue to be proposed in the

U.S. and elsewhere although evidence does not support their effectiveness (Trenholm et al., 2008; Underhill et

al., 2007). A difference-in-differences (DD) study of state-level data from the U.S. covering 2000­2011 found

that state-mandated abstinence-based sexual education policies had no effect on teen birth rates or abortion

rates, but may have increased the incidence of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) (Carr and Packham, 2017).

Another DD study compared the changes in teen birth rates in Texas counties that lost family planning funding

to changes in counties outside of Texas with publicly funded clinics. Reductions in funding for family planning

services in Texas increased teen birth rates by 3.4% during 2011­2014 (Packham, 2017).




                                                                                                                 2
       Studies of low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) are even scarcer. One DD study based on South

Africa relied upon geographic variation in the rollout of the National Adolescent Friendly Clinic Initiative

(NAFCI) during 2000­2010. The investigators found that living near an NAFCI clinic delayed childbearing by

0.5­0.7 years (Branson and Byker, 2018). Another DD paper studied the impact of a major expansion of the

Indonesian midwife program, which sent over 50,000 midwives to over 52,000 communities, principally during

1993­1997. The SRH services provided by the midwives included oral and injectable contraceptives and

implants. Women aged 13­20 years who lived in a participating community delayed their first birth by an

average of 0.96 years (Strupat, 2017).

       The present paper fills an important gap in the literature as it addresses the question: How much can

restrictive access to SRH services affect teen birth rates? To answer this question, we analyze a policy in

Ecuador that severely limited access to SRH services among adolescents. We find that the more restrictive

access to SRH services increased the adolescent birth rate in Ecuador, particularly in the areas with a higher

concentration of indigenous women. This paper is, to our knowledge, the first to estimate a causal effect of an

abrupt policy change on SRH outcomes in Latin America. Specifically, this study focuses on effects on teen

birth rates and, consequently, addresses one of the most important public health policy issues in the region. The

identifying assumption is that absent the sudden policy change, teens (15-19 years) and young adults (20-24

years) would have experienced similar changes in birth rates.

       Various pieces of evidence provide support to the identifying assumption. First, we provide graphical

and statistical evidence that the trends for the two groups were similar prior to the sudden reversal in SRH

policy. We exploit a constructed-panel structure for 221 cantons for 10 years, to enable a canton- and time-fixed

effects, triple difference (DDD) regression specification. The first difference is between teen and young adult

birth rates, the second difference is for cantons above or below the mean of indigenous women concentration,

and the third difference is for before and after (3-4 years of) program exposure. Furthermore, we show that

including time-varying control variables or changing various parameters through robustness tests does not

qualitatively affect the main results.
                                                                                                                  3
       The DDD analysis shows that the policy change increased the birth rate difference (teens minus young

adults) by 8.5 births per 1000 women in cantons with a higher indigenous concentration (as compared to

cantons with lower indigenous concentration). This represents a 27% change from a baseline of a 31-point

difference between young minus young adult birth rates. The main results are robust to changes in the

comparison population (young adults versus women in their late 20s, or versus women in their early 30s), pre-

intervention control periods, population weighting, logarithmic model specification, adjustments for

intervention year, definition of high indigenous concentration, and potential delays in policy implementation.

   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we present essential background information.

Then we summarize our analytical methods and empirical strategy. We proceed to present the main results,

followed by a series of robustness tests. A discussion of the results occupies the last section, along with

limitations and potential paths for future research.

   2. Background

   On February 28, 2015, President Rafael Correa of Ecuador publicly clarified his rationale for the new Plan

Familia, which had gone into effect by presidential decree three months earlier on November 26, 2014 (Correa,

2015; Official Register, 2014). Correa attacked the now defunct Inter-Sectoral Strategy for Family Planning and

Prevention of Adolescent Pregnancy (ENIPLA for its initials in Spanish), which had formally been in effect

nationwide since 2011. Although he acknowledged that births among adolescents aged 12­19 had dropped

significantly under the ENIPLA program, Correa claimed that the ENIPLA strategy was completely misguided

in its promotion of "hedonism." ENIPLA talked only about "pleasure, a terrible message," Correa asserted, "...

and if you have problems, go to the health center. But the foundation of our society is not the health center, it's

the family." Correa continued, "We have to enable the parents. The remedy was worse than the disease. It broke

the bond with the family." (Correa, 2015) [p.4]. In contrast to ENIPLA, which offered sexually transmitted

disease testing and treatment as well as short- and long-term contraceptive services through teen-friendly clinics

at local health centers, the new Plan Familia would rely on education through the family, with a focus on

                                                                                                                      4
abstinence and delayed initiation of sexual activity (Presidencia de la República del Ecuador, 2015). The

government's educational materials encouraging condom use under ENIPLA, such as the pamphlet in Figure 1,

would be prohibited under Plan Familia (Estrella, 2015). While the ministries of public health, education, and

economic and social integration had jointly taken charge of ENIPLA, the new Plan Familia would be under the

direct control of the president.

                                          [FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE.]

       To motivate the research strategy, we first suggest that the impact of the policy change is not clear from

a simple comparison of self-reported outcomes. For example, Appendix Figure A1 plots historical trends in

sexual activity and contraceptive use among teens in the last two nationally representative health surveys.

Teenage women were less likely to report being sexual active in 2018 than in 2012 (31 vs. 39%); and if they

were sexually active already, they were slightly more likely to use birth control in the 30 days preceding the

survey (52 vs. 47%). Similarly, Appendix Table A1 uses ENSANUT 2012 and 2018 to analyze the trajectories

of contraception use among teenage women and compare them to those of young adult women. The top (Panel

A) presents contraceptive methods ever used: over three quarters of teens (78% in 2012 and 82% in 2018,

columns 1 and 4) report having used some method at some point; meanwhile, a large majority of young adult

women (89% in 2012 and 92% in 2018, columns 2 and 5) report having ever used some method. Furthermore,

compared to young adults, teens were less likely to use any contraception method in a given year (columns 3

and 6); and they were also less likely to use any method over time and in comparison to young adults (column

7). We found similar patterns when we analyzed methods currently used now (Panel B). Yet, these were self-

reported outcomes, and at only two points in time that do not fully coincide with the beginning and the end of

the intervention.

       Our premise here is that the full registry of births over a decade are a more accurate indicator of the

impact of changes in SRH policies than self-reported contraceptive use in two repeated cross sections. We focus

specifically on the impact of the abrupt change in SRH policy on teen birth rates in Ecuador. To that end, we

                                                                                                                    5
treat the unanticipated shock of the replacement of ENIPLA with Plan Familia as a natural experiment (Craig et

al., 2017). To address the alternative hypothesis that the observed patterns of birth rates were actually due to

trends independent of the government's sudden reversal in SRH policies toward adolescents, we use a DD

approach, comparing birth rates of teens aged 15-19 years with those of young adults aged 20-24 years. In

contrast to adolescents, whose access to contraceptives was curtailed after 2014, young adults continued to have

access to short- and long-term contraceptives at health centers through other government programs (Bucheli et

al., 2014). ENIPLA was formally established as a government program in 2011 focused specifically on

adolescent women ages (10-19) (Ministerio Coordinador de Desarrollo Social, 2011). Additionally, there is

evidence that non-governmental organizations had set up some teen-friendly programs at health centers during

the pre-ENIPLA period from 2008­2010 (Burneo Salazar et al., 2015; MSP, 2018). These included

differentiated services for adolescents, offered by well-sensitized and trained general providers (Goicolea et al.,

2017). Accordingly, we study the interval from 2008­2017, covering the pre-ENIPLA period from 2008­2010,

the ENIPLA period from 2011­2014, and the Plan Familia period from 2015­2017.

        Here, we focus on birth rates, rather than pregnancy rates, for two reasons. First, there is no uniform

record of all pregnancies as there is for live births; and the live birth rate is the actual outcome of interest.

Second, abortion is not legal (even in cases of rape), and generally not observable in Ecuador, to the extent that

it occurs (Reuters, 2019). We calculate birth rates at the level of the county ("cantón"), which we treat as our

fundamental unit of observation. We reason that the SRH services provided by ENIPLA and its predecessors

were delivered in local health clinics in each canton, and that the density and intensity of services thus varied

across counties.

        To assess whether the abrupt switch to Plan Familia had a disproportionate effect on the most vulnerable

populations, we stratify birth rates in each canton not only by age group, but also by the presence of a

substantial indigenous population. We then use a difference-in-difference-differences (DDD) approach, further

distinguishing between counties ("cantones") with high and low proportions of indigenous women. Ecuador's

ministry of public health (MSP for its initials in Spanish) has emphasized that, when it comes to the indigenous
                                                                                                                     6
population: "adolescence does not exist as part of the cycle of life. To the contrary, childhood transitions to

youth, and with that, one acquires a social role differentiated from boys and girls. This type of `invisibility' of

adolescence is associated with marriage at very early ages..." (MSP, 2012) [p. 131]

       Generally, teen pregnancy has deleterious consequences for employment and educational outcomes

among all ethnic groups. Most teens and young women who got pregnant and were studying or working report

that they stopped working and did not return to work (39.4%), or stopped studying and did not return to school

(44.3%) (Freire et al., 2015) [p. 285]. As a consequence, indigenous women have the lowest rates of knowledge,

use, and access to sexual and reproductive services.

       In terms of knowledge, most indigenous women (87.3%) did not know of any contraception method

[ibid. p.130]; and were the ethnic group with the least knowledge about sexually transmitted infections. For

example, only about two thirds of them (68.2%) had heard about HIV/AIDS; and of them, a third did not know

how to avoid getting HIV (32.8%) [ibid. pgs. 296, 301, 305]. Indigenous women also were the ethnic group

with the least information about the three main ways to prevent HIV acquisition: condom use (38.6%), mutually

monogamous relationship (30.4%) or abstinence (16.6%) [ibid. p.308]. Conversely, over a third of indigenous

women (36.3%) endorsed that HIV could be transmitted by using eating utensils used by a person living with

HIV, and about a fifth (18.4%) thought they could get infected by shaking hands with someone living with HIV

[ibid. p.309]. Indigenous women were the ethnic group with the lowest rates of knowing about the HIV test,

where they could obtain it, or having taken it (53.7, 68.5 and 54.8% respectively) [ibid. p.312].

       In terms of actual practices, 20.7% of indigenous women did not use a condom in their last sexual

encounter because they had never used it; a rate that is three times higher than other groups [ibid. p.335].

Similarly, indigenous women had some of lowest rates of using any contraception (65.8%) [ibid. p.143]; while a

fifth (19.8%) had never used any [ibid. p.148].

       With respect to access, three quarters (76.8%) of indigenous people did not have any health insurance;

and they were the ethnic group least likely to be hospitalized (2.9%) if they had a health problem in the 30 days

                                                                                                                      7
prior to the survey [ibid. p.352]. Rather than seeing a healthcare professional, self-medicating, or seeking care at

home, indigenous people are the ethnic group most likely to do nothing about their health problems (19.1%)

[ibid. p.359]. Indigenous women were the group with the highest proportion who did not undergo any prenatal

care (17.4%) [ibid. p.380]; the highest group to give birth at home (15%). They also exhibited the highest rates

of unplanned pregnancies (17.1%) and highest fertility rates (3.4 children per woman) [ibid. p.119]. If they do

access contraception, indigenous women are most likely to go to a public health center run by the Ministry of

Health [ibid. p.137].

   3. Correa's sudden reversal

   Returning to Ecuador after receiving his Ph.D. in economics, Rafael Correa became minister of economy

and finance under then-president Alfredo Palacio. In that capacity, he lobbied Congress for increased spending

on health and education. Campaigning against what he characterized as Ecuador's neo-liberal elites, he was

elected as president in 2006 and took office in January 2007. Overseeing the introduction of a new national

constitution in 2008, Correa was re-elected in 2009 and again in 2013. During his tenure, Correa fashioned his

own brand of socialist revolution, increasing government spending generally and in particular on health. He

raised the minimum wage to combat poverty, and increased physicians' salaries.

   In the face of a long career of leftist policies, why did Correa perform a 180-degree turn on sexual and

reproductive health policy at the start of his third and final term in office? This question can be framed within

the political agency model (Galárraga and Harris, 2019). Correa, having entered his third term and facing no

further prospect of re-election, abruptly changed his posture away from the public interest and in favor of his

private interests in conformance with his Catholic faith. Although the country has had official separation of

church and state since at least the 1906 constitution, and re-affirmed that separation in 2007, Correa himself

used his powers to oppose legal abortion, even in cases of rape (Nicolalde-Escobar, 2016). For Plan Familia, in

particular, the official posture was that adolescents would now need to discuss any sexual reproductive issues

first within their own families (i.e., with their parents). Thus, family-centered policies become the guiding

                                                                                                                    8
norm, undermining the previous ENIPLA policies, which provided free and easier access to contraception for

adolescents (Paz-y-Miño, 2014).



   4. Methods

4.1. Data

Our numerator data for the birth rates come from detailed live birth registry records released by Ecuador's

Institute of Statistics and Census (Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas y Censos, INEC) for the years 2008­2017

(about 350,000 births per year), available at http://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/nacimientos-bases-de-datos/.

The live birth registry provides the mother's province and cantón of residence, as well as her age, marital status,

ethnic/racial self-identification, and education. Data on each birth also include: place of delivery, prenatal

control, prior pregnancies and births, birth attendant information. We merged all of these data for 10 years

(about 3.5 million births) including all births that occurred in a given calendar year (t), regardless of when they

were registered, i.e., including registrations in any subsequent year (t + ) (Carrera and Yunga, 2016).

       The denominator for the birth rates comes from the last Census (Censo de Población y Vivienda, CPV)

conducted in Ecuador in 2010 (containing records for over 14 million people), available at

http://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/base-de-datos-censo-de-poblacion-y-vivienda/. The population data for

before and after the census year are taken from the INEC's Official Population Projections for each province

and canton (with 221 cantones with pre- and post-census year data), available at

http://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/proyecciones-poblacionales/.

   Background information on sexual activity and contraception methods utilization come from the National

Health and Nutrition Survey (Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición, ENSANUT), which collected health and

nutrition information from 19,949 households in 2012, and from 43,311 households in 2018. Topics included

anthropometric, blood and urine measurements, tobacco and alcohol use, physical activity, diet (through a 24-

hour food recall diary), as well as issues of health care use and access. ENSANUT also includes a detailed
                                                                                                                      9
module on sexual and reproductive health for women of reproductive age (10-49 years), available at

https://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/salud-salud-reproductiva-y-nutricion/.




   4.2 Econometric analysis

   Main econometric specification. We define the birth rate Delta 1 (1jt) as the difference between the teen

(15­19) and young adult (20­24) birth rates in each canton j in each year t. Thus, larger values of 1jt imply

higher teen birth rates while lower (even negative) values imply higher young adult birth rates. We employ

differences-in-differences (DD) and triple difference (DDD) approaches, estimating regressions of the form:

               (1)     1 jt = 1INDjt + 2INDjt × Postt + t3 + j4 +5Zj + jt

where, Postt is a binary indicator that the year t is after 2014, when Plan Familia started. The variable INDjt is a

binary indicator that the percentage of women in canton j who self-identified as indigenous in year t exceeded

the canton national average of 12%. The coefficient 2 of the interaction term INDjt × Postt gives the triple

difference (DDD) estimator. In addition, t3 are year fixed effects to control for shocks to teen birth rates that

are common to all cantons in a year, and j4 are canton fixed effects to control for any time-invariant systematic

differences across counties. Finally, the vector Zj refers to time-varying canton-specific characteristics,

including canton-level means for age, years of education, and proportion indigenous; as well canton-level rates

for: married/in-union, institutional delivery, skilled birth attendance, at-least-one-prenatal-control, second-or-

higher-order-child. We estimated equation (1) with robust errors clustered at the canton level. This approach

follows previous econometric analytic conventions and best practices for public health policy research (Wing et

al., 2018; Wooldridge, 2010). Because we have year fixed effects, we do not need Post2014 as a main effect.

       Subsequently, we define Delta 2 (2jt) as the difference in birth rates for teens (15­19) and adult women

in their late 20s (25­29); and Delta 3 (3jt) as the difference in birth rates for teens (15­19) and adult women in




                                                                                                                     10
their early 30s (30­34), in each canton j in each year t. We analyze 2jt and 3jt in analogous form as equation

(1) and present separate results for each specification with and without time-varying control variables.

       An alternative random effects specification using an expanded time-constant covariate vector including

proportion Afro-Ecuadorian, literacy level, percentage use for mobile phone, Internet and computer, as well as

dummy variables for health insurance and employment, gave similar results. However, a Hausman test strongly

rejected the null hypothesis that the random effects model provides consistent estimates [2(10)=140.23,

p=0.000]. Hence, we hereafter present only the fixed effects results. Of note, there is some minor variation on

the percentage of women who self-identify as Indigenous. Appendix Figs. A2-A3 show trends for indigenous

self-identification for random first and last 18 cantons. Nevertheless, for the 221 cantons during the entire

observation period, 96% of canton observations classified as indigenous for one period remain as indigenous in

next period.

       For the estimation, we used Stata SE 16.1 xtreg commands with fixed effects (fe) and cluster options.

Since the dependent variable is already a difference in birth rates, the coefficient 2 already provides a DDD

estimator. (Also, we did not implement a Poisson model because the dependent variables can be, and often are,

negative numbers, the data are not discrete, and there were no canton-year cells with zero teen births).

4.3. Tests of Robustness

   Comparable trends assumption. We investigated the comparable trends assumption using visual methods as

well as a formal tests using event study models to assess potential effects during the intervention and in the pre-

intervention period (year<2015).

   Alternative Control Periods. In our main specification, we used only the ENIPLA period as the pre-

intervention time. To check on alternative pre-intervention periods, we used all of the data in the ENIPLA

(2011-2014) and pre-ENIPLA (2007-2010) years, as well only the pre-ENIPLA period.




                                                                                                                  11
   Log-linear Models. Our main specification tests absolute differences in rates per 1000 women. As an

alternative, we ran relative risk models, where the dependent variable (jt) was the difference in log birth rates.

   Population-Weighted Regressions. In our main specification, all cantons had equal regression weight. As

another robustness test, we ran our model as a weighted regression with population weights derived from the

2010 Census data on the percentages of women (ages 15-29) at the canton level (Deb et al., 2017). Weighted

regression serves to account for the potentially differential program effects depending on canton size. A

population weighting scheme in repeated cross section is akin to inverse probability of selection in a random

sampling framework (Ridder and Moffitt, 2007).

   Alternative Year of Intervention. The official SRH policy changed abruptly by presidential decree in 2014

(Correa, 2015; Official Register, 2014), and thus we defined the binary variable Postt as equal to 1 if the year is

greater than 2014. Since there may have been delays in the switch from ENIPLA to Plan Familia due to inertia

or problems with plan implementation, we re-estimated our model with Postt as equal to 1 if the year was

greater than 2015.

   Secondary Evaluation. We also evaluated the impact of ENIPLA as a secondary result, by estimating an

equation similar to (1), but using only the pre-ENIPLA period as pre-intervention, and a Post 2010=1 as the

post intervention dummy for years 2011-2014.

   Serial Correlation. In our main model specification, we clustered at the level of the canton, but did not

correct for potential serial correlation. As one test of robustness, we re-estimated our model with robust

standard errors clustered at the canton level, and serial correlation with a three-period autoregressive, AR(3),

correlation matrix. The rationale was the possibility that characteristics at the canton level in one year could

affect how policies were implemented in the next three years. We allowed for an autocorrelation process when

computing robust standard errors as the number of groups is relatively large (Bertrand et al., 2004).

   Other robustness tests. We also checked for alternative specifications of equation 1.


                                                                                                                   12
    Lastly, because the indigenous self-identification can change over time (Appendix Figures A2 and A3), we

also changed the definition of highly-indigenous canton to be time-invariant based on an average over all of the

years (IND2); and then based on quintiles (such that IND3=1 if canton was in top two quintiles vs. IND3=0 if

canton was in bottom three quintiles).




5.0 Results

5.1. Descriptive Statistics.

    Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for 221 cantons in Ecuador for the 10-year span from 2008 to 2017.

The average teen population at the canton level over the decade was 3,374 women aged 15 to 19 years, ranging

from 86 in small rural areas to over 120,000 in large cities. The average teen birth rate was 86 per 1000 women

(ranging from 6 to 227); while the average young adult (20-24 year) birth rate was 118 per 1000 women

(ranging from 19 to 319). The average late 20s (25-29 year) birth rate was 100 per 1000 women (ranging from

18 to 267); while the average early 30s (30-34 year) birth rate was 77 per 1000 women (ranging from 13 to

226). On average, a quarter (25%) of canton-year observations were classified as having high indigenous

concentration (i.e., where more than 12% of women self-identified as indigenous in that year).

                                          [TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE.]

5.2. Analyses of Group Means.

    Figure 2 compares the trends in mean birth rates of teen mothers (black data points) and young adult

mothers (grey data points) among 221 cantons. In both teens and young adults, the mean birth rate appears to be

declining during the pre-ENIPLA (2008­2010) and ENIPLA (2011­2014) periods, although the rate of decline

is more marked in the young adult group. In the Plan Familia (2015­2017) period, the rate for young adult

mothers appears to continue to decline through at least 2016, while the rate for teen mothers increases and then

remains stagnant.

                                                                                                                 13
                                          [FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE.]

   Table 2 shows the mean live birth rates per 1000 women for teens (ages 15-19) and young adults (ages 20-

24). Overall, teen birth rates in cantons with low indigenous concentration were lower in the post period (2015-

2017) (by 8.43 per 1000 women); while young adult birth rates were lower by a greater margin (13.29 per 1000

women). For cantons with high indigenous concentration, that difference was even more pronounced: while the

teen birth rate in highly-indigenous cantons decreased by only 4.92 points, it was reduced by over 18 points

among young adults. The triple differences (DDD, of teen minus young adult and indigenous minus non-

indigenous) was 8.67 per 1000 women, and highly significant (p<0.001). This implies that birth rates in

indigenous cantons have not declined as much as in non-indigenous cantons; and that during the Plan Familia

years (2015-2017) the teen births in indigenous cantons have comparatively worsened. The rest of the analysis

delves more deeply into this main result by using regression analysis and two additional control groups: women

in their late 20s (25-29 years) as well as women in their early 30s (30-34 years).

   5.3. Regression Results.

   Table 3 shows our main regression results based upon a time- and canton-fixed effects model, with robust

standard errors clustered at the canton level and using only ENIPLA (2011-2014) as the pre-intervention period.

The dependent variable is Delta 1 (difference between teen and young adult birth rates) in columns 1 and 2;

Delta 2 (the difference between teen and late 20s birth rates) in columns 3 and 4; and Delta 3 (the difference

between teen and late 30s birth rates) in columns 5 and 6. In column (1), we present the main results, unadjusted

for covariates, where the interaction term of Indigenous × Post is 9 per 1000 women and highly significant

(p<0.001). In column (2), we show the regression results for the same model specification, adjusted for all time-

varying control variables. The control variables only slightly reduced the main DDD results to 8.5 per 1000

women and still highly significant. The results for the interaction of interest are very similar when we use the

alternative control groups with and without time-varying control variables using Delta 2 and Delta 3 as

dependent variables in columns 3-6.

                                                                                                                   14
                                          [TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE.]

   The 8.5-point change in the difference over time (2015-2017) between teen and young adult birth rates, and

between cantons with low and high indigenous concentrations, is from a baseline mean difference of 31 in

2014. This implies an overall 27% (8.5/31) increase in the birth rate difference for high-indigenous-

concentration cantons, most likely affected due to teen females not being able to access contraception services.

   Table 4 presents DDD regression results where we re-estimated our models using both the ENIPLA and pre-

ENIPLA periods as an alternative pre-intervention period. The coefficients of the interaction of interest are

similar to the previous table. The DDD estimates remain highly significant (p<0.001) across the six fixed effects

specifications with and without time-varying control variables.

                                          [TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE.]

   5.4. Other Robustness Tests.

   Figure 3 provides graphical evidence that the trends in birth rate differences for teen and young adults

groups in cantons with low and high indigenous concentration were comparable prior to 2015. Specifically, in

Figure 3, we plot unadjusted DD estimates by year for low and high indigenous cantons.

                                          [FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE.]

   Table 5 presents event study models for our three control groups. We re-estimated eq. (1) above as a

standard event study with interactions between IND and each year in our dataset (IND×2008... IND×2013;

omitted IND×2014 ­ the period interaction prior to the Plan Familia intervention; IND×2015; IND×2016; and

IND×2017). In addition to reporting the coefficient and standard errors for each of the leads and lags, we also

report a test on the joint significance of the leads (IND×2012 and IND×2013). The test of joint significance for

the leads in model 1 was not significant [F (2, 220) = 0.18; Prob > F = 0.8314]; nor was it significant for model

2 [F (2, 220) = 0.29; Prob > F = 0.7505]. The results were similar for models 5 and 6. The event study,

conditioning on the fixed effects and our time-varying covariates, is a rigorous way to assess the parallel trends

                                                                                                                  15
assumption. We can confirm that the lead effects were insignificant and small and close to 0 in our main models

using young adults as comparison group (columns 1 and 2), and for models 5 and 6 (using women in their early

30s as a comparison group). Nevertheless, the joint significance test for the lead effects was significant in

models 3 and 4 suggesting that the parallel trends assumption did not fully hold when we used women in their

late 20s as a control group. In addition, the event study models also allow us to assess lags dynamics in the

policy response. The main effect presented earlier in Table 3 (as the IND × Post interaction) is the effectively

the average of the effects, which seem to be mostly present in the IND×2016 interaction. That is, the policy

seems to have taken about one year to fully have its deleterious effect; and lost its impact by 2017 (which makes

sense because Plan Familia was abolished early that year by Presidential decree, from the new President

Moreno).

                                           [TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE.]

       Table 6 (columns 1 and 2) presents DDD estimates for the log difference (that is, log teen birth rate ­

log young adult birth rate) model, using robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at canton level. The

interaction (DDD) term indicates that teen births in cantons with high indigenous concentration increased by

7% compared to young adults in low indigenous cantons. The interaction is slightly reduced (to 6.36%) when

controlling for time-varying covariates. The results for the alternative control groups (in columns 3-6) are

slightly larger and remain stable in the range of 6 to 9%.

                                           [TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE.]

       Table 7 shows weighted regression results, with weights based on the 2010 Census data percentages of

women (ages 15-29) at the canton level. The main interaction terms are again positive and significant though

the magnitudes, particularly when using time-varying control variables, are lower. In the unadjusted model in

column (1), the interaction term of indigenous × post is 8.1 per 1000 women and highly significant (p<0.001).

The coefficient in the adjusted model in column (2) is 4.6 per 1000 women and also significant (p<0.01). In the

other differences models (columns 3-6), the interaction terms indicate that teen births in cantons with high

                                                                                                                   16
indigenous concentration increased also; except the model in column (4) comparing teen birth rates with those

of women in their late 20s. The weighted regression results are attenuated compared to the main results, which

makes sense because higher indigenous concentration cantons tend to be smaller in population.

                                           [TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE.]

       Table 8 presents DDD regression results where we use a dummy indicator for Post such that Post=1 if

the year is greater than 2015 (instead of greater than 2014). The DDD coefficients are larger than in the main

results table: 11.47 unadjusted and 11.18 adjusted for time-varying control variables. The main DDD estimates,

for the two additional control groups unadjusted and adjusted (columns 3-6) are smaller in magnitude but

remain significant. Since the effects are stronger in the post 2015 models (compared to the main results), we can

infer that the impact was concentrated in the 2016-17 period.

                                           [TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE.]

       Table 9 presents DDD regression results where we re-estimated our models without the ENIPLA period,

and thus using only the pre-ENIPLA period as an alternative pre-intervention period. The coefficients of the

interaction of interest are generally strengthened compared to the main results. The DDD estimates remain

significant across the six fixed-effects specifications with and without time-varying control variables.

                                           [TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE.]

   Table 10 presents the results for the secondary result evaluating the impact of ENIPLA using Delta 1

(difference between teen and young adult birth rates). In column (1), we present unadjusted results, and the

relevant interaction term of indigenous × post is 3.7 per 1000 women but not significant. In column (2) we show

the adjusted regression results; the covariates reduce the DDD coefficient results: the critical interaction term of

indigenous × post is 2.8 per 1000 women and still not significant. These results suggest that ENIPLA did not

affect birth rates for teen women in high indigenous cantons as Plan Familia did.

                                          [TABLE 10 ABOUT HERE.]


                                                                                                                  17
   Appendix Table A2 shows DDD regression results clustered at the canton level, and correcting for three-

period serial autocorrelation, AR(3). The DDD coefficients of the main interaction are slightly decreased from

previous tables (now in the 5-7 per 1000 range), yet remain highly significant (p<0.001).

   Appendix Table A3 shows results of an alternative specification of equation 1 where the dependent variable

is the teen birth rate (TR) and the comparison group birth rate (CR) is included as a control variable as follows:

                           (2)      TRjt = 1CRjt + 2INDj + 3INDj × Postt + t4 + j5 +6Zj + jt

   This specification ensures an unrestricted 0 coefficient (rather than assume 0=1, as it was done under the

main specification in equation 1). Appendix Table A3 presents fixed effects with unrestricted models using each

comparison group. Columns (1) and (2) use young adults as the comparison group; columns (3) and (4) use

women in their late20s and comparison group; and columns (5) and (6) use women in their early30s as

comparators. In column (2), our preferred specification, the interaction term of IND × Post is 5.3 per 1000

women and highly significant (p<0.001). In other model specifications, the interaction term of interest remains

highly significant and positive (in the range of 3.8 to 5 per 1000 women).

   Appendix Table A4 shows the results of changing the definition for highly-indigenous cantón so that it is

time-invariant. Under the ind2 time-invariant definition, a cantón is classified as high indigenous if the

percentage of women who self-identified as indigenous across all years (2008-2017) is above the national mean

(>12%); low indigenous if that percentage is at or below the national mean (12%) across all years. In column

(2), our preferred specification, the interaction term of ind2×Post is 8.5 per 1000 women and highly significant

(p<0.001). In other model specifications, the interaction term of interest remains highly significant and positive

(in the range of 7.3 to 9.7 per 1000 women). Under this re-definition, once a canton was defined as "highly

indigenous" it stayed that way over the entire sample period, and the main effect of Indigenous>12% dropped

out of the model since it was captured by our canton fixed effects.

   Appendix Table A5 shows the results of changing the definition for highly-indigenous cantón so that it is

based on quintiles. Under the ind3 time-invariant definition, a cantón is classified as high indigenous if the

                                                                                                                 18
percentage of women who self-identified as indigenous is in the top two quintiles of the national distribution

across all years (2008-2017); and low indigenous if that percentage is in the bottom three quintiles of the

national distribution across all years. In column (2), our preferred specification, the interaction term of

ind3×Post is 6.6 per 1000 women and highly significant (p<0.001). In other model specifications, the

interaction term of interest remains highly significant and positive (in the range of 5.5 to 8.7 per 1000 women).

Our results are robust to alternate definitions of highly indigenous share cantons (other than just using the

national mean of 12% as a cutoff) including upper two quintiles versus bottom three.

       6. Potential mechanisms

       The evidence suggests that Plan Familia increased adolescent birth rates by influencing SRH service

providers. The effect is concentrated in cantons where more women self-identify as indigenous, so racial/ethnic

and socio-economic disparities as well as decreased access to healthcare services appear to play a key role

(Anderson et al., 2016). To analyze the potential mechanisms more closely, we return to the last two nationally

representative surveys, ENSANUT 2012 and 2018, and look at the triple differences, not only comparing teens

and young adults as we did at the beginning to motivate the research, but also including an indicator on

indigenous race/ethnicity self-identification. Appendix Table A6, column (1) shows a strong (negative) and

significant DDD interaction for any contraception use ever; the DDD interaction in column (2), for any

contraception used currently now (i.e., in 2018), was still negative but lost its significance. These results are

congruent with our hypothesis because Plan Familia was abolished by 2017; thus it makes sense to see an effect

in the "ever" utilization variable only, and not necessarily in the current or "now" variable for 2018.

       These empirical results are consistent with various theoretical interpretations. As alluded, the program

can be understood in the context of a political trade-off between choosing what is better for population health

versus what is best for a politician's own private benefit (Barro, 1973; Rivas, 2016). On the one hand, choices

that enhance the health and living standards of citizens can improve the politician's chances of re-election. On

the other hand, the politician may be tempted instead to make choices that serve his own private benefits or

                                                                                                                    19
beliefs. In this framework, Plan Familia increased the cost to adolescent women, particularly in cantons with

higher indigenous concentration, in terms of higher adolescent birth rates, while the SRH policies were

suddenly shifted to be more in line with the private beliefs of the president and the Plan's director. As in other

cases where access to contraception is restricted, the birth rates consequently increase. This interpretation of the

program leaves unanswered, however, precisely how the program might have reduced contraception access for

teenage women. Contraception services should be available, by law, at each level of MOH health services

provision. The canton with the smallest population in 2015 had 2354 inhabitants; and for every 2000

inhabitants, there should be a type-A health center (Salcedo et al., 2014) [pg. 48]. Similarly, the law established

that at each health center, there should be access to contraception, including at the lowest level of health

services provision (Bucheli et al., 2014). Since clinics were not closed, the most likely explanation for how Plan

Familia limited access to contraception for teens was by altering the environment and the "adolescent

friendliness" of the SRH clinics and health posts.

       In particular, the program seems to have acted as a top-down coordination mechanism to make

contraception access for teens less socially acceptable or less desirable, making it harder for adolescent females

to demand access to  and information about  contraception. This top-down presidential decree and official

guidelines made SRH harder to access for adolescents, and consequently the young adults' birth rate rates were

decreasing faster than the teens' birth rates. Indeed, this interpretation is supported by anecdotal evidence, such

as the comments by the president and the Plan Familia director. The president openly decried his own former

ENIPLA policies as "abortionist and gay" (El Universo, 2015a); and the director of Plan Familia stated that "we

will very much emphasize abstinence" (El Universo, 2015b). Furthermore, the Plan Familia director, stated that

adolescents when they go to health centers should be questioned: "Are you sure that when you start your sexual

life as adolescent you are not curtailing your dreams? your medium and long term plans?" (El Universo,

2015b). Moreover, the information campaign "Habla serio: sexualidad sin misterios" [All joking aside:

sexuality without mystery] (See Figure 1) was stopped; including radio, TV, and the site

www.sexualidadsinmisterios.com were taken down in favor of promotion of abstinence, delay of sexual
                                                                                                                     20
initiation and the Billings method (El Universo, 2015c). The fundamental problem, particularly in the rural

areas, is that adolescents have not had access to contraception, not even basic information, so that their conduct

is highly dependent on how policies are actually implemented (Nicolalde-Escobar, 2016).

       7. Discussion and Conclusion

   We analyzed canton-level birth rate data for women ages 15-24 in Ecuador during 2008-2017. By looking at

a sudden, unanticipated policy change from ENIPLA to Plan Familia, we identified the effect of implementing

more restrictive access to sexual and reproductive health resources on adolescent women. Utilizing a difference-

in-differences approach, we determined how the difference in the birth rates between adolescent (15­19 years)

and young adult (20­24) women changed after the switch to Plan Familia. Further utilizing a triple-difference

approach, we determined how this difference in birth rates varied among cantons with low and high proportions

of indigenous women. Our results suggest that the dismantling of ENIPLA and the subsequent reduction of

differentiated, adolescent-friendly SRH services after 2014 significantly increased teen birth rates in

comparison to young adult birth rates, particularly among indigenous women. That is, we demonstrate that Plan

Familia disproportionately affected teen birth rates in cantons with higher indigenous concentrations. We

estimate that the Plan Familia intervention effect in cantons with high indigenous concentration is to have

increased teen birth rates by 27% over three years (so about 9% per year) over the baseline mean difference

(between teens and young adults) in 2014. The results were qualitatively similar when we using comparison

birth rates for women in their late 20s or in their early 30s as alternative control groups.

   A number of robustness checks provide reassurance for the main results. First, there is visual and formal

evidence that the pre trends were comparable. Young adult women (aged 20-24) are an adequate control for

teen women (aged 15-19) because the fertility trends for the two groups were comparable, and the policy shock

clearly targeted teens only: dismantling ENIPLA meant curtailing access to information and adolescent-friendly

health services. Second, the main results cannot be simply an artefact of the years of observation. Instead of

using only ENIPLA as pre-intervention period, we also conducted DDD analyses using both ENIPLA and pre-

                                                                                                                 21
ENIPLA as pre-intervention periods. Similarly, we also used pre-ENIPLA only as the pre-intervention period.

Third, by using post>2015 in a robustness test, we rule out the possibility that the main findings in the DDD

models are driven solely by births in 2015, a year that could have been only partially affected by the switch to

Plan Familia. Fourth, our results are robust to potential issues with small cantons: there were no cantons with

zero births, yet the high indigenous cantons tend to be smaller. When we used population-based weights, the

results are attenuated but still significant. Furthermore, other changes such as changing the comparison group

(to women in their late 20s, or in their early 30s), specification to logarithmic differences, definition of

indigenous concentration, or serial correlation corrections still supported our primary conclusion: the DDD

coefficient, the critical interaction, was in the hypothesized direction and significant in 63 out of 66

specifications across all models presented in Tables 3-9 and Appendix Tables A2-A5. Finally, our secondary

result, evaluating ENIPLA, suggests that the earlier policies did not reduce teen birth rates (as the government

claimed). Yet the main interaction, the DDD result, was not significant, meaning that ENIPLA did not

comparatively increase teen birth rates in indigenous cantons, as Plan Familia did.

    Given the importance of the topic and policies that our paper is addressing, the latter point deserves further

discussion and framing. ENIPLA did not (relatively) reduce adolescent pregnancies in highly indigenous

cantons. The interaction result was nil. That on itself, however, is not a totally undesirable outcome because it

means it had no differential effect based on race/ethnicity (i.e., no discrimination). Plan Familia, on the other

hand, did have a differential effect based on race/ethnicity (so it was discriminatory) because it reduced access

in indigenous cantons and thus increased birth rates in highly-indigenous cantons vs low-indigenous cantons.

    Finally, it is important to note also that teens in even low-indigenous cantons may be potentially impacted ­

that is, the control group is not a pure control group in that sense, that our third difference is along the lines of a

dose-response check. Thus, our original hypothesis was to expect larger effects in cantons with a higher share of

indigenous population relative those with a lower share. Yet, in fact, what we see is more of an inverted-U

effect based on the quintile-based definition of highly-indigenous cantons (Appendix Table A5). Hence, more


                                                                                                                     22
analysis is needed to uncover all of the complexities in the interaction of race/ethnicity and access to SRH

services.

   The results overall, nevertheless, constitute a test of abstinence only and "family-values" policies

implemented from the top leadership at the national level. In terms of proximate channels of operation, the less

adolescent-friendly policies were instituted in the context of a sudden policy reversal. As mentioned, the

president decried his own past policies as "abortionist and gay" (El Universo, 2015a); the head of the family

planning program stated that Plan Familia "will very much emphasize abstinence" (El Universo, 2015b); and

evidence-based information on contraception for adolescents was intentionally restricted (El Universo, 2015c).

Nevertheless, the root mechanisms may be the underlying inequity in a health system that curtails access to

basic health services in general, and sexual/reproductive health services in particular for indigenous women.

One study of in the Ecuadorian Amazon basin found that most pregnancies among indigenous women were

unintended (62.7%); over two-thirds (73.7%) reported having had at least one unintended pregnancy; and being

young, single, and indigenous were significant risk factors for unintended pregnancy, in addition to having low

access to education and having more than two children (Goicolea and Sebastian, 2010). Another study in six

communities from the central highland region of Ecuador found that most indigenous women work long hours

(about 14 hours per day), largely on agricultural production and food preparation, though other tasks required

considerable time as well: washing and drying clothes, fetching firewood and water for cooking, and child care.

Moreover, they give birth while they are still in their teens. The average age for first pregnancy is 19 years

(range 14-29). About a fifth (17%) had problems accessing health services, and most (58.1%) preferred

traditional health services, particularly in pregnancy and childbirth, while only 16.1% preferred public health

services (Waters et al., 2018).

   It is instructive to compare the impact of the Plan Familia policy with other studies although, as mentioned,

most studies are U.S.-based, so the comparisons are limited. In the U.S., income-based Medicaid family

planning expansions reduced teen birth rates by 5.3%; while a 5-point rise in unemployment would lead to a 3%

reduction in teen childbearing, representing 16% of the 19.3% observed decline in teen childbearing rates
                                                                                                                  23
(Kearney and Levine, 2015). Similarly, reducing funding for family planning funding by 67% in Texas

increased teen birth rates by 3.4% over four years (Packham, 2017). Moreover, legalization of abortion in the

1970s in the U.S. changed the composition of women at risk of becoming unmarried mothers some 15-24 years

later. That composition effect reduced out-of-wedlock teen birth rates by 6%, which accounted for about 25% of

the observed decline in unmarried teen birth rates over that period (Donohue et al., 2009). Some of these

policies have comparable effects to the 27% increase over three years (that is, about 9% per year) in the

difference between teen and young adult birth rates caused by Plan Familia that we found when comparing

cantons with and without high indigenous concentration.

   The results also constitute a commentary on the chasm between the rhetoric of electoral candidates and

elected politicians and the policies that are actually implemented. The high cost of this divergence tends to be

borne by the most vulnerable. This commentary is particularly relevant to Latin American countries, many of

which have a long history of populism (Edwards, 2019). Despite the socialist rhetoric of Hugo Chavez in

Venezuela, his administration actually fragmented and weakened organized labor, restricted collective

bargaining, and undermined vulnerable workers in cooperatives (Posner, 2016). The governments of Correa (in

Ecuador) and Chavez (in Venezuela) both engaged in strong pro-poor rhetoric (Ellner, 2012). Yet rhetoric alone

does not necessarily ensure that the policies implemented are in fact pro-poor or pro-minorities.

   Our research is not without limitations. First, we analyzed rates rather than individual-level data. In

particular, we computed birth rates at the finest level of data aggregation, that is, the canton. We reasoned that

the quantity and intensity of teen-friendly SRH services at health canters varied across cantons. However, there

is no accurate data for when some of the clinics restricted some SRH services to adolescents in predominantly

indigenous cantons. Nor is there accurate data about the number of clinics that provided adolescent-friendly

services. Second, unlike most U.S.-based studies that rely on state- or county-level variation for identification,

we cannot implement such a research strategy in Ecuador, where laws are applied uniformly at the national

level. Thus, we need the difference in birth rates (teen ­ comparison group) for identification. A third limitation

is the lack of microdata for additional outcomes such as abortions or sexually transmitted disease prevalence.
                                                                                                                     24
Abortion is illegal in Ecuador  even in cases of rape (Reuters, 2019), and data vary from un-reported to

substantially under-reported. Lastly, our identification strategy relies on the assumption that the policy change

was an abrupt, unexpected shock. Although we have no reason to believe that adolescents would pre-emptively

change their behaviors in anticipation of a policy change, the implementation of a national-level re-structuring

of SRH policy can take time. Still, to the extent that more liberal adolescent health policies continued in some

cantons after 2015, our results would be biased towards the null.

       More research on SRH policies is needed outside of the United States. Randomized controlled trials in

low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) may have high internal validity, but they may be less generalizable,

more expensive, and not always ethically acceptable. Other rigorous, non-experimental approaches can be

implemented in LMICs where there are reasonably complete data sources (as we found in Ecuador) and where

sudden and unexpected policy changes or other natural experiments that can be exploited for identification.

       In conclusion, the main contribution of this paper is to assess the effects of restrictive SRH policies on

adolescent women. The results provide evidence to suggest that restrictive policies, including family-centered,

abstinence-only policies, have comparatively increased the rates of teen pregnancy in Ecuador, particularly

among indigenous women.




                                                                                                                    25
FIGURES
Figure 1
ENIPLA Pamphlet Encouraging Condom Use among Adolescents.




Notes: The campaign slogan "Habla serio," which literally means "Talk seriously," was regularly used in informal
conversation as the equivalent of the English "All joking aside." The front page continues "With a condom, you enjoy a
lot." The second page describes the "Correct, permanent use of the condom in all sexual relations, whether vaginal, oral or
anal."




                                                                                                                        26
Figure 2
Birth Rates at the Canton level for Teens (15­19) and Young Adults (20­24).
                                   140
  Live Birth Rate per 1000 Women
                                   120




                                                                                     Young Adults (20-24)
                                   100




                                                                            Teenagers (15-19)
                                   80
                                   60




                                         2008   2009   2010   2011   2012     2013   2014       2015   2016   2017
                                                                     Year of Birth

Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Each data point represents the unweighted mean birth rate among 221 cantones. The error bars indicate the 95% confidence interval (that is,
±1.96 standard errors) around each mean value.




                                                                                                                                                 27
Figure 3
Birth Rate Difference at the Canton Level for Teens (15­19) minus Young Adults (20­24).




Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Each line represents the unweighted mean birth rates among 221 cantones. High indigenous concentration is an indicator variable =1 if more
than 12% of women self-identify as indigenous in a given canton for a given year.




                                                                                                                                               28
Table 1
Summary Statistics for 221 Cantons: Means for 2008-2017.

          Variable                                                  Obs.       Mean         Std. Dev.        Min             Max
 Demographic variables

          Female teen population (15-19 yrs.)                       2210       3,374         11,045                  86    120,634

          Female young adult population (20-24 yrs.)                2210       3,098         10,626                  69    116,203

          Female adult late20s population (25-29 yrs.)              2210       2,843         10,180                  55    113,289

          Female adult early30s population (25-29 yrs.)             2210       2,598          9,535                  44    107,645

          Teen birthrate¶                                           2210        85.5          30.5                  5.9     227.4

          Young adult birthrate¶                                    2210       118.1          38.4                 19.6     319.6

          Adult late20s birthrate¶                                  2210       100.0          32.1                 17.8     266.9

          Adult early30s birthrate¶                                 2210        76.8          28.5                 13.0     226.3

 Main outcomes: birth rate differences
          Delta1 (teen - young adult)                               2210       -32.6          24.3          -145.2           67.2
          Delta2 (teen - late20s)                                   2210       -14.4          26.5          -128.8           87.9
          Delta3 (teen - early30s)                                  2210        8.7           29.0           -94.7          116.4
 Exposures
          Year of Birth                                             2210      2012.5          2.87           2008            2017
          Post 2014                                                 2210        0.30          0.46             0               1
          Pre 2011                                                  2210        0.30          0.46             0               1
          High indigenous concentration§                            2210        0.25          0.43             0               1
 Time-varying control variables
          Teen indigenous rate                                      2210        0.13          0.23             0               1
          Teen average age                                          2210        17.5          0.23           16.3            18.6
          Teen average educational level                            2210        3.58          0.70             2              7.8
          Teen married/in-union rate                                2210        0.52          0.21             0               1
          Teen institutional delivery rate                          2210        0.82          0.20             0               1
          Teen skilled birth attendant rate                         2210        0.85          0.19             0               1
          Teen at-least-one-prenatal-control rate                   2210        0.86          0.17             0               1
          Teen second-or-higher-order-child rate                    2210        0.20          0.08             0             0.83
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents averages at the canton level for the entire observation period 2008-2017 (inclusive).
¶
  Birth rates are per 1000 women (in the respective age group). § High indigenous concentration is an indicator variable =1 if more than 12% of
women self-identify as indigenous.  Educational levels are: 0=none, 1=literacy center, 2=kinder garden, 3=primary, 4=basic, 5=junior high school,
6=high school, 7=post secondary, 8=university, 9=post graduate.


                                                                                                                                                29
Table 2
Live Birth Rates by Age Group and Indigenous Status, Ecuador: 2011-2017.

 Group                                   2011-14                 2015-17                Difference
 LOW INDIGENOUS
 Teen (15-19 yrs.)                         80.34                   71.92                   -8.43
                                            1.05                    1.03
 Young adult (20-24 yrs.)                 109.50                   96.21                   -13.29
                                            1.17                    1.12
 HIGH INDIGENOUS
 Teen (15-19 yrs.)                        102.35                  97.44                    -4.92
                                           2.26                    2.85
 Young adult (20-24 yrs.)                 141.45                  123.00                   -18.45
                                           2.90                    3.32
 DELTA 1
 Teens - Young adults
 Low Indigenous                           -29.16                   -24.29                   4.86
                                           0.75                     0.81
 High Indigenous                          -39.10                   -25.56                  13.54
                                           1.82                     2.22
 DDD                                                                                        8.67
                                                                                          (2.5)***
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents canton-level birth rates per 1000 women with standard errors in parentheses.
Cantons are classified as having high indigenous concentration if more than 12% of women self-identify as
indigenous in that year; and low indigenous concentration if 12% or fewer women self-identify as indigenous.
The 12% cutoff was chosen because it is the national mean.
DDD denotes triple difference.
*** significant at p<0.001




                                                                                                                   30
Table 3
Effect of Abrupt Change in Sexual and Reproductive Health Policy on Adolescent Birth Rates in Ecuador 2011-2017:
Triple Difference Main Regression Results Using ENIPLA (2011-2014) as Pre-Treatment Period.

                                                     (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
                                                   Delta1        Delta1
                                                   (teen -       (teen -        Delta2         Delta2       Delta3         Delta3
                                                   young         young          (teen -        (teen -      (teen -        (teen -
                                                   adult)        adult)        late20s)       late20s)     early30s)      early30s)
 Indigenous>12%=1                                  -5.088        -5.312        -4.213         -2.050         0.273          1.016
                                                   (5.214)       (5.210)       (3.879)       (4.024)        (4.672)        (4.467)
 Indigenous>12%=1 × Post 2014=1                   9.004***      8.538***      9.563***       7.910**       7.533***       8.547***
                                                   (2.282)       (2.304)       (2.742)       (2.990)        (2.065)        (2.346)
 Canton fixed effects                               YES            YES           YES            YES           YES           YES
 Year fixed effects                                 YES            YES           YES            YES           YES           YES
 Time-varying control variables                      NO            YES            NO            YES            NO           YES

 Observations                                       1547          1547           1547          1547           1547          1547
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents fixed effects main regression results.
Interaction term represents triple differences (DDD) in birth rates per 1000 women:
Delta 1 is for (teens ­ young adults)
Delta 2 is for (teens ­ late 20s)
Delta 3 is for (teens ­ early 30s)
Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at canton level:
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
Cantón is classified as high indigenous if percentage of women who self-identified as indigenous is above the national mean (>12%); low indigenous
if that percentage is at or below the national mean (12%).
Post 2014 is a dummy variable = 1 if year>2014. Because we have year fixed effects, we do not need Post2014 as a main effect.
Time-varying control variables include cantón-level means for: age, education, proportion Indigenous, married/in-union, institutional delivery, skill
birth attendance, any prenatal control, and second-or-higher-order birth.




                                                                                                                                                  31
Table 4
Effect of Abrupt Change in Sexual and Reproductive Health Policy on Adolescent Birth Rates in Ecuador 2008-2017:
Triple Difference Regression Results Using ENIPLA and pre-ENIPLA as Pre-Treatment Periods.

                                                    (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                  Delta1        Delta1
                                                  (teen -       (teen -        Delta2        Delta2        Delta3        Delta3
                                                  young         young          (teen -       (teen -       (teen -       (teen -
                                                  adult)        adult)        late20s)      late20s)      early30s)     early30s)
 Indigenous>12%=1                                 -0.176        -0.993         1.970          2.422         3.155         3.061
                                                  (4.325)       (4.227)       (3.530)        (3.638)       (3.291)       (3.577)
 Indigenous>12%=1 × Post 2014=1                  10.65***      8.945***      12.97***       11.19***      11.11***      10.28***
                                                  (2.756)       (2.624)       (3.248)        (3.212)       (2.504)       (2.493)
 Canton fixed effects                             YES           YES           YES             YES           YES           YES
 Year fixed effects                               YES           YES           YES             YES           YES           YES
 Time-varying control variables                   NO            YES           NO              YES           NO            YES
 Observations                                      2210          2210          2210           2210          2210          2210
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents fixed effects regression results.
 Interaction term represents triple differences (DDD) in birth rates per 1000 women:
 Delta 1 is for (teens ­ young adults)
 Delta 2 is for (teens ­ late 20s)
 Delta 3 is for (teens ­ early 30s)
 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at canton level:
 * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
 Cantón is classified as high indigenous if percentage of women who self-identified as Indigenous is above the national mean (>12%); low
 indigenous if that percentage is at or below the national mean (12%).
 Post 2014 is a dummy variable = 1 if year>2014. Because we have year fixed effects, we do not need Post2014 as a main effect.
Time-varying control variables include cantón-level means for: age, education, proportion Indigenous, married/in-union, institutional delivery, skill
birth attendance, any prenatal control, and second-or-higher-order birth.




                                                                                                                                                    32
Table 5
Estimated policy effects in the years before and during Plan Familia: 2008-2017.
                                        (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                   Delta1 (teen -   Delta1 (teen -   Delta2 (teen   Delta2 (teen   Delta3 (teen   Delta3 (teen
                                   young adult)     young adult)      - late20s)     - late20s)    - early30s)    - early30s)
 Indigenous>12%                          5.730          4.130           14.29**       14.74**          11.00*         11.44*
                                       (5.171)         (5.513)          (4.403)        (4.914)        (4.489)        (4.775)
 2008                                -17.25***       -14.89***          -4.295*         -4.977         4.929*         3.814
                                       (2.111)         (3.215)          (1.755)        (2.762)        (2.013)        (2.764)
 2009                                -13.03***       -10.04***            0.943          2.425       9.811***      9.796***
                                       (1.739)         (2.001)          (1.820)        (2.085)        (1.901)        (2.161)
 2010                                -8.556***        -5.404**            1.685          3.551       9.191***      9.804***
                                       (1.732)         (1.956)          (1.869)        (2.086)        (1.920)        (2.068)
 2011                                -9.208***         -4.710*         -0.00615          2.701       6.871***      8.569***
                                       (1.610)         (2.214)          (1.714)        (2.357)        (1.551)        (2.045)
 2012                                   -2.695          3.493             2.185          6.036       5.565***        8.542**
                                       (1.653)         (3.211)          (1.510)        (3.299)        (1.663)        (3.066)
 2013                                 -4.819**          -2.687           -0.861          0.543          1.245         2.071
                                       (1.642)         (1.786)          (1.669)        (1.878)        (1.655)        (1.814)
 2015                                  5.277**          2.539            3.558*          1.759       5.860***        4.878**
                                       (1.719)         (1.858)          (1.581)        (1.681)        (1.469)        (1.741)
 2016                                    1.473          -0.554           -0.291         -2.825        -3.492*       -5.897**
                                       (1.371)         (1.601)          (1.450)        (1.582)        (1.469)        (1.788)
 2017                                 -4.565**       -9.581***        -6.116***      -11.01***      -5.773***      -9.705***
                                       (1.542)         (2.190)          (1.542)        (1.954)        (1.468)        (2.292)
 2008 × Indigenous>12%=1                -8.024          -3.901        -18.32***        -15.99*       -16.16**        -14.15*
                                       (6.422)         (6.858)          (5.333)        (6.205)        (5.647)        (6.091)
 2009 × Indigenous>12%=1               -11.22*          -9.423         -14.93**       -14.06**        -12.57*        -12.08*
                                       (5.393)         (5.474)          (4.824)        (5.022)        (5.206)        (5.126)
 2010 × Indigenous>12%=1                -5.368          -3.918        -17.96***      -17.17***         -9.065         -8.863
                                       (4.547)         (4.801)          (4.907)        (4.942)        (5.411)        (5.375)
 2011 × Indigenous>12%=1               -13.41*         -12.38*        -15.02***      -14.40***        -10.59*        -10.28*
                                       (5.369)         (5.366)          (4.238)        (4.263)        (5.208)        (5.130)
 2012 × Indigenous>12%=1                -1.870          -3.130         -13.75**       -14.37**         -2.447         -3.272
                                       (3.809)         (4.247)          (4.283)        (5.032)        (4.221)        (4.550)
 2013 × Indigenous>12%=1                -2.026          -1.754           -8.974         -8.755         -4.593         -4.388
                                       (4.110)         (4.132)          (4.669)        (4.654)        (3.844)        (3.785)
 2015 × Indigenous>12%=1                -1.116          -0.961            0.485        -0.0386          1.431         1.186
                                       (4.256)         (4.206)          (4.278)        (4.384)        (4.274)        (4.233)
 2016 × Indigenous>12%=1                9.226*          8.513*            2.828          2.248         8.582*         8.745*
                                       (3.862)         (3.843)          (3.806)        (3.911)        (3.525)        (3.573)
 2017 × Indigenous>12%=1                 6.538          5.551            -1.566         -2.504          0.770         0.699
                                       (4.567)         (4.462)          (3.504)        (3.507)        (4.525)        (4.341)
 Canton fixed effects                    YES             YES              YES            YES            YES            YES
 Year fixed effects                      YES             YES              YES            YES            YES            YES
 Time-varying control variables           NO             YES               NO            YES             NO            YES

                                                                                                                                 33
 Observations                                  2210                2210              2210             2210              2210            2210
 Test of joint significance for lead interactions:
    F (2,220)                                  0.18                0.29              5.29             4.27             0.72             0.69
    Prob. > F                                 0.8314              0.7505            0.0059           0.0151           0.4892           0.5016
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents event study models with three comparison groups.
Interaction term between year and Indigenous represent triple differences (DDD) in birth rates per 1000 women:
Delta 1 is for (teens ­ young adults)
Delta 2 is for (teens ­ late 20s)
Delta 3 is for (teens ­ early 30s)
Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at cantón level:
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
Cantón is classified as high indigenous if percentage of women who self-identified as indigenous is above the national mean (>12%); low indigenous
if that percentage is at or below the national mean (12%).
Reference year is 2014.

  Lead interactions defined as: 2012 × Indigenous>12%=1 and 2013 × Indigenous>12%=1.
Time-varying control variables include cantón-level means for: age, education, proportion Indigenous, married/in-union, institutional delivery, skill
birth attendance, any prenatal control, and second-or-higher-order birth.




                                                                                                                                                  34
Table 6
Effect of Abrupt Change in Sexual and Reproductive Health Policy on Adolescent Birth Rates in Ecuador 2011-2017:
Logarithmic Triple Differences.

                                                (1)                (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)                 (6)
                                                Log
                                              delta1                               Log
                                              (teen ­             Log            delta2         Log              Log                 Log
                                              young              delta1          (teen ­       delta2           delta3              delta3
                                               adult)    (teen - young adult)  late20s)  (teen - late20s) (teen - early30s) (teen - early30s)
 Indigenous>12%=1                            -0.0489            -0.0468         -0.0540       -0.0232          -0.0102              0.0117
                                            (0.0683)           (0.0649)        (0.0575)      (0.0515)         (0.0812)             (0.0718)
 Indigenous>12%=1 × Post 2014=1 0.0700**                       0.0636**       0.0956***      0.0665*         0.0867***            0.0837**
                                            (0.0214)           (0.0231)        (0.0281)      (0.0320)         (0.0258)             (0.0291)
 Canton fixed effects                          YES                YES             YES           YES              YES                 YES
 Year fixed effects                            YES                YES             YES           YES              YES                 YES
 Time-varying control variables                 NO                YES              NO           YES              NO                  YES
 Observations                                  1547              1547             1547         1547             1547                 1547
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents fixed effects regression results.
 Interaction term represents triple differences (DDD) in birth rates per 1000 women:
 Log delta 1 is for (log teen birth rate ­ log young adult birth rate)
 Log delta 2 is for (log teen birth rate ­ log late 20s birth rate)
 Log delta 3 is for (log teen birth rate ­ log early 30s birth rate)
 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at canton level:
 * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
 Cantón is classified as high indigenous if percentage of women who self-identified as Indigenous is above the national mean (>12%); low
 indigenous if that percentage is at or below the national mean (12%).
 Post 2014 is a dummy variable = 1 if year>2014. Because we have year fixed effects, we do not need Post2014 as a main effect.
Time-varying control variables include cantón-level means for: age, education, proportion Indigenous, married/in-union, institutional delivery, skill
birth attendance, any prenatal control, and second-or-higher-order birth.




                                                                                                                                                    35
Table 7
Effect of Abrupt Change in Sexual and Reproductive Health Policy on Adolescent Birth Rates in Ecuador 2011-2017:
Triple Difference, Population Weighted Regression Results.
                                                   (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)

                                                                 Delta1 (teen         Delta2          Delta2
                                             Delta1 (teen -       - young             (teen -         (teen -       Delta3 (teen -     Delta3 (teen
                                             young adult)           adult)           late20s)        late20s)         early30s)        - early30s)
 Indigenous>12%=1                               -5.554            -5.675*             -2.131          -2.324         -5.067***          -4.942**
                                               (2.863)             (2.792)           (1.813)         (1.617)           (1.349)           (1.559)
 Indigenous>12%=1 × Post 2014=1               8.110***            4.635**            6.710**          3.174            5.708**           4.437*
                                               (2.017)             (1.603)           (2.126)         (1.882)           (1.826)           (1.739)
 Canton fixed effects                            YES                YES                YES             YES               YES              YES
 Year fixed effects                              YES                YES                YES             YES               YES              YES
 Time-varying control variables                   NO                YES                 NO             YES                NO              YES
 Observations                                    1547               1547               1547            1547              1547             1547
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents fixed effects regression results weighted by share of female teen (15-19) population according to 2010 Census.
 Interaction term represents triple differences (DDD) in birth rates per 1000 women:
 Delta 1 is for (teens ­ young adults)
 Delta 2 is for (teens ­ late 20s)
 Delta 3 is for (teens ­ early 30s)
 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at canton level:
 * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
 Cantón is classified as high indigenous if percentage of women who self-identified as Indigenous is above the national mean (>12%); low
 indigenous if that percentage is at or below the national mean (12%).
 Post 2014 is a dummy variable = 1 if year>2014. Because we have year fixed effects, we do not need Post2014 as a main effect.
Time-varying control variables include cantón-level means for: age, education, proportion Indigenous, married/in-union, institutional delivery, skill
birth attendance, any prenatal control, and second-or-higher-order birth.




                                                                                                                                                    36
Table 8
Effect of Abrupt Change in Sexual and Reproductive Health Policy on Adolescent Birth Rates in Ecuador 2011-2017:
Triple Difference Regression Results, Using Post>2015.
                                                   (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)

                                                                                      Delta2           Delta2
                                             Delta1 (teen -     Delta1 (teen -        (teen -          (teen -       Delta3 (teen      Delta3 (teen
                                             young adult)       young adult)         late20s)         late20s)       - early30s)       - early30s)
 Indigenous>12%=1                               -4.399             -4.568             -2.723           -0.771           1.211             2.150
                                               (5.133)            (5.131)            (3.921)          (4.073)          (4.627)           (4.443)
 Indigenous>12%=1 × Post 2015=1               11.47***           11.18***            7.800**           6.151*          7.503**           8.411**
                                               (2.709)            (2.818)            (2.518)          (2.614)          (2.515)           (2.774)
 Canton fixed effects                            YES                YES                YES              YES              YES               YES
 Year fixed effects                              YES                YES                YES              YES              YES               YES
 Time-varying control variables                   NO                YES                 NO              YES               NO               YES
 Observations                                    1547               1547               1547             1547             1547              1547
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents fixed effects regression results.
 Interaction term represents triple differences (DDD) in birth rates per 1000 women:
 Delta 1 is for (teens ­ young adults)
 Delta 2 is for (teens ­ late 20s)
 Delta 3 is for (teens ­ early 30s)
 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at canton level:
 * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
 Cantón is classified as high indigenous if percentage of women who self-identified as Indigenous is above the national mean (>12%); low
 indigenous if that percentage is at or below the national mean (12%).
 Post 2015 is a dummy variable = 1 if year>2015. Because we have year fixed effects, we do not need Post2015 as a main effect.
Time-varying control variables include cantón-level means for: age, education, proportion Indigenous, married/in-union, institutional delivery, skill
birth attendance, any prenatal control, and second-or-higher-order birth.




                                                                                                                                                    37
Table 9
Triple Difference Effect of Abrupt Change in SRH Policy on Teen Birth Rates using Pre-ENIPLA only as Pre-
Intervention Period.

                                                   (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)

                                                                Delta1 (teen
                                             Delta1 (teen -      - young          Delta2 (teen     Delta2 (teen     Delta3 (teen       Delta3 (teen
                                             young adult)          adult)          - late20s)       - late20s)      - early30s)        - early30s)
 Indigenous>12%=1                               -1.035            -0.998              0.510            1.900           2.253              3.873
                                               (5.958)            (5.657)           (5.687)          (5.686)          (5.454)            (5.530)
 Indigenous>12%=1 × Post 2014=1                13.34**            8.675*           18.01***          14.97**         16.04***            12.88**
                                               (4.260)            (4.275)           (4.610)          (4.506)          (3.844)            (3.920)
 Canton fixed effects                            YES               YES                YES              YES             YES                YES
 Year fixed effects                              YES               YES                YES              YES             YES                YES
 Time-varying control variables                   NO               YES                 NO              YES              NO                YES
 Observations                                    1326              1326               1326             1326            1326               1326
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents fixed effects regression results for 2008-2017 with the ENIPLA period (2011-2014) excluded.
 Interaction term represents triple differences (DDD) in birth rates per 1000 women:
 Delta 1 is for (teens ­ young adults)
 Delta 2 is for (teens ­ late 20s)
 Delta 3 is for (teens ­ early 30s)
 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at canton level:
 * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
 Cantón is classified as high indigenous if percentage of women who self-identified as Indigenous is above the national mean (>12%); low
 indigenous if that percentage is at or below the national mean (12%).
 Post 2014 is a dummy variable = 1 if year>2014. Because we have year fixed effects, we do not need Post2014 as a main effect.
Time-varying control variables include cantón-level means for: age, education, proportion Indigenous, married/in-union, institutional delivery, skill
birth attendance, any prenatal control, and second-or-higher-order birth.




                                                                                                                                                    38
Table 10
Secondary Results: Triple Difference Effect of ENIPLA on Teen Birth Rates: 2008-2014.
                                                  (1)          (2)
                                               Delta1       Delta1
                                                (teen -      (teen -
                                                young        young
                                                adult)       adult)
 Indigenous>12%=1                               0.382        0.774
                                               (4.098)      (3.893)
 Indigenous>12%=1 × Post 2010=1                 3.775        2.858
                                               (3.312)      (3.393)
 Canton fixed effects                            YES          YES
 Year fixed effects                              YES          YES
 Time-varying control variables                   NO          YES
 Observations                                    1547         1547
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents fixed effects regression results.
 Interaction term represents triple differences (DDD) in birth rates per 1000 women:
 Delta 1 is for (teens ­ young adults)
 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at canton level:
 * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
 Cantón is classified as high indigenous if percentage of women who self-identified as Indigenous is above the national mean (>12%); low
 indigenous if that percentage is at or below the national mean (12%).
 Post 2010 is a dummy variable = 1 if year>2010. Because we have year fixed effects, we do not need Post2010 as a main effect.
Time-varying control variables include cantón-level means for: age, education, proportion Indigenous, married/in-union, institutional delivery, skill
birth attendance, any prenatal control, and second-or-higher-order birth.




                                                                                                                                                    39
References
Anderson, I., Robson, B., Connolly, M., Al-yaman, F., Bjertness, E., King, A., Tynan, M., Madden, R., 2016.
    Indigenous and tribal peoples ' health ( The Lancet ­ Lowitja Institute Global Collaboration): a population
    study. Lancet 388, 131­157. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00345-7
Azevedo, J.P., Favara, M., Haddock, S.E., Lopez-Calva, L.F., Müller, M., Perova, E., 2012. Teenage Pregnancy
    and Opportunities in Latin America and the Caribbean, The World Bank. Washington, DC.
Barro, R.J., 1973. The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model. Public Choice 14, 19­42.
Berthelon, M.E., Kruger, D.I., 2011. Risky behavior among youth: Incapacitation effects of school on
     adolescent motherhood and crime in Chile. J. Public Econ. 95, 41­53. doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2010.09.004
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., Mullainathan, S., 2004. How Much Should We Trust Differences-In-Differences
     Estimates? Q. J. Econ. 119, 249­275. doi:https://doi.org/10.1162/003355304772839588
Branson, N., Byker, T., 2018. Causes and Consequences of Teen Childbearing: Evidence from a Reproductive
    Health Intervention in South Africa. J. Health Econ. 57, 221­35. doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2017.11.006
Bucheli, A., Masabanda, M., Illapa, M., Jumbo, J., Ortega, J., 2014. Instructivo de Implementación del
    Reglamento para regular el acceso a métodos anticonceptivos - Acuerdo Ministerial 2490 [Implementation
    Instructions for Regulation for access to contraceptive methods - Ministerial Agreement 2490]. Ministerio
    de Salud Pública (MSP) [Ministry of Public Health], Quito, Ecuador.
Burneo Salazar, C., Córdova Páez, A., Gutiérrez, M.J., Ordoñez, A., 2015. Embarazo Adolescente en el Marco
    De La Estrategia Nacional Intersectorial De Planificación Familiar (ENIPLA) 2014 Y El Plan Nacional De
    Fortalecimiento de la Familia 2015 [WWW Document]. URL
    http://saludyderechos.fundaciondonum.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/SEXUALIDAD-
    ADOLESCENTE-PDF.pdf (accessed 6.21.19).
Buvinic, M., 1998. The costs of adolescent childbearing: evidence from Chile, Barbados, Guatemala, and
    Mexico. Stud. Fam. Plann. 29, 201­9.
Carr, J.B., Packham, A., 2017. The Effects of State-Mandated Abstinence-Based Sex Education on Teen Health
     Outcomes. Health Econ. 26, 403­420. doi:10.1002/hec.3315
Carrera, S., Yunga, J., 2016. Nota técnica: Registro de Estadísticas Vitales-Nacidos vivos y Defunciones 2015
     [WWW Document]. URL http://www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/documentos/web-
     inec/Poblacion_y_Demografia/Nacimientos_Defunciones/2015/Nota_tecnica_Registro_de_Estadisticas_Vi
     tales_2015.pdf (accessed 6.18.19).
Correa, R., 2015. Enlace Ciudadano 413 desde Carcelén Alto [WWW Document]. El Comer. URL
    https://www.elcomercio.com/actualidad/enlace-ciudadano-413-carcelen-alto.html (accessed 6.18.19).
Craig, P., Katikireddi, S.V., Leyland, A., Popham, F., 2017. Natural Experiments: An Overview of Methods,
     Approaches, and Contributions to Public Health Intervention Research. Annu. Rev. Public Health 38, 39­
     56. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031816-044327
Deb, P., Norton, E.C., Manning, W.G., 2017. Health econometrics using Stata. Stata Press, College Station, TX.
Diaz, C.J., Fiel, J.E., 2016. The Effect(s) of Teen Pregnancy: Reconciling Theory, Methods, and Findings.
    Demography 53, 85­116. doi:10.1007/s13524-015-0446-6
Donohue, J.J., Grogger, J., Levitt, S.D., 2009. The impact of legalized abortion on teen childbearing. Am. Law
    Econ. Rev. 11, 24­46. doi:10.1093/aler/ahp006

                                                                                                             40
Edwards, S., 2019. On Latin American Populism, and Its Echoes around the World. J. Econ. Perspect. 33, 76­
   99.
El Universo, R., 2015a. En Enipla hubo una ` agenda abortista y gay ', dice Rafael Correa [ENIPLA had
    abortionist and gay agenda, says Rafael Correa] [WWW Document]. El Universo. URL
    https://www.eluniverso.com/noticias/2015/04/02/nota/4728121/enipla-hubo-agenda-abortista-gay-dice-
    correa
El Universo, R., 2015b. Mónica Hernández: ` Daremos mucho énfasis a la abstinencia ' ["We will very much
    emphasize abstinence"] [WWW Document]. El Universo. URL
    https://www.eluniverso.com/noticias/2015/03/08/nota/4630786/daremos-mucho-enfasis-abstinencia
    (accessed 4.23.20).
El Universo, R., 2015c. Salud sexual en Ecuador sujeta a cambios en Ecuador [Sexual health subject to changes
    in Ecuador] [WWW Document]. El Universo. URL
    https://www.eluniverso.com/noticias/2015/03/08/nota/4630796/salud-sexual-sujeta-cambios (accessed
    4.23.20).
Ellner, S., 2012. The distinguishing features of Latin America's new left in power: The Chávez, Morales, and
     Correa governments. Lat. Am. Perspect. 39, 96­114. doi:10.1177/0094582X11425333
Estrella, S., 2015. Para el Presidente, con el Enipla se distribuía condones como chicles [For the President,
     ENIPLA distributed condoms as if they were chewing gum] [WWW Document]. El Comer. URL
     http://www.elcomercio.com/actualidad/rafaelcorrea-enipla-distribuia-condones-sexualidad.html (accessed
     1.11.19).
Freire, W., Ramírez-Luzuriaga, M., Belmont, P., Mendieta, M., Silva-Jaramillo, M., Romero, N., Sáenz, K.,
     Piñeiros, P., Gómez, L., Monge, R., 2015. Tomo II: Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición de la
     población ecuatoriana. ENSANUT-ECU 2012. [National Health and Nutrition Survey ENSANUT-EC
     2012 Vol.2]. Ministerio de Salud Pública (MSP)/Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas y Censos (INEC),
     Quito, Ecuador.
Galárraga, O., Harris, J., 2019. Effect of an Abrupt Change in Sexual and Reproductive Health Policy on
    Adolescent Birth Rates in Ecuador, 2008­2017. NBER Work. Pap. 28. doi:10.3386/w26044
Goicolea, I., Coe, A.B., San Sebastián, M., Hurtig, A.K., 2017. Developing and sustaining adolescent-friendly
    health services: A multiple case study from Ecuador and Peru. Glob. Public Health 12, 1004­1017.
    doi:10.1080/17441692.2015.1123752
Goicolea, I., Sebastian, M.S., 2010. Unintended pregnancy in the amazon basin of Ecuador: a multilevel
    analysis. Int. J. Equity Health 9, 14. doi:10.1186/1475-9276-9-14
Heissel, J.A., 2017. Teenage motherhood and sibling outcomes. Am. Econ. Rev. 107, 633­637.
    doi:10.1257/aer.p20171130
Kearney, M.S., Levine, P.B., 2015. Investigating recent trends in the U.S. teen birth rate. J. Health Econ. 41,
    15­29. doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.01.003
Kearney, M.S., Levine, P.B., 2012. Why is the Teen Birth Rate in the United States So High and Why Does It
    Matter? J. Econ. Perspect. 26, 141­166. doi:10.1257/jep.26.2.141
Marteleto, L.J., Villanueva, A., 2018. The Educational Consequences of Adolescent Childbearing and Union
    Formation in Brazil. Stud. Fam. Plann. 49, 183­211. doi:10.1111/sifp.12071
Ministerio Coordinador de Desarrollo Social, 2011. Estrategia Intersectorial de Prevención del Embarazo
    Adolescente y Planificación Familiar [WWW Document]. Estrateg. Intersectorial Prevención del
                                                                                                                  41
     Embarazo Adolesc. y Planif. Fam. URL http://www.todaunavida.gob.ec/wp-
     content/uploads/downloads/2015/04/Proyecto_enipla.pdf
MSP, 2018. Panel 2: retos pendientes para garantizar el acceso a la salud sexual y reproductiva, y para cerrar las
   brechas de género [Current challenges to guarantee access to sexual and reproductive health and close
   gender gaps] [WWW Document]. Conf. Reg. sobre Población y Desarro. URL
   https://crpd.cepal.org/3/sites/crpd3/files/presentations/panel_2_ecuador.pdf (accessed 6.4.19).
MSP, 2012. Manual del Modelo de Atención Integral de Salud (MAIS) [WWW Document]. URL
   http://instituciones.msp.gob.ec/somossalud/images/documentos/guia/Manual_MAIS-MSP12.12.12.pdf
Nicolalde-Escobar, N.N., 2016. Influencia del discurso moralista en la toma de decisiones dentro del poder
    ejecutivo ( 2014- 2015 ): Proyecto " Plan Familia " e implicaciones en los derechos de la mujer [WWW
    Document]. [Moralistic discourse in decision-making within executive branch (2014-2015): Plan Familia
    and implications for women's rights]. URL
    http://repositorio.usfq.edu.ec/bitstream/23000/5783/1/124888.pdf
Official Register, 2014. Derecho Ecuador - Registro Oficial [WWW Document]. Off. Pres. URL
     https://derechoecuador.com/registro-oficial/2014/12/registro-oficial-no-395---viernes-12-de-diciembre--
     2014-suplemento (accessed 6.18.19).
Packham, A., 2017. Family planning funding cuts and teen childbearing. J. Health Econ. 55, 168­185.
    doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2017.07.002
Paz-y-Miño, C., 2014. Habla serio, sexualidad sin misterios [All joking aside, sexuality without mystery]
    [WWW Document]. El Telégrafo. URL http://tinyurl.com/yxgo8k8t (accessed 4.27.20).
Posner, P.W., 2016. Laboring Under Chávez: Populism for the Twenty-first Century. Lat. Am. Polit. Soc. 58,
    26­50. doi:10.1111/j.1548-2456.2016.00317.x
Presidencia de la República del Ecuador, 2015. Proyecto Plan Nacional de Fortalecimiento de la Familia
     [WWW Document]. URL https://www.presidencia.gob.ec/wp-
     content/uploads/downloads/2015/09/k_proyecto_plan_familia_2015.pdf (accessed 6.30.19).
Reuters, 2019. Ecuador abortion: National Assembly rejects easing law in rape cases [WWW Document]. BBC
    News. URL https://www.bbc.com/news/world-latin-america-49739495 (accessed 5.7.20).
Ridder, G., Moffitt, R., 2007. Chapter 75 The Econometrics of Data Combination. Handb. Econom. 6, 5469­
    5547. doi:10.1016/S1573-4412(07)06075-8
Rivas, J., 2016. Private agenda and re-election incentives. Soc. Choice Welfare 46, 899­915.
    doi:10.1007/s00355-015-0941-0
Salcedo, A., Silva, V., Holguín, W., Hidalgo, S., Uquillas, O., Torres, J., Puga, E., Vásquez, S., Cárdenas, N.,
     Santillán, V., Lucero, S., 2014. Distribución espacial referencial de los establecimientos prestadores de
     servicios públicos [Geographic distribution for public healthcare establishments], Guía técnica. Secretaría
     Nacional de Planificación y Desarrollo [National Secretary of Planning and Development], Quito,
     Ecuador.
Strupat, C., 2017. Do Targeted Reproductive Health Services Matter? ­ The Impact of a Midwife Program in
     Indonesia. Heal. Econ. (United Kingdom) 26, 1667­1681. doi:10.1002/hec.3465
The Economist, 2019. Latin America is losing its battle against teen pregnancy: Why rates of early motherhood
    are so high [WWW Document]. Econ. URL https://www.economist.com/the-americas/2019/02/16/latin-
    america-is-losing-its-battle-against-teen-pregnancy (accessed 12.11.19).

                                                                                                               42
Trenholm, C., Devaney, B., Fortson, K., Clark, M., Bridgespan, L.Q., Wheeler, J., 2008. Impacts of Abstinence
    Education on Teen Sexual Activity, Risk of Pregnancy, and Risk of Sexually Transmitted Diseases. J.
    Policy Anal. Manag. 27, 255­276. doi:10.1002/pam.20324
Underhill, K., Montgomery, P., Operario, D., 2007. Sexual abstinence only programmes to prevent HIV
    infection in high income countries: systematic review. BMJ 335, 248. doi:10.1136/bmj.39245.446586.BE
UNFPA, 2013. Motherhood in Childhood: Facing the Challenge of Adolescent Pregnancy. United Nations
   Population Fund (UNFPA), New York.
Waters, W.F., Ehlers, J., Ortega, F., Kuhlmann, A.S., 2018. Physically Demanding Labor and Health Among
    Indigenous Women in the Ecuadorian Highlands. J. Community Health 43, 220­226. doi:10.1007/s10900-
    017-0407-7
Wing, C., Simon, K., Bello-Gomez, R.A., 2018. Designing Difference in Difference Studies: Best Practices for
    Public Health Policy Research. Annu. Rev. Public Health 39, 453­69. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth
Wooldridge, J.M., 2010. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data (Second Edition). MIT Press,
   Cambridge, MA.




                                                                                                            43
                                                                  APPENDIX
Appendix Table A1
Methods of contraception used by sexually active teen (15-19 yrs.) and young adult women (20-24 yrs.).

                                                     2012                                   2018
                                         (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)             (7)

                                   Teens Young adult diff.            Teens Young adult                   diff.       Diff. in diff.
 A. Methods ever used (conditional on ever having sex)
    Any method                      77.5       88.6       -11.0        82.2    92.3                      -10.1              0.9
    Condom                          50.5       56.8        -6.3        48.3    56.8                       -8.5             -2.2
    Pill                            33.2       47.1       -13.9        29.0    43.1                      -14.1             -0.2
    Injectable                      24.1       38.8       -14.7        28.5    45.2                      -16.7             -2.1
    Implant                         12.8       13.1        -0.3        20.5    29.5                       -9.1             -8.8
    Emergency contraception          7.7       11.7        -4.0        17.8    22.9                       -5.1             -1.1
    Withdrawal                      23.3       27.4        -4.1        12.7    15.8                       -3.1              1.0
    Rhythm                          11.8       18.4        -6.6         6.7    13.5                       -6.9             -0.3
    Female condom                    3.9        4.7        -0.8         3.9     6.1                       -2.2             -1.4
    Intrauterine device              5.1        9.5        -4.4         1.8     4.9                       -3.1              1.3
    Lactational amenorrhea           2.3        3.8        -1.6         1.3     2.5                       -1.2              0.4
    Other                            4.0        3.9         0.1        0.02    0.12                       -0.1             -0.2
 B. Methods currently used now (conditional on having sex in the past 30 days)
    Any method                      46.9       59.6       -12.7        51.9    67.0                      -15.2             -2.5
    Condom                           9.8       10.1        -0.3        11.8    12.7                       -0.9             -0.6
    Pill                            10.2       12.3        -2.2         8.8    12.3                       -3.5             -1.4
    Injectable                      10.4       14.2        -3.8        13.4    20.4                       -7.0             -3.3
    Implant                         10.1       11.1        -1.0        16.2    17.4                       -1.2             -0.1
    Emergency contraception          1.4        0.7         0.7         0.8     1.1                       -0.3             -1.1
    Withdrawal                       7.1        6.5         0.6         3.2     4.2                       -1.0             -1.6
    Rhythm                           3.2        5.0        -1.8         2.2     4.3                       -2.1             -0.3
    Female condom                   0.03        0.2        -0.2        0.51    0.45                       0.1               0.2
    Intrauterine device              3.7        3.9        -0.2         0.6     1.9                       -1.3             -1.0
    Lactational amenorrhea           0.8        1.3        -0.6         0.5     0.5                       0.0               0.6
    Other                            0.3        0.2         0.1        0.02    0.07                       -0.1             -0.1
Sources: Ecuador National Health and Nutrition Surveys, ENSANUT 2012 and 2018.
Notes: Table shows percentages from nationally representative sample of sexually active female teens (15-19 years) and young adult women (20-24
years).
The analysis pools the last two nationally representative health surveys (ENSANUT 2012 and 2018) as repeated cross-sections and estimates a
differences-in-differences (DD) of contraception use (ever and now). The first differences are presented in columns 3 and 6 for 2012 and 2018
respectively; and the DD is in column 7, which shows the results of the differences in 2018 minus the differences in 2012 (i.e., column 6 ­ column 3).
For example, the table shows that over three quarters of teens (78% in 2012 and 82% in 2018, columns 1 and 4) report having used some
contraception method at some point; in fact, half of teenage women (50% in 2012 and 48% in 2018) report having used (male) condoms. Hormonal
contraception (pill use) is the next most common form, with a third (33% in 2012 and 29% in 2018) of teen women reporting having used the pill.
While injectable, implant, and emergency contraception use seems to have increased, the use of withdrawal and rhythm methods seems to have
decreased among teens. Data for young adult women (columns 2 and 5) are used for comparison. A large majority of young adult women (89% in
2012 and 92% in 2018) report having used some method; though still only slightly more than half (57% in both 2012 and 2018) report (male)
condom use. Pill use is also the next most common form, with almost half (47% in 2012) of young adults reporting use; yet lowering (to 43% in
2018).




                                                                                                                                                  44
Appendix Table A2
Effect of Abrupt Change in Sexual and Reproductive Health Policy on Adolescent Birth Rates in Ecuador 2011-2017:
Triple Difference Population Average Model with Autoregressive (AR3) Serial Correlation.
                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)                 (5)                 (6)
                                               Delta1
                                               (teen ­                            Delta2
                                                young        Delta1 (teen -       (teen ­    Delta2 (teen -      Delta3 (teen -      Delta3 (teen -
                                                adult)       young adult)        late20s)      late20s)           early30s)           early30s)
 Indigenous>12%=1                            -8.601***          -4.099            -4.746         2.099              -5.651               2.172
                                               (2.385)         (3.193)           (2.644)       (3.651)             (3.005)             (3.413)
 Indigenous>12%=1 × Post 2014=1               6.716**         7.429***           6.733**        6.893*             5.412**            7.580***
                                               (2.092)         (2.201)           (2.611)       (2.749)             (2.096)             (2.253)
 Canton fixed effects                            YES             YES               YES           YES                 YES                 YES
 Year fixed effects                              YES             YES               YES           YES                 YES                 YES
 Time-varying control variables                   NO             YES                NO           YES                  NO                 YES
 Observations                                    1547            1547              1547          1547                1547                1547
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents population average models correcting for three-period serial, autocorrelation (AR3).
 Interaction term represents triple differences (DDD) in birth rates per 1000 women:
 Delta 1 is for (teens ­ young adults)
 Delta 2 is for (teens ­ late 20s)
 Delta 3 is for (teens ­ early 30s)
 Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at canton level:
 * p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
 Cantón is classified as high indigenous if percentage of women who self-identified as Indigenous is above the mean (>12%); low
 indigenous if that percentage is at or below the mean (12%).
 Post 2014 is a dummy variable = 1 if year>2014. Because we have year fixed effects, we do not need Post2014 as a main effect.
Time-varying control variables include cantón-level means for: age, education, proportion Indigenous, married/in-union, institutional delivery, skill
birth attendance, any prenatal control, and second-or-higher-order birth.




                                                                                                                                                    45
Appendix Table A3
Effect of Abrupt Change in Sexual and Reproductive Health Policy on Adolescent Birth Rates in Ecuador 2011-2017,
Triple Difference Regression Results Using ENIPLA (2011-2014) as Pre-Intervention Period: Alternative Specification
with Unrestricted Coefficient for Comparison Groups.

                                                      (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
                                                      Teen             Teen            Teen            Teen            Teen            Teen
                                                      birthrate        birthrate       birthrate       birthrate       birthrate       birthrate

 Young adult birthrate                                0.283***         0.282***
                                                      (0.0208)         (0.0209)
 Adult late20s birthrate                                                               0.268***        0.268***
                                                                                       (0.0226)        (0.0230)
 Adult early30s birthrate                                                                                              0.238***        0.237***
                                                                                                                       (0.0273)        (0.0274)
 Indigenous>12%=1                                     0.0933           -0.584          0.437           0.385           1.696           1.213
                                                      (3.242)          (3.284)         (3.291)         (3.335)         (3.364)         (3.406)
 Indigenous>12%=1 × Post 2014=1                       4.484**          5.284***        4.538**         5.050**         3.848*          5.082**
                                                      (1.505)          (1.579)         (1.529)         (1.604)         (1.562)         (1.640)
 Constant                                             50.24***         36.65           55.73***        42.30           62.51***        29.24
                                                      (2.506)          (34.41)         (2.395)         (34.95)         (2.378)         (35.83)
 Canton fixed effects                                 YES              YES             YES             YES             YES                 YES
 Year fixed effects                                   YES              YES             YES             YES             YES                 YES
 Time-varying control variables                       NO               YES             NO              YES             NO                  YES
 Observations                                         1547             1547            1547            1547            1547            1547
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Appendix Table A3 shows results of alternative specification of equation 1 where the dependent variable is the teen birthrate (TR) and the
comparison group birthrate (CR) is included as a control variable as follows:
TRjt = 1CRjt + 2INDj + 3INDj × Postt + t4 + j5 +6Zj + jt
Table presents canton and year fixed effects with unrestricted model using each comparison group.
Columns (1) and (2) use young adults as comparison group.
Columns (3) and (4) use women in their late20s as comparison group.
Columns (5) and (6) use women in their early30s as comparison group.
Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at canton level:
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
Cantón is classified as high indigenous if percentage of women who self-identified as indigenous is above the national mean (>12%); low indigenous
if that percentage is at or below the national mean (12%).
Post 2014 is a dummy variable = 1 if year>2014. Because we have year fixed effects, we do not need Post2014 as a main effect.
Time-varying control variables include cantón-level means for: age, education, proportion Indigenous, married/in-union, institutional delivery, skill
birth attendance, any prenatal control, and second-or-higher-order birth.




                                                                                                                                                    46
Appendix Table A4
Effect of Abrupt Change in Sexual and Reproductive Health Policy on Adolescent Birth Rates in Ecuador 2011-2017,
Triple Difference Regression Results Using ENIPLA (2011-2014) as Pre-Intervention Period: Time-Invariant Definition
for Highly Indigenous Cantons.

                                              (1)                  (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)



                                        Delta1 (teen -       Delta1 (teen -      Delta2 (teen      Delta2 (teen      Delta3 (teen -      Delta3 (teen
                                        young adult)         young adult)         - late20s)        - late20s)        early30s)          - early30s)


 ind2=1 × Post 2014=1                      9.034***            8.547***            9.702***           8.078**           7.370***          8.347***
                                            (2.261)             (2.272)             (2.767)           (3.018)            (2.089)           (2.356)

 Canton fixed effects                        YES                  YES                YES                YES               YES                YES
 Year fixed effects                          YES                  YES                YES                YES               YES                YES
 Time-varying control variables               NO                  YES                 NO                YES                NO                YES
 Observations                                1547                 1547               1547               1547              1547               1547
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents fixed effects regression results using a time-invariant definition for highly indigenous cantons; thus the ind2 variable drops out.
Interaction term represents triple differences (DDD) in birth rates per 1000 women:
Delta 1 is for (teens ­ young adults)
Delta 2 is for (teens ­ late 20s)
Delta 3 is for (teens ­ early 30s)
Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at canton level:
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
Under the ind2 time-invariant definition, a cantón is classified as high indigenous if the percentage of women who self-identified as indigenous
across all years (2008-2017) is above the national mean (>12%); low indigenous if that percentage is at or below the national mean (12%). Because
ind2 is time invariant, it drops out as a main effect.
Post 2014 is a dummy variable = 1 if year>2014. Because we have year fixed effects, we do not need Post2014 as a main effect.
Time-varying control variables include cantón-level means for: age, education, proportion Indigenous, married/in-union, institutional delivery, skill
birth attendance, any prenatal control, and second-or-higher-order birth.




                                                                                                                                                      47
Appendix Table A5
Effect of Abrupt Change in Sexual and Reproductive Health Policy on Adolescent Birth Rates in Ecuador 2011-2017,
Triple Difference Regression Results Using ENIPLA (2011-2014) as Pre-Intervention Period: Time-Invariant Quintile-
based Definition for Highly Indigenous Cantons.


                                                (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)
                                          Delta1 (teen -     Delta1 (teen -     Delta2 (teen -     Delta2 (teen -     Delta3 (teen -     Delta3 (teen -
                                          young adult)       young adult)         late20s)           late20s)          early30s)          early30s)
 ind3=1 × Post 2014=1                       7.181***            6.616***           8.740***           7.452**            5.481**            6.133**
                                             (1.901)             (1.959)            (2.171)           (2.256)            (1.781)            (1.897)
 Canton fixed effects                        YES                  YES                YES                YES               YES                YES
 Year fixed effects                          YES                  YES                YES                YES               YES                YES
 Time-varying control variables               NO                  YES                 NO                YES                NO                YES
 Observations                                 1547                1547               1547               1547               1547               1547
Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: Table presents fixed effects regression results using a time-invariant quintile-based definition for highly indigenous cantons; thus the ind3
variable drops out.
Interaction term represents triple differences (DDD) in birth rates per 1000 women:
Delta 1 is for (teens ­ young adults)
Delta 2 is for (teens ­ late 20s)
Delta 3 is for (teens ­ early 30s)
Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered at canton level:
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
Under the ind3 time-invariant, quintile definition, a cantón is classified as high indigenous if the percentage of women who self-identified as
indigenous across all years (2008-2017) is in the top two quintiles of the national distribution; and low indigenous if that percentage is in the bottom
three quintiles of the national distribution. Because ind3 is time invariant, it drops out as a main effect.
Post 2014 is a dummy variable = 1 if year>2014. Because we have year fixed effects, we do not need Post2014 as a main effect..
Time-varying control variables include cantón-level means for: age, education, proportion Indigenous, married/in-union, institutional delivery, skill
birth attendance, any prenatal control, and second-or-higher-order birth.




                                                                                                                                                      48
Appendix Table A6
Any Contraception Use, Ever and Currently Used Now, Triple Difference (DDD) Estimation: ENSANUT 2012 and 2018.

                                                       (1)                           (2)
                                                                         Any contraception method
                                              Any contraception             currently used now
                                              method used ever                 (last 30 days)


 Year = 2018                                        0.00256                        -0.00289
                                                   (0.00715)                       (0.0128)

 Teen                                             -0.0884***                      -0.102***
                                                    (0.0143)                       (0.0168)

 Year = 2018 × Teen                                0.00161                         -0.0129
                                                   (0.0172)                        (0.0204)

 IND                                              -0.156***                       -0.106***
                                                   (0.0282)                        (0.0229)

 Year=2018 × IND                                    0.0230                          0.0264
                                                   (0.0304)                        (0.0270)

 Teen x IND                                         0.0329                          0.0307
                                                   (0.0367)                        (0.0523)

 Year=2018 × Teen × IND                            -0.111**                        -0.0819
                                                   (0.0305)                        (0.0582)

 Constant                                          0.933***                        0.705***
                                                   (0.00855)                       (0.0105)

 Observations                                        12659                           12593
Sources: Ecuador National Health and Nutrition Surveys, ENSANUT 2012 and 2018.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the province level.
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
We pooled the last two nationally representative health surveys (ENSANUT 2012 and 2018) as repeated cross-sections and estimated a triple
difference (DDD) with contraception use (ever and now as separate dependent variables) against a triple interaction of Postt × Teenit × INDit and all
the lower level interactions; where Postt is equal to 1 for the 2018 cross-section, teen is an indicator for teen women, and INDit is an indicator for
indigenous self-identification for woman i at time t.




                                                                                                                                                     49
Appendix Figure A1
Sexual Activity and Birth Control Use of Female Teens.




Notes: We pooled the last two nationally representative health surveys (ENSANUT 2012 and 2018) as repeated cross-sections and plotted percentage
of teenage women (15-19 years) who reported to be sexually active (SA) [measured on the left Y-axis] as well as any birth control (BC) use as a
percentage of total population and as a percentage of SA [measured on the right Y-axis].




                                                                                                                                             50
Appendix Figure A2
Indigenous self-identification rates, by age group and year of birth, 2007-2018, random first 18 cantons.




Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: The figures in Appendix Figure A2 show the trajectories of indigenous self-identification in a random set of the first-observed 18 cantons (out
of 221 at the national level) using the Live Births Dataset (Encuesta de Nacidos Vivos, ENV) such that years of observation are presented in the X-
axis, and the percentages of women who self-identify as indigenous are in the Y-axis. Each graph presents the rates for a different age group: teen
women (15-19 years), young adult women (20-24), women in their late 20s (25-29), and women in their early 30s (30-34 years).




                                                                                                                                                   51
Appendix Figure A3
Indigenous self-identification rates, by age group and year of birth, 2007-2018, random last 18 cantons.




Sources: Ecuador's National Registries of Live Births for 2008-2017; National Census and population projections.
Notes: The figures in Appendix Figure A3 show the trajectories of indigenous self-identification in a random set of the last-observed 18 cantons (out
of 221 at the national level) using the Live Births Dataset (Encuesta de Nacidos Vivos, ENV) such that years of observation are presented in the X-
axis, and the percentages of women who self-identify as indigenous are in the Y-axis. Each graph presents the rates for a different age group: teen
women (15-19 years), young adult women (20-24), women in their late 20s (25-29), and women in their early 30s (30-34 years).




                                                                                                                                                   52
