                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               EXCHANGE RATE RECONNECT

                                         Andrew Lilley
                                        Matteo Maggiori
                                         Brent Neiman
                                         Jesse Schreger

                                       Working Paper 26046
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26046


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 2019, Revised December 2019




We are grateful to Katharina Bergant, Ric Colacito,Wenxin Du, and Ken Rogoff for their
comments, and we offer particular thanks to Steve Kaplan for his generous help with the project.
Bob Freeman, Ravi Wadhwani, and Matt Weiss offered outstanding technical assistance at
various stages of the project. Our analysis makes use of data that are proprietary to Morningstar
and/or its content providers. Neither Morningstar nor its content providers are responsible for any
of the views expressed in this article. We thank the Becker-Friedman Institute, the Guggenheim
Foundation, the NSF (1653917), the Sloan Foundation, and the Weatherhead Center for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Andrew Lilley, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exchange Rate Reconnect
Andrew Lilley, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger
NBER Working Paper No. 26046
July 2019, Revised December 2019
JEL No. E44,E47,F31,F32,F37,G11,G15,G23

                                           ABSTRACT

It is surprisingly difficult to find economic variables that strongly co-move with exchange rates, a
phenomenon codified in a large literature on "exchange rate disconnect." We demonstrate that a
variety of common proxies for global risk appetite, which did not co-move with exchange rates
prior to 2007, have provided significant in-sample explanatory power for currencies since then.
Furthermore, during the global financial crisis and its aftermath, U.S. purchases of foreign bonds
were highly correlated with these risk measures as well as with exchange rates. Changes in this
type of capital flow statistically explain as much as half of the quarterly variation in the US dollar
during 2007-2012. We use security-level data on U.S. portfolios to demonstrate that this
connection of U.S. foreign bond purchases to exchange rates is largely driven by investment in
dollar-denominated assets rather than by foreign currency exposure alone. Our results support the
narrative emerging from an active recent literature that the US dollar's role as an international
and safe-haven currency has surged since the global financial crisis.

Andrew Lilley                                     Brent Neiman
Harvard Business School                           University of Chicago
Baker Library 420K                                Booth School of Business
Soldiers Field Road                               5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Boston, MA 02163                                  Chicago, IL 60637
andrewlilley@g.harvard.edu                        and NBER
                                                  brent.neiman@chicagobooth.edu
Matteo Maggiori
Stanford University                               Jesse Schreger
Graduate School of Business                       Columbia Business School
655 Knight Way                                    3022 Broadway
Stanford, CA 94305                                Uris Hall 821
and NBER                                          New York, NY 10027
maggiori@stanford.edu                             and NBER
                                                  jesse.schreger@columbia.edu
1    Introduction
Starting with the influential contribution by Meese and Rogoff (1983), a long literature has demon-
strated the difficulty in finding economic variables that co-move with exchange rates, a phe-
nomenon known as "exchange rate disconnect." The paucity of robust empirical relationships
between exchange rates and other aggregates offers little guidance for researchers and policy-
makers on which macroeconomic models to use. While progress has certainly been made, the
proverbial glass remains ­ at the very most ­ half full.
     It is against this backdrop that we uncover a surprising pattern that emerged with the global
financial crisis: exchange rates, and in particular the broad US dollar, have co-moved closely
with global risk appetite and with U.S. foreign bond purchases. Since 2007, during months when
proxies for global risk appetite decrease, the dollar contemporaneously appreciates. When risk
appetite increases, the dollar depreciates. Whereas risk measures had little or no explanatory power
for exchange rates prior to the crisis, the risk measures statistically explain a meaningful share of
all subsequent exchange rate variation. Furthermore, during 2007-2012, U.S. purchases of foreign
bonds rose and fell with these measures of global risk appetite, and so these capital flows also
co-moved with the broad US dollar. In quarters when U.S. residents increased their holdings of
external debt, the dollar contemporaneously depreciated. When U.S. residents decreased these
foreign bond holdings, the dollar appreciated.
     We dub the emergence of the relationships of global risk proxies and U.S. foreign bond pur-
chases with the exchange rate as "exchange rate reconnect." It is difficult to reach definitive con-
clusions from such short time series as the 2013-2018 period, but it appears that the risk measures
remain reconnected with exchange rates even at the end of our sample. U.S. foreign bond pur-
chases, however, appear to have again disconnected with the broad US dollar.
     We start our analysis by examining the connection between exchange rates and common prox-
ies of global risk appetite, including credit spreads, financial intermediary returns, the S&P 500
returns and their implied volatility in option markets, and the premium on U.S. Treasuries. Consis-
tent with Lilley and Rinaldi (2018), who first showed that the S&P 500 and exchange rates began to
co-move since the crisis, we demonstrate that all six risk proxies exhibit a structural break around
2007. We run rolling regressions of exchange rates on our risk proxies using monthly data span-
ning 10- and 5-years. We find negligible explanatory power before the crisis and large R2 's ­ in
some cases, surpassing 50 percent ­ since then. Even at the end of our sample, the estimated co-
efficients in these regressions generally remained significantly different from zero and above their
pre-crisis values.
     We decompose the explanatory power of these risk measures for the broad dollar into its bilat-
eral exchange rate components. Intuitively, the co-movement of these risk measures and bilateral


                                                 1
exchange rates between the dollar and other safe-haven currencies such as the Swiss franc and
Japanese yen remains fairly muted, even after the crisis. Instead, the reconnect of global risk mea-
sures and the broad dollar is largely driven by the bilateral exchange rates between the US dollar
and currencies conventionally thought of as riskier, such as the Australian dollar.
    Next, we turn to publicly available data from the IMF Balance of Payments (BoP) and Interna-
tional Investment Positions (IIP) to construct quarterly measures of U.S. capital flows. In rolling
10-year and 5-year regressions using these data, quarterly changes in U.S. gross foreign bond
flows (as a share of the stock of U.S. foreign bond positions) had near-zero explanatory power for
changes in the broad US dollar exchange rate prior to 2007. At the time of the crisis, the corre-
lation between these objects increased and the R2 on the regressions climbed sharply. The R2 of
the 5-year regressions, after peaking above 50 percent for the period corresponding to 2007-2012,
returns to a near-zero level for 2013-2018. We conclude that the connection of U.S. gross foreign
bond flows to exchange rates lasted for a number of years when markets were in a heightened state
of turmoil.
    When we repeat the identical exercise for other countries and for other flow measures (in-
cluding outflows, inflows, and net flows of bonds, equity, and direct investment), we do not find
similarly compelling evidence of reconnect. Since other flows likely interact similarly to U.S. for-
eign bond flows in terms of the pressure they exert on currency markets and their interaction with
various market frictions, and given the continued reconnect of risk measures and exchange rates,
we do not view the relationship between U.S. foreign bond flows and the dollar as causal. Rather,
we believe fluctuations in global risk appetite simultaneously influenced both exchange rates and
U.S. foreign bond flows during the crisis and several years of its aftermath. In this sense, the
reconnect carries something of a special role for the United States.
    While we find strong evidence for a reconnect between risk, capital flows, and exchange rates,
we show that exchange rate disconnect largely remains for macro fundamentals. In particular, we
find that macroeconomic variables such as interest rate, inflation, and growth rate differentials,
remain only weakly correlated with exchange rate movements, even during and after the global
crisis.
    Having demonstrated the strong in-sample explanatory power of U.S. purchases of foreign
bonds for the broad US dollar, at least during 2007-2012, we turn to a novel micro dataset capable
of elaborating on the mechanics of this reconnect. We use data assembled by Maggiori, Neiman
and Schreger (2019a) on mutual fund holdings from Morningstar that covers $32 trillion of assets
from individual security-level positions. These proprietary data do not extend backward enough in
time to capture the change that occurs around 2007, but they do offer a number of benefits relative
to BoP and IIP data.
    First, the mutual fund holdings decompose the market value of positions into prices and quan-


                                                 2
tities. As such, we can use them to isolate changes in foreign bond positions that come from
purchases of additional securities and not from movements in prices or exchange rates. This en-
sures that reconnect does not reflect the direct or mechanical influence of the exchange rate on the
value of foreign bond purchases. Indeed, even with this conservative notion of flows, U.S. foreign
bond flows in the Morningstar data do have a similarly high explanatory power for the broad dollar
as we found in the public macro data from 2007 onward.
     Second, U.S. purchases of foreign bonds in the Maggiori et al. (2019a) dataset can be separated
by issuing country, sector (corporate or government), and currency of denomination. Further, the
data can be used to explore these purchases across different kinds of investors, including large ver-
sus small mutual funds or those that specialize in international investment versus those that do not.
In doing so, we find that the explanatory power of U.S. portfolio flows is driven as much by U.S.
net purchases of dollar-denominated bonds as by U.S. purchases of foreign-currency-denominated
bonds. This further corroborates that the explanatory power is indeed coming from the relationship
between these flows and changes in a global risk factor, rather than from the direct effect of a sale
of US dollars and purchase of foreign currencies. In addition, in contrast to BoP data, the Morn-
ingstar data allow us to see which securities investors are buying domestically. Consistent with the
idea that flows are picking up changes in investors' risk appetite, we see that when U.S. investors
buy less U.S. Treasuries or more domestic corporate debt, the dollar depreciates.
     Third, we sort the open-end and exchange-traded funds in Maggiori et al. (2019a) according to
their size, the degree to which they specialize in foreign investment or foreign currency investment,
and the degree to which they follow a passive investment strategy. We find that the aggregate results
are driven by large actively-managed funds that are not specialists in foreign currency or foreign
issuers. The fund-level analysis therefore also supports the view that U.S. foreign bond flows
largely pick up the risk appetite of sizable dollar-centric discretionary U.S. investors.
     In summary, we identify the emergence of a close relationship between various global risk mea-
sures and the broad US dollar that emerged with the global financial crisis. Further, we identify a
particular quantity, U.S. foreign bond purchases, that has strongly comoved with these risk mea-
sures and the broad US dollar during the crisis and several years of its aftermath, even though this
relationship no longer appears to hold at the end of our data. In the context of the voluminous liter-
ature on exchange rate disconnect which offers few comparably successful covariates, we consider
this progress even if the post-crisis time series is short and we do not establish a causal mecha-
nism. Going forward, anyone analyzing the relationship between exchange rates and risk should
pay close attention to the large structural break that we document over the last 10 years.
     Our documentation that exchange rate reconnect started around 2007 relates to the finding in
Du, Tepper and Verdelhan (2017) of large covered interest rate parity deviations (CIP) over this
same period, which Avdjiev, Du, Koch and Shin (2019b) show are systematically related to the


                                                  3
dollar exchange rate. More generally, a number of papers have made progress on the exchange
rate disconnect puzzle. Gourinchas and Rey (2007) show predictability over medium term hori-
zons using the cyclical component of net external balances, and Kremens and Martin (2018) have
success forecasting exchange rates with S&P 500 options-implied risk premia. Measures of the
convenience yield on treasuries have been shown to covary with the broad dollar exchange rate in
Jiang et al. (2018) and Engel and Wu (2018). Adrian and Xie (2019) find a higher share of US
dollar loans in the portfolio of non-U.S. banks forecasts a dollar depreciation.
    Finally, the crisis seems to have further cemented the role of the US dollar as the primary global
safe asset. Maggiori et al. (2019a,b) document a broad and persistent portfolio shift into dollar-
denominated bonds (and away from euro-denominated bonds) since the financial crisis. These
latter two developments suggest an increase in the role of risk premia in driving the broad dollar.
Our results support an emerging narrative that the US dollar's role as an international and safe-
haven currency has surged since the global financial crisis, such as Bruno and Shin (2015) and
Jiang et al. (2019).


2        Exchange Rate Disconnect and Reconnect
Figures 1a and 1b reproduce the well-known disconnect between the exchange rate and two funda-
mentals ­ the interest rate differential and inflation differential between the United States and other
G10 countries ­ for the period 1977-2006. For example, Figure 1a relates quarterly log-changes in
the broad dollar, defined as an equally-weighted basket of nine currencies (the G10, excluding the
United States) against the US dollar, with the average quarterly interest differential between the
United States and the other nine countries.1 Uncovered interest parity implies a strong relationship
between these variables. Fitting these data with a linear regression, however, yields a small and
imprecise point estimate, with the interest differential explaining only 5 percent of the variation
in the exchange rate. Figure 1b similarly relates changes in observed inflation differentials with
the exchange rate and, at odds with many standard models, exhibits an even weaker relationship,
with an R2 value of less than 1 percent. Given this exchange rate disconnect holds in-sample for
realized outcomes, it is not surprising that interest rates and inflation differentials also offer no
out-of-sample forecasting power.2
    Figure 1c relates changes in the broad dollar to changes in a measure of global risk appetite,
the U.S. corporate bond credit spread, or "GZ Spread", taken from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012).
 1 The broad dollar is defined such that an increase corresponds to a dollar depreciation, and the interest differential is
defined such than an increase corresponds to higher U.S. rates. Aloosh and Bekaert (2019) term such equal-weighted
measures "currency baskets" and demonstrate how they can be used to capture systematic exchange rate variation.
 2 These two variables constitute only a small subset of the many fundamentals that, at odds with standard models,

have been shown to be disconnected from the exchange rate.


                                                            4
Figure 1d relates changes in the broad dollar to changes in U.S. holdings of foreign bonds, con-
structed as the quarterly flow of U.S. residents into foreign debt securities (from BoP) divided by
the value of U.S. foreign debt holdings at the start of the quarter (from IIP). Similar to the two
fundamentals in Figures 1a and 1b, both the GZ Spread and U.S. holdings of foreign bonds also
did not co-move with the US dollar during the same 1977-2006 period. While the disconnect of
interest and inflation differentials persists, we show below that the GZ Spread (and other risk mea-
sures) and this particular component of U.S. capital flows both started to closely track the exchange
rate during the global financial crisis, a phenomenon we refer to as exchange rate reconnect.


2.1     Reconnect with Global Risk Appetite
The reconnect of exchange rates to global risk appetite can be clearly seen in Figure 2, which plots
the R2 values of rolling univariate regressions run in monthly data of the broad dollar exchange rate
on a constant and the contemporaneous change in six global risk proxies. These proxies include (i)
the "GZ Spread", (ii) the "VXO", calculated as the monthly change in the log implied volatility on
the S&P100 stock index, (iii) the log total return on the "S&P500", (iv) the "Treasury Premium"
constructed as the average one-year covered interest parity deviation between developed country
government bonds and U.S. Treasuries taken from Du et al. (2018), (v) the "Global Factor" in
world asset prices constructed by Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2018), and (vi) the "Intermediary
Returns" from a value-weighted portfolio of holding companies of New York Federal Reserve
primary dealers taken from He et al. (2017).3 Figure 2a shows regressions estimated on 10-year
rolling windows, and Figure 2b considers 5-year windows, starting in January of 1977 and ending
in December of 2018.
     During 1977-2006, most of the rolling regressions in Figure 2a have R2 s that average only a
few percentage points and peak at about 5-10 percent. Around 2007, however, there is an abrupt
but sustained increase in the explanatory power of most of these risk proxies for the broad dollar.
The measures subsequently have R2 values ranging from 10 to 60 percent, with most finishing the
sample with R2 values above 20 percent, large values that stand out in the exchange rate disconnect
literature. Even after the steep one-quarter declines in the R2 s at the very end of the sample, which
arise from dropping the second quarter of 2009 from the rolling regressions, all of the 10-year
regressions in Figure 2a have R2 s well above their pre-crisis peak values. The 5-year regressions
in Figure 2b similarly have R2 values that peak between 30-70 percent, though these R2 s also
sharply decline toward the end of our sample, suggesting that the explanatory power of global risk
 3 We showed exchange rate disconnect in Figure 1 using quarterly data since that's the highest frequency with which
most macro fundamentals are measured. We compare risk proxies and exchange rates at a monthly horizon in Figure
2 and below as it gives us more power. If we instead plotted a version of Figure 1c using monthly data, we would still
have demonstrated a disconnect between credit spreads and the exchange rate prior to 2007.



                                                          5
measures for the exchange rate was greater during 2007-2012 than during 2013-2018. Nonetheless,
four of the six measures, even in this final five-year period of our sample, offer more explanatory
power than they did at any point prior to the crisis.
    The break from historical experience in the relationship between these risk measures and the
broad dollar can be additionally seen by examining the regression coefficients underlying the R2
values shown in Figure 2b. For each of the six risk proxies, we plot in Figure 3 the point estimates
from the rolling regressions along with their 95 percent confidence intervals. In the regressions, a
positive coefficient indicates that a depreciation of the broad dollar is associated with a decline in
the risk premium (or an increase in risk appetite) captured by our proxies. We plot the estimates
after normalizing them as z-scores, so they give the percent depreciation of the broad dollar in
response to a one-standard-deviation increase in each measure of risk appetite. For example, the
value in Figure 3b corresponding to the GZ Spread ends our sample at 0.0125, implying that when
corporate credit spreads drop by one standard deviation, the dollar depreciates by 1.25 percent.
In all six cases, the coefficients rise dramatically from their typical pre-crisis values to their post-
crisis peaks near 2012, all of which are statistically greater than zero. In four of the six cases, the
estimates remain statistically greater than zero, even by the last quarter of 2018, the last observation
for these risk measures in our data.

2.1.1   Bilateral Exchange Rates

We can further unpack the exchange rate reconnect of global risk appetite by studying how the
risk proxies correlate differently with different bilateral exchange rates. We find that when our
measures of the risk premium decrease, the dollar depreciates most strongly against currencies
conventionally described as "riskier" and less strongly or not at all against currencies convention-
ally considered to be "safe havens". Figure 4 reports the coefficients from regressions of changes
in each bilateral exchange rate against the dollar on changes in the GZ Spread using monthly data
from 2007 to 2018. The coefficients are sorted in ascending order. While safe-haven currencies
such as the Yen and Swiss Franc hold steady or even depreciate vis-a-vis the US dollar when credit
spreads are low (i.e. when risk appetite is high), the emerging market currencies and the New
Zealand and Australian dollars appreciate.
    In fact, given the different degrees of comovement across bilateral pairs with the US dollar, in
the post-crisis period, fluctuations in global risk appetite explain significant shares of variation in
all bilateral exchange rates. Table 1 reports the R2 s from univariate regressions of changes in each
G10 bilateral exchange rate, including pairs that do not involve the US dollar, on the GZ Spread.
Note that the Australian Dollar to Japanese Yen exchange rate pair is among the most explainable,




                                                   6
with an R2 of 34 percent, even higher than that of the broad US dollar.4 The bottom row of Table
1 reports the simple mean of the R2 s across all bilaterals for each country. The fact that these
values are highest for the Japanese yen and US dollar, and is third-highest for the Swiss franc, is
consistent with the idea that all three safe-haven currencies have similar loadings on a global risk
appetite that is proxied by our various measures. We generated these results using the GZ Spread
but note that the results are qualitatively unchanged when we use any of the other five risk proxies.

2.1.2   Out-of-Sample Forecasting

Next, we follow the tradition established by Meese and Rogoff (1983) in evaluating the "out-of-
sample" fit of a model while giving the model the realized values of the regressors. We provide
full details about how the forecast is computed in Appendix A.1. To compare the out-of-sample
forecasting power of our six risk proxies to that of a random walk model, we use two metrics.
First, we divide the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of our forecasts' RMSE by the RMSE of
the random walk. We call this the "RMSE Ratio", and a number lower than 1 implies the forecasts
using our risk proxies outperform the random walk by this measure. Second, we formalize this
forecast-error comparison using the Diebold-Mariano test statistic (Diebold and Mariano (2002)).
This test compares the mean squared errors of the two forecasts and reports a p-value corresponding
to the percent chance that a conclusion of outperformance versus the random walk reflects random
error or noise. We then plot these two metrics in Figure 5a for each 120-month forecast evaluation
period, and in Figure 5b for each 60-month forecast evaluation period, for each of our six risk
proxies. The evaluation periods are selected to start at the beginning of each calendar year, with
the first evaluation period covering 1987-1996 and the next starting and ending a year later, and so
each test period overlaps. The "x" markers represent evaluation periods that are entirely prior to
2007, the hollow dots represent evaluation periods that include months before and after 2007, and
the solid dots represent evaluation periods where all forecast periods occur after 2007.
    Prior to 2007, we find the standard result: the RMSE ratio of all model forecasts performs
worse, or on par at best, with that of a random walk. Yet for the last decade, we find that all of
these models outperform the "no-change" benchmark. Moreover, we find two instances of model
forecasts passing the Diebold-Mariano test even at the 5 percent significance threshold; changes in
the Global Factor do so for both the last 5 and 10 years, while the log return on the S&P500 does
so for the last 10 years, but loses statistical significance at the shorter horizon.
4 Appendix   Table A.1 is the equivalent of Table 1 but for the period before the crisis. Nearly all R2 s are close to zero.




                                                             7
2.2     Reconnect with U.S. Foreign Bond Purchases
The post-crisis reconnect between global risk measures and exchange rates is strong, appears long-
lived, and complements a small number of recent successes in the exchange rate forecasting litera-
ture that use other price-based variables. The finding of reconnect between quantity-based macroe-
conomic aggregates and exchange rates, however, has been even more elusive. In this section we
demonstrate that U.S. purchases of foreign bonds, a type of U.S. capital flow, strongly comoved
with these risk measures and, therefore, strongly moved with the broad dollar during 2007-2012.
    We start by constructing U.S. purchases of foreign bonds as the quarterly flow of U.S. funds
into foreign debt securities (from BoP) divided by the value of U.S. foreign debt holdings at the
start of the quarter (from IIP). We then demonstrate that during 2007-2012, in a clear break from
the pre-crisis relationship, these U.S. purchases of foreign bonds moved closely together with each
of the six risk measures. Figures 6a and 6b report the R2 of rolling 10-year and 5-year univariate
regressions of quarterly changes in U.S. holdings of foreign bonds on the six risk measures.5 All
series jump starting in 2007, though the R2 's from the 5-year regressions all also sharply decline
after 2013.
    Does the comovement of this U.S. capital flow and our risk measures imply that U.S. foreign
bond purchases also reconnected with the broad dollar? Figure 7 shows the R2 of 10- and 5-year
rolling regressions of the broad US dollar and U.S. foreign bond purchases and demonstrates that
the answer is yes. The series estimated with rolling 10-year windows, plotted in a solid black line,
shows that the explanatory power of changes in these bond flows for changes in the broad dollar
jumps from near-zero to about 15 percent with the onset of the crisis and peaks near 40 percent
shortly thereafter. The removal of the first post-crisis quarter from the estimation window causes
a steep decline for the last plotted value, but the level even at the end of our series remains clearly
elevated relative to pre-crisis values. The 5-year series, plotted with a red dashed line, shows an
even greater surge in the explanatory power of these bond flows for the broad dollar during the
period from 2007-2012, though the R2 values return by the end of the sample to negligible levels.
We do not wish to draw definitive conclusions based on 5-year windows, but the results do suggest
that the reconnect of U.S. foreign bond purchases and the broad dollar did not persist through the
end of our sample.
    Much of the stark change in Figure 7 is driven by the particularly large appreciation of the US
dollar and particularly large reduction in U.S. foreign bond holdings during the third and fourth
quarters of 2008. The confluence of reconnect of this capital flow and the global financial crisis is
important and intriguing. We emphasize, however, that the large movements during 2007-2009 are
not wholly responsible for reconnect. To give a better sense for how evenly distributed reconnect
 5 We switch our analysis here of changes in the risk measures from monthly to quarterly frequency as that is the
highest frequency with which the bond holding and purchase measures are reported.


                                                       8
is across the post-crisis period, Figure 8 reproduces Figure 1d but for 2007:Q1-2019:Q2.
    The solid black best-fit line has a positive slope of 0.85 that indicates that greater U.S. pur-
chases of foreign bonds are associated with larger depreciations of the US dollar. The R2 on this
relationship between the broad dollar and U.S. purchases of foreign bonds jumps from less than
one percent in Figure 1d, capturing the pre-crisis period, to 32 percent in these subsequent quarters
plotted in Figure 8.6 The red dashed line in Figure 8 demonstrates that the best-fit slope relating
these two variables is nearly identical whether including or excluding 2009:Q3 to 2019:Q2, the
key quarters of the global crisis.

2.2.1    Other U.S. Capital Flows?

Interestingly, other types of U.S. capital flows have not exhibited a post-crisis reconnect with global
risk measures nor with the broad dollar.7 Appendix Table A.2 reports regression estimates for
gross foreign purchases, gross foreign sales, and net foreign purchases by the United States of
bonds and of equities. Of these six types of U.S. capital flows, only U.S. gross foreign purchases
of debt securities and U.S. gross sales of equities exhibit a meaningful post-crisis change in their
explanatory power for the broad dollar, with the change for U.S. foreign bond purchases being the
largest by far.8

2.2.2    Other Macroeconomic Fundamentals

In Figure 9 we analyze whether there has been a reconnect of other macroeconomic fundamentals
to exchange rates. We run 40-quarter and 20-quarter rolling-window regressions using the funda-
mentals that are related to exchange rates in several standard models in international economics,
analogous to what we did with global risk measures in Figure 2. Guided by the excellent review
of exchange rate predictability in Rossi (2013), the models that we test include the UIP model, the
monetary model, the Taylor-rule model, and the Backus-Smith model.9 Figure 9 plots the rolling
R2 values from these models, together with the series from Figure 7 using U.S. purchases of for-
eign bonds, for comparison. Table 2 reports the in-sample performance for the pre- and post-crisis
 6 Appendix  Figures A.1 and A.2 confirm that the same patterns in Figures 1d and 8 hold when focusing on yearly (i.e.
4-quarter) changes rather than quarterly changes.
 7 We do not offer a theory of why some flows have reconnected and not others. Recent theoretical developments have

introduced financial shocks in the Euler equations for foreign currency bonds (Farhi and Werning (2014); Itskhoki and
Mukhin (2017)) and we hope our empirical results might offer further guidance on the source of these shocks.
 8 The importance of the distinction between gross and net capital flows has been documented empirically by Forbes

and Warnock (2012), Broner et al. (2013), and Avdjiev et al. (2018), and has been examined theoretically by Caballero
and Simsek (2016). An interesting literature studies the relationship between bank credit and exchange rates, including
Avdjiev et al. (2019b,a), Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2018), and Niepmann and Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2019)).
 9 Appendix A.2 provides details about the implementation of each model. Recent contributions of this literature

include Engel and West (2005), Chen et al. (2010), Eichenbaum et al. (2017), Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2018), and
Calomiris and Mamaysky (2019).


                                                          9
periods.
    Figure 9 and Table 2 remind us that while most models perform relatively poorly, it is not
unusual to find short spans of data over which a particular model "works well". For example,
both the UIP and Taylor-rule models have large R2 s in the mid-to-late 2000s, and most models
have a mild uptick in performance in the post-crisis period. In fact, the recent upticks suggest
the interesting possibility that we might soon also observe a clearer reconnect of exchange rates to
macro fundamentals.10 For now, however, we focus on the sharper and more persistant relationship
with U.S. foreign bond purchases during 2007-2012 and note that the instability in some of the lines
in Figure 9 reiterate the general need for caution in reaching too strong conclusions from analyses
of short time series.
    In sum, before the global financial crisis of 2007-2008, exchange rates rarely comoved with
other economic aggregates. We demonstrate, however, that several common proxies for global risk
appetite, and even more surprisingly, U.S. purchases of foreign bonds, strongly reconnected with
the broad dollar starting around 2007. Reconnect remains even after excluding the quarters of the
global financial crisis, though it has significantly attenuated in recent years. The short time series
cautions against definitive conclusions, but at the end of our sample, risk-based reconnect appears
to continue while we no longer see evidence for capital-flow-based reconnect.11


3     Elaborating Reconnect with Micro Data
One key benefit of our finding that a type of U.S. capital flow began to co-move with the broad
dollar is that it offers a natural pathway to explore reconnect further. In particular, we can dis-
agregate those capital flows using the security-level holdings details assembled by Maggiori et al.
(2019a) using Morningstar data on open-end mutual fund positions.12 These data cover $32 tril-
lion of assets and allow us to make two distinct contributions. First, our micro data allow us to
directly disentangle security purchases from changes in security prices, whereas BoP or IIP data
necessarily conflate the two to some degree when calculating changes in positions. This means
that we can corroborate that our finding of flows that correlate with exchange rates is not a simple
10 Appendix    Figure A.3 shows results from the equivalent out-of-sample tests as were reported in Figure 5, but using
U.S. foreign bond purchases and these other macroeconomic fundamentals. We find the only factor that consistently
outperforms the random walk consistently is that of U.S. foreign bond purchases. It outperforms the random walk
for every ten year evaluation window that includes the post-crisis period, though this outperformance usually is not
statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
11 All results presented in this section can be easily replicated using the code and datasets posted to

http://www.globalcapitalallocation.com.
12 We refer the reader to Maggiori et al. (2019a) and its Online Appendix for an extensive study of the representa-

tiveness of this type of flows for the BoP. Here, we only note that the measured changes in U.S. holdings of foreign
bonds in the two sources have a correlation of 0.64. Appendix Figure A.4 plots the two time series from 2005:Q1 to
2017:Q4, the maximum span we can study in the micro data.


                                                         10
reflection of the use of exchange rates to impute these flows. Second, the micro data allow us to
study reconnect using various subsets of the data, distinguishing flows by currency, asset class, and
investor type, for example.13
    In this final section of the paper, therefore, we use these micro data to unpack the reconnect
of exchange rates with U.S. foreign bond purchases. We remind the reader, however, that this
elaboration may only be informative for the period 2007-2012, when the connection between the
broad dollar and U.S. foreign bond purchases was strongest, and may not teach us much about the
end of our sample, when this flows-based reconnect appears to have ended.


3.1     Reconnect after Separating Purchases from Price Changes
Our previous analyses defined flows as quarterly purchases of foreign securities during a quarter
divided by the stock of holdings of such securities at the start of the quarter. Aggregated data on
these purchases, however, do not allow us to completely separate the quantity of securities pur-
chased and the price at which they were purchased. The flow measures might therefore contain
information about the exchange rate, since it may be an important driver of the security's price (par-
ticularly if the security is not dollar-denominated). For claims such as ours, that a macroeconomic
variable co-moves with the exchange rate, this limitation is critical.
    We circumvent this issue in this section by building a measure of flows that keeps all prices
and exchange rates constant at their beginning-of-quarter levels, which we are able to do using
the dataset assembled by Maggiori et al. (2019a). These data capture the detailed holdings of all
U.S. mutual funds and allow us to separately track for each position s at the end of each quarter
t the number of securities Nt (s) and the price per security Pt (s). The total start-of-quarter value
of the position is then simply the product of the two at the end of the prior quarter: Qt -1 (s) =
Pt -1 (s) × Nt -1 (s), while the flow is the change in the number of securities during the current
quarter times the start-of-quarter price: Ft (s) = (Nt (s) - Nt -1 (s)) × Pt -1 (s). We can then aggregate
the flows across all positions s within some category S (such as corporate or government bonds,
denominated in dollars or otherwise), Ft ,S = sS Ft (s), and divide the total by the aggregated start-
of-quarter positions, Qt -1,S = sS Qt -1 (s), to construct a measure equivalent to what we studied
using aggregated data above, Ft ,S /Qt -1,S .14
    In Table 3, we confirm that U.S. foreign bond purchases constructed from these micro data
connect with the broad US dollar to a similar extent as did these purchases when taken from the
macro data.15 While the coefficients are slightly different, the R2 are nearly identical: 33.4 percent
13 We follow the procedure in Coppola et al. (2019) to classify positions based on nationality of the ultimate parent and

not residency of the immediate issuer. The BoP and IIP are instead based on residency. Therefore, another advantage
of the micro data is the focus on truly foreign positions of U.S. resident funds.
14 We provide a more exhaustive description of this procedure in Appendix Section A.3.2.
15 In Appendix Figure A.4, we show the purchase of foreign bonds by U.S. mutual funds in the microdata is highly



                                                          11
for the BoP and 34.6 percent for the Morningstar data. Our results using the aggregate BoP data
were not driven by the implicit influence of the exchange rate on bond prices.


3.2     Which Flows Matter?
As discussed above, we believe the post-crisis era has been characterized by a reconnect between
the exchange rate and proxies for global risk appetite. U.S. purchases of foreign bonds appear to
have themselves started to comove with these risk proxies, which brought about our capital-flow
based reconnect. We can use the micro data to confirm the importance of this single global factor
by comparing, for each individual bilateral exchange rate against the US dollar, the explanatory
power that comes from U.S. purchases of bonds in that particular corresponding foreign country
with that coming from all other U.S. foreign bond purchases. For example, the analysis in Table
4 asks whether U.S. purchases of Australian bonds have more explanatory power for the bilateral
exchange rate between the US and Australian dollar than do U.S. purchases of foreign bonds
excluding those issued by Australia. The results show that for the vast majority of countries,
including the flows to that country adds little to the R2 for their currency relative the inclusion of
all other foreign flows. The average R2 , for example, increases from 23 to 26 percent, as seen in
the bottom row of the table. The notable exception is the Euro, for which only the flow to the Euro
area is significant at the 5 percent level. These results stand in contrast with much of the previous
literature on exchange rate disconnect which focused on bilateral differences in fundamentals (such
as bilateral capital flows) to explain bilateral exchange rate changes and instead highlights the
power of global variables for explaining the cross-section of bilateral exchange rate changes.
     One might find it natural that bonds are more connected to exchange rates than equities since
bonds are promises to pay units of a particular currency and equities are claims on real assets.
Therefore, one might conjecture that the connection between U.S. foreign bond flows and the
broad dollar occurs because U.S. residents are changing their positions in foreign-currency bonds,
thus directly and causally affecting the exchange rate.16 Table 5 shows that this is not the case.
Much of the information about the exchange rate contained in U.S. purchases of foreign bonds is
contained in U.S. purchases of foreign, but US dollar-denominated, bonds. The table separately
investigates the explanatory power for the broad dollar of flows by U.S. residents in corporates and
sovereigns and dollar- and non-dollar-denominated bonds. Flows to corporate bonds denominated
in US dollars has the most explanatory power for the US dollar, while flows to sovereigns in foreign
currency are statistically significant, though weaker.
correlated with the U.S. BoP bond flow.
16 Models of portfolio balance such as Kouri (1976) and Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) connect foreign currency risk

taking to exchange rates via imperfect substitutability of the assets. A growing empirical literature has focused on
portfolio rebalancing of foreign currency exposures and its connection to exchange rates, including Hau and Rey
(2006), Camanho et al. (2017), and Bergant and Schmitz (2018).

                                                        12
    These results are consistent with the narrative that when U.S. residents have more risk-bearing
capacity, they use it to purchase foreign bonds in all currencies and at the same time require a
lower risk premium, which causes the world's primary safe-haven currency to depreciate. This
logic suggests a similar relationship in domestic portfolio allocations, which unlike the BoP data,
are included in our micro dataset. We explore this in Table 6, which examine the co-movement
between the broad dollar and changes in U.S. mutual fund investment in overall domestic bonds,
corporate bonds, and domestic sovereign bonds (Treasuries), the safest asset class. Column one
shows that overall flows into domestic bonds by U.S. residents covaries negatively with the broad
dollar. This means that during times when U.S. mutual funds are increasing their flows into domes-
tic debt, the broad dollar tends to appreciate. This is the opposite of what we saw for U.S. foreign
bond flows. Interestingly, we find strong effects with opposite signs for domestic investment in
corporate versus sovereign bonds. When U.S. funds purchase the riskier corporate bonds or sell
the safer sovereign bonds, the dollar contemporaneously depreciates.
    This duality between domestic risky and foreign bond investments can be further confirmed
by focusing on which type of funds drive the aggregate results. We sort U.S.-domiciled funds on
four characteristics: total size of the fund, fraction of the fund that is invested in foreign assets,
fraction of the fund that is invested in foreign currency, and how close a fund is to being a passive
investor. We split funds into quintiles for each characteristic and report coefficient estimates and
R2 from univariate regressions of changes in the broad dollar on foreign bond flows for each of
these subgroups in Figure 10.
    The key driver of the aggregate results are the large active funds that are not specialized in
foreign investment. Indeed, the upper left panels of Figures 10a and 10b show that that the de-
gree to which a fund specializes in foreign currency investments does not have a strong effect on
the results. The upper right hand panels show that funds that have the least percentage of asset
under management invested abroad have the strongest covariation and explanatory power for the
exchange rate. The lower left panels show that it is the largest funds that drive the overall results.
Finally, the bottom right panels show that the most passive funds have no explanatory power for
the exchange rate. Therefore, we see that the aggregate explanatory power is driven by active funds
who do not specialize in foreign investment. The fact that the results are driven by the purchases
or sales of non-specialists supports the idea that the key driver of the aggregate results is the risk-
bearing capacity of large U.S.-based investors, rather than the flows themselves causing exchange
rate changes.




                                                  13
4        Conclusion
This paper documents a correlation between global risk proxies, U.S. foreign bond purchases, and
exchange rates that emerged starting with the global financial crisis. The US dollar, a safe-haven
currency, depreciates when risk-appetite is high and when these flows out of the United States
increase. And since currencies load heterogeneously on this global risk factor, these relationships
explain more than just the broad US dollar, they also explain variation in bilateral currency pairs
where one currency is considered "safe" and the other is considered "risky". The reconnect of the
global risk proxies has clearly weakened relative to the 2007-2012 period, but appears to remain
intact at the end of our sample. The reconnect of the U.S. capital flows, however, appears to have
ended by 2018.
    While we do not offer a theory of the reconnect nor do we establish a causal link between
global risk proxies and U.S. foreign bond purchases, we offer here one possible view of the facts
uncovered in this paper. Perhaps currencies began to strongly covary with measures of global risk
at the time of the global crisis because of a drastic reduction in global financial intermediation
capacity compared to global flows and a repricing of currency risk. This is consistent with the
evidence in Du et al. (2017) that persistent CIP deviations have emerged after the crisis. Perhaps
U.S. foreign bond purchases become connected with measures of global risk around the same
time because that is the unique component of global capital flows whose direction alone reveals
whether investors are shifting their portfolio towards riskier foreign securities compared to the
ultimate safety of domestic government bonds. This is consistent with the idea that the US dollar's
role as a safe asset and international currency has sharply increased since the financial crisis.17
    Maggiori et al. (2019a,b), for example, provide direct evidence that the dollar's use in several
roles, including to denominate corporate bonds and bank loans, has surged since 2008. Such a
change would help explain why the factors highlighted in this paper have become relatively more
important drivers of the dollar's value after the crisis than they were previously.




17 The role of the dollar as a safe asset has received much theoretical and empirical attention in the literature on the
international monetary system. See for example Caballero et al. (2008), Gourinchas et al. (2011), Maggiori (2017),
and Farhi and Maggiori (2018).


                                                          14
References
Adrian, Tobias and Piechu Xie, "The Non-U.S. Bank Demand for U.S. Dollar Assets," Working
 Paper, 2019.
Aloosh, Arash and Geert Bekaert, "Currency factors," National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper, 2019.

Avdjiev, Stefan, Bryan Hardy, Sebnem Kalemli-Özcan, and Luis Servén, Gross capital flows
  by banks, corporates, and sovereigns, The World Bank, 2018.
Avdjiev, Stefan, Valentina Bruno, Catherine Koch, and Hyun Song Shin, "The dollar exchange
  rate as a global risk factor: evidence from investment," IMF Economic Review, 2019, pp. 1­23.
Avdjiev, Stefan, Wenxin Du, Catherine Koch, and Hyun Song Shin, "The dollar, bank leverage
  and the deviation from covered interest parity," Forthcoming in American Economic Review:
  Insights, 2019.
Backus, David K. and Gregor W. Smith, "Consumption and real exchange rates in dynamic
  economies with non-traded goods," Journal of International Economics, 1993, 35 (3-4), 297­
  316.
Bergant, Katharina and Martin Schmitz, "Valuation Effects and Capital Flows - Security Level
  Evidence from Euro Area Investors," 2018.
Broner, Fernando, Tatiana Didier, Aitor Erce, and Sergio L Schmukler, "Gross capital flows:
  Dynamics and crises," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2013, 60 (1), 113­133.
Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, "Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of monetary
  policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2015, 71, 119­132.
Caballero, Ricardo J and Alp Simsek, "A model of fickle capital flows and retrenchment," Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 2016.
Caballero, Ricardo J, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, "An Equilibrium
  Model of "Global Imbalances" and Low Interest Rates," American Economic Review, 2008,
  98 (1), 358­393.
Calomiris, Charles W and Harry Mamaysky, "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Returns:
  Time-Varying Risk Regimes," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 2019.
Camanho, Nelson, Harald Hau, and Helene Rey, "Global Portfolio Rebalancing Under the
  Microscope," 2017.
Chen, Yu-Chin, Kenneth S Rogoff, and Barbara Rossi, "Can exchange rates forecast commod-
 ity prices?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (3), 1145­1194.
Coppola, Antonio, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, "Redrawing the Map
  of Global Capital Flows: The Role of Cross-Border Financing and Tax Havens," 2019.
Diebold, Francis X and Robert S Mariano, "Comparing predictive accuracy," Journal of Busi-
  ness & economic statistics, 2002, 20 (1), 134­144.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 1976, 84 (6), 1161.
Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan, "Deviations from covered interest rate

                                              15
  parity," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 2017.
Du, Wenxin, Joanne Im, and Jesse Schreger, "The U.S. Treasury Premium," Journal of Interna-
 tional Economics, 2018, 112, 167­181.
Eichenbaum, Martin, Benjamin K Johannsen, and Sergio Rebelo, "Monetary policy and the
  predictability of nominal exchange rates," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Pa-
  per, 2017.
Engel, Charles and Kenneth D West, "Exchange rates and fundamentals," Journal of political
  Economy, 2005, 113 (3), 485­517.
Engel, Charles and Steve Pak Yeung Wu, "Liquidity and Exchange Rates: An Empirical Inves-
  tigation," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 2018.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivan Werning, "Dilemma not trilemma? Capital controls and exchange
  rates with volatile capital flows," IMF Economic Review, 2014, 62 (4), 569­605.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Matteo Maggiori, "A Model of the International Monetary System," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (1), 295­355.
Forbes, Kristin J and Francis E Warnock, "Capital flow waves: Surges, stops, flight, and re-
  trenchment," Journal of International Economics, 2012, 88 (2), 235­251.
Frankel, Jeffrey, "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based on Real Interest
  Differentials," American Economic Review, 1979, 69 (4), 610­22.
Gabaix, Xavier and Matteo Maggiori, "International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dynamics,"
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 3, 1369­1420.
Gilchrist, Simon and Egon Zakrajsek, "Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations," Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 2012, 102 (4), 1692­1720.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Helene Rey, "International Financial Adjustment," Journal of
 Political Economy, 2007, 115 (4), 665­703.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Nicolas Govillot, and Hélène Rey, "Exorbitant Privilege and Exor-
 bitant Duty," Working Paper UC Berkeley and LBS, 2011.
Hau, Harald and Hélène Rey, "Exchange Rates, Equity Prices, and Capital Flows," Review of
 Financial Studies, 2006, 19 (1), 273­317.
He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, "Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from
 many asset classes," Journal of Financial Economics, 2017, 126 (1), 1­35.
Itskhoki, Oleg and Dmitry Mukhin, "Exchange rate disconnect in general equilibrium," National
   Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 2017.
Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig, "Foreign safe asset demand and
  the dollar exchange rate," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 2018.
Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig, "Dollar Safety and the Global
  Financial Cycle," Available at SSRN 3328808, 2019.
Kouri, Pentti J. K., "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in the Short Run and in the
 Long Run: A Monetary Approach," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 1976, 78 (2), 280­304.


                                              16
Kremens, Lukas and Ian Martin, "The Quanto Theory of Exchange Rates," American Economic
 Review, 2018.
Lilley, Andrew and Gianluca Rinaldi, "Currency Risk and Central Banks," Available at SSRN
  3262313, 2018.
Maggiori, Matteo, "Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and Reserve Curren-
 cies," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (10), 3038­3071.
Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, "International Currencies and Capital
 Allocation," Forthcoming in Journal of Political Economy, 2019.
Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger, "The Rise of the Dollar and Fall of the
 Euro as International Currencies," in "AEA Papers and Proceedings," Vol. 109 2019, pp. 521­26.
Meese, Richard A and Kenneth Rogoff, "Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: Do
 they fit out of sample?," Journal of international economics, 1983, 14 (1-2), 3­24.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Hélene Rey, "US monetary policy and the global financial cy-
 cle," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 2018.
Molodtsova, Tanya and David H. Papell, "Out-of-sample exchange rate predictability with Tay-
 lor rule fundamentals," Journal of International Economics, 2009, 77 (2), 167 ­ 180.
Niepmann, Friederike and Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr, "Institutional Investors, the Dollar, and US
  Credit Conditions," FRB International Finance Discussion Paper, 2019, (1246).
Rossi, Barbara, "Exchange rate predictability," Journal of economic literature, 2013, 51 (4),
  1063­1119.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martín Uribe, "Exchange Rates and Uncovered Interest Dif-
  ferentials: The Role of Permanent Monetary Shocks," National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper, 2018.




                                              17
     Tables




                                       Table 1: G10 Bilateral Exchange Rates and Change in GZ Spreads, 2007-2018


                                            R2        AUD     CAD      CHF     EUR     GBP     JPY     NOK     NZD      SEK     USD
                                            AUD                2        24      17      5       34       1       4        7      23
                                            CAD         2               14      9       2       36       0       0        2      30
                                            CHF        24       14              4       7       12      20      11       10       1
                                            EUR        17        9       4              2       19      17       5        6       7
                                            GBP         5        2       7       2              25       3       1        0      20
                                            JPY        34       36      12      19      25              35      22       26       9
18




                                            NOK         1        0      20      17       3      35              1        5       24
                                            NZD         4        0      11       5      1       22       1               1       12
                                            SEK        7         2      10       6       0      26       5        1              13
                                            USD        23       30       1       7      20       9      24       12      13
                                            Mean       13       10      11      10       7      24      12        6       8      16

     Notes: This table reports the R2 of regressions of the form ei, j,t =  +  ft + t , where ei, j,t is the monthly change in the bilateral exchange rate of the currency in
     row i and column j, and ft is the change in U.S. corporate bond spreads, taken from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). Exchange rate data are from Thomson Reuters
     Datastream and bond position data are from the IMF Balance of Payments database. Data is measured monthly from 2007-2018.
                    Table 2: Broad Dollar, Capital Flows, and Macro Fundamentals

                                            B
                                           eUSD       B
                                                     eUSD          B
                                                                 eUSD            B
                                                                               eUSD           B
                                                                                           eUSD
                             Model                   UIP     Backus-Smith     Monetary   Taylor Rule
                                                       Panel A: 1977-2006
                           U.S. Flows      0.086
                                           (0.14)
                           iUS     ¯
                            t -1 - it -1             -0.53**
                                                      (0.22)
                            tUS - ¯t                             -2.5*         -0.25       -0.82
                                                                 (1.3)         (0.84)      (0.83)
                           cUS
                            t - ct                                1.1
                                                                 (1.3)
                           yUS
                            t - yt                                              -0.13
                                                                               (0.30)
                            yUS
                             t - yt                                                         0.56
                                                                                           (0.43)
                              Obs.          108       108          47           108         108
                               R2           0.00      0.07        0.10          0.00        0.08
                                                     Panel B: 2007Q1-2019Q2
                           U.S. Flows      0.85***
                                            (0.16)
                           iUS     ¯
                            t -1 - it -1             1.3**
                                                     (0.61)
                            tUS - ¯t                            2.5***         2.8***      2.9***
                                                                (0.65)         (0.57)      (0.54)
                           cUS
                            t - ct                               -0.75
                                                                (1.28)
                           yUS
                            t - yt                                              0.50
                                                                               (1.17)
                            yUS
                             t - yt                                                        0.0063
                                                                                           (0.099)
                              Obs.           50        50         50             50           50
                               R2           0.32      0.08       0.15           0.15         0.15

                                                           B                              B
Notes: This table reports regressions results of the form eUSD ,t =  +  Xt + t , where eUSD,t is the quarterly change
in the broad US dollar and Xt captures various macroeconomic variables. For our baseline regressions, Xt is "U.S.
Flows," net purchases of foreign bonds by the United States, normalized as a percentage of the value of the United
States' foreign bond investment at the end of the prior quarter. For the "UIP" model, Xt is the lagged interest rate
spread between the United States and the average of the other G10 countries. For the "Monetary" model, Xt contains
two variables, the mean inflation difference between the United States and the other G10 countries and the mean
growth difference between the United States and the other G10 countries. For "Taylor Rule", Xt contains the (relative
value of) the two variables in a Taylor Rule, the mean inflation difference between the United States and the other
G10 countries and the mean output gap differential between the United States and the other G10 countries. All
macroeconomic variables are computed as the difference between the quarterly observation for the United States
versus the average of all other G10 countries. Panel (A) reports regression results from 1977:Q1-2006:Q4 and Panel
(B) reports regression results from 2007:Q1-2019:Q2. Exchange rate data are from Thomson Reuters Datastream,
international investment data are from the IMF Balance of Payments, and macroeconomic data are from the IMF
International Financial Statistics Database.
                     Table 3: Broad US Dollar and U.S. Purchases of Foreign Bonds

                                                                B
                                                             eUSD         eUSDB          eUSDB

                                                          1977-2006     2007-2017      2007-2017
                                                              BoP           BoP        Morningstar
                     U.S. Purchases of Foreign Bonds         0.091        0.86***       0.50***
                                                             (0.13)        (0.16)         (0.08)
                                 Constant                   -0.0016      -0.013**       -0.014**
                                                           (0.0045)      (0.0060)       (0.0055)
                               Observations                   120            44             44
                                   R2                         0.00          0.33           0.39

                                                           B                                  B
Notes: This table reports regressions results of the form eUSD ,t =  +  ft + t , where eUSD,t is the quarterly change
in the broad US dollar and ft is a particular measure of capital flows listed in the first column of the table. Purchases
of bonds are normalized by the stock of holdings of that asset at the end of the previous quarter. The BoP measure is
defined as net purchases of foreign bonds by the United States, where transactions are recorded at their current value
during the quarter, normalized as a percentage of the United States' value of foreign bond investment at the end of
the prior quarter. The Morningstar measure defines net purchases of foreign bonds as the change in the quantity of
each foreign bond held multiplied by the prior quarter's end of period price, normalized as a percentage of the value
of mutual fund foreign bond investment at the end of the prior quarter.




                                                          20
      Table 4: Bilateral Exchange Rates with the US Dollar, Global and Idiosyncratic Factors

                                     Restricted Regression         Unrestricted Regression
                                     US to all ex.           US to all ex.      US to
                        Currencies                    R2                                    R2    Partial-R2
                                      Country i               Country i       Country i
                          AUD         -0.82***       0.44     -0.55***         -0.31**     0.53     0.09
                          BRL         -0.85***       0.29     -0.88***           0.081     0.30     0.01
                          CAD         -0.47***       0.31     -0.46***           -0.03     0.31     0.00
                          CHF           -0.26*       0.09      -0.28**         0.12**      0.17     0.08
                          COP         -0.71***       0.29     -0.55***         -0.26**     0.34     0.05
                          CZK         -0.57***       0.20     -0.58***       -0.0068*** 0.29        0.09
                          DKK         -0.38***       0.16     -0.37***         -0.0036     0.16     0.00
                          EUR           -0.32*       0.09       -0.062          -0.22*     0.19     0.10
                          GBP         -0.58***       0.36      -0.52**           -0.08     0.37     0.01
                          IDR          -0.35**       0.16       -0.34*            -0.1     0.18     0.02
                           ILS        -0.31***       0.13     -0.31***          0.0037     0.13     0.00
                          INR         -0.42***       0.31     -0.42***          -0.017     0.32     0.01
                          JPY           0.042        0.00       0.039           0.0098     0.00     0.00
                          KRW         -0.60***       0.40     -0.61***           0.021     0.41     0.01
                          MXN         -0.54***       0.24     -0.55***            0.01     0.24     0.00
                          MYR         -0.27***       0.12     -0.26***         -0.0066     0.12     0.00
                          NOK         -0.69***       0.34     -0.58***        -0.11***     0.41     0.07
                          NZD         -0.66***       0.36     -0.64***          -0.015     0.36     0.00
                          PLN         -0.81***       0.28     -0.69***         -0.046*     0.30     0.02
                          RUB         -0.70***       0.17     -0.68***          -0.076     0.18     0.01
                          SEK         -0.63***       0.33     -0.46***         -0.12**     0.38     0.05
                          SGD         -0.24***       0.20     -0.25***          0.0044     0.20     0.00
                          TRY          -0.52**       0.19      -0.48**         -0.17**     0.24     0.05
                          ZAR         -0.54***       0.18        -0.28        -0.20***     0.37     0.19
                         Average                     0.23                                  0.26     0.04


Notes: The dependent variable of each regression in the left panel is the log change in each foreign currency against
the US dollar, defined such that a negative value corresponds to an appreciation of the non-US dollar currency. The
average R2 is the mean R2 from separate regressions for each currency. The regressor titled "U.S. to All ex. Country i"
is the percentage increase in foreign bond investment in all countries which are not the natural issuer of the currency,
while the regressor titled "US to Country i" is the percentage increase in foreign bond investment in all countries
which are the natural issuer of the currency. A negative coefficient for "U.S. to All ex. Country i" indicates that
the listed currency appreciates against the US dollar when the United States is purchasing foreign bonds. A negative
coefficient for "U.S. to Country i" indicates that the listed currency appreciates against the US dollar when the United
States is purchasing that country's bonds. Units are defined as percentage changes, as described in section A.3.2. All
regressions are conducted at a quarterly frequency. The sample period for all regressions is from 2007:Q1 to 2017:Q4.
Standard errors are calculated allowing for heteroskedasticity. *p< 0:1; **p< 0:05; ***p< 0:01. Exchange rate data
are from Thomson Reuters Datastream and bond position data are from Morningstar.




                                                                21
                         Table 5: US Dollar and Subcomponents of U.S. Outflows

                                                     B
                                                  eUSD          B
                                                              eUSD        B
                                                                         eUSD        B
                                                                                    eUSD        B
                                                                                               eUSD
                                                 0.36***     0.43***
                                     USD
                                                 (0.072)     (0.069)
                    Corporates
                                                  -0.034                  0.085
                                   NonUSD
                                                 (0.068)                 (0.065)
                                                 -0.0024                             0.15
                                     USD
                                                  (0.12)                            (0.12)
                    Sovereigns
                                                 0.16**                                       0.24***
                                   NonUSD
                                                 (0.069)                                      (0.066)
                         Observations               44          44         44         44         44
                             R2                    0.42        0.35       0.03       0.04       0.22

Notes: This table reports regressions results of the form eUSD  B  =  +  ft + t , where eUSD  B
                                                                                                  ,t is the quarterly change
in the broad dollar and ft is a particular measure of capital flows. All variables are defined as U.S. purchases of foreign
securities belonging to a particular category, scaled by U.S. holdings of bonds belonging to that category at the end
of the previous quarter. "Corporates" refers to corporate debt, "Sovereigns" refers to sovereign debt, "USD" indicates
that the bond is denominated in US dollars, and "NonUSD" indicates that the bond is denominated in a currency other
than the US dollar. Each row refers to a bond in the relevant category, a bond included in Corporates, USD indicates
U.S. purchases of corporate debt issued by a non-US firm denominated in a currency other than the US dollar. All
other variables are defined equivalently. The sample period for all regressions is from 2007:Q1 to 2017:Q4. Standard
errors are calculated allowing for heteroskedasticity. *p< 0:1; **p< 0:05; ***p< 0:01. Exchange rate data are from
Thomson Reuters Datastream and bond position data are from Morningstar.




                                                            22
                                                   Table 6: The Broad Dollar and U.S. Domestic Investment

                                                                                     B
                                                                                    eUSD          B
                                                                                                 eUSD          B
                                                                                                              eUSD
                                                      All United States Bonds       -0.51**
                                                                                    (0.24)
                                                          Sovereign Bonds                       -0.27***
                                                                                                 (0.082)
                                                          Corporate Bonds                                    0.76**
                                                                                                              (0.25)
                                                              Constant              0.0078       0.0075     -0.020**
                                                                                   (0.0065)     (0.0060)    (0.0081)
23




                                                            Observations              44           44           44
                                                                R2                    0.10        0.20         0.21

                                                                  B
     Notes: This table reports regressions results of the form eUSD   =  +  ft + t , where eUSDB
                                                                                                   ,t is the quarterly change in the broad dollar and ft is a particular
     measure of capital flows. "All United States Bonds" refers to U.S. domiciled mutual fund purchases of U.S. debt, scaled by the value all holdings of U.S. bonds by
     U.S. mutual funds at the end of the previous quarter. "Sovereign Bonds" and "Corporate Bonds" are defined equivalently, restricting the sample to the universe of
     debt issued by the U.S. Federal Government and U.S. corporations, respectively. Exchange rate data are from Thomson Reuters Datastream and bond position data
     are from Morningstar.
Figures

                                                           Figure 1: Exchange Rate Disconnect, 1977-2006
                                          (a) Interest Rate Differential                                                                    (b) Inflation Differential
               .1




                                                                                                                .1
                         .05




                                                                                                                          .05
  Change in Broad Dollar




                                                                                                   Change in Broad Dollar
                0




                                                                                                                 0
     -.05




                                                                                                      -.05
               -.1




                                                                                                                -.1
               -.15




                                                                                                                -.15
                               -.06       -.04         -.02             0           .02   .04                                   -.015     -.01      -.005              0       .005   .01
                                                    Interest Rate Differential                                                                       Inflation Differential



                                    (c) Change in U.S. Corporate Bond Spread                                                            (d) U.S. Foreign Bond Purchases
               .1




                                                                                                                .1
                         .05




                                                                                                                          .05
  Change in Broad Dollar




                                                                                                   Change in Broad Dollar
                0




                                                                                                                 0
     -.05




                                                                                                      -.05
               -.1




                                                                                                                -.1
               -.15




                                                                                                                -.15




                               -1            -.5               0               .5         1                                     -.05              0                      .05           .1
                                             Change in U.S. Corporate Bond Spread                                                                U.S. Foreign Bond Purchases



Notes: This figure plots the relationship between various macroeconomic variables and quarterly changes in the
broad dollar exchange rate from 1977-2006. Changes in the broad dollar are reported on the y-axis and the relevant
macroeconomic quantity is reported on the x-axis. A positive change in the broad dollar indicates dollar depreciation,
and a rightward move in the x-axis corresponds to a higher level for the United States minus the G10 countries. Panel
A tests the UIP model, using the average lagged interest rate differential in the United States relative to the mean of
the other G10 economies. Panel B looks at the equivalent in the U.S. inflation rate relative to the inflation rate of the
other G10 economies. Panel C uses the change in U.S. corporate bond spreads, taken from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek
(2012). Panel D looks at U.S. purchases of foreign bonds by the United States, normalized as a percentage of the
United States' value of foreign bond investment at the end of the prior quarters. The R2 s of these regressions are 0.06,
0.00, 0.00 and 0.00 respectively. Exchange rate data are from Thomson Reuters Datastream and macroeconomic data
are from the IMF International Financial Statistics Database.




                                                                                              24
                  Figure 2: Reconnect of The Broad Dollar and Risk Measures: R2 's
                                                                    (a) 10-Year Rolling Window




                                  .6
                      R : rolling 10Y window
                         .2              .4
                      2

                                  0




                                                  1990m1                   2000m1                    2010m1                  2020m1

                                                           Global Factor            GZ Spread                 VXO
                                                           S&P500                   Treasury Basis            Intermediary Returns




                                                                     (b) 5-Year Rolling Window
                                  .8         .6
                        R : rolling 5Y window
                                   .4
                      2

                      .2          0




                                                  1990m1                   2000m1                    2010m1                  2020m1

                                                           Global Factor            GZ Spread                 VXO
                                                           S&P500                   Treasury Basis            Intermediary Returns




Notes: The figures show the 120- and 60- month rolling R2 for regressions of the average log change in the
US dollar versus the other G10 currencies against various indicators of risk. The regression specification is
   B
eUSD   ,t =  +  Xt + t , where Xt corresponds to different variables depending on the model in question. For "VXO,"
Xt is the monthly change in the log transformation of an index of implied volatility on the stocks in the S&P100, from
the CBOE. For "S&P500," Xt is the log total return on the S&P500 index. For "Treasury Premium," Xt is the change
in the one-year Treasury Premium, the average one-year tenor CIP deviation between developed country government
bonds and U.S. Treasuries from Du et al. (2018). For "GZ Spread," Xt is the U.S. corporate bond credit spread, taken
from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). For "Intermediaries," Xt is the value-weighted return on a portfolio of NY Fed
primary dealers' holding companies and is taken from He et al. (2017). For "Global Return Factor," Xt is the global
factor in world asset prices constructed by Miranda-Agrippino
                                                          25 and Rey (2018).
                              Figure 3: Reconnect of The Broad Dollar and Risk Measures:  's
             .0375            (a) Global Return Factor                                                (b) GZ Spread




                                                                                .0375
             .025




                                                                                .025
     t: rolling 5Y window




                                                                        t: rolling 5Y window
                  .0125




                                                                                     .0125
          0




                                                                             0
             -.0125




                                                                                -.0125
             -.025




                                                                                -.025
                     1980m1   1990m1     2000m1       2010m1   2020m1                   1980m1   1990m1        2000m1   2010m1   2020m1



                              (c) S&P500 Log Return                                                       (d) Log VXO
             .0375




                                                                                .0375
             .025




                                                                                .025
     t: rolling 5Y window




                                                                        t: rolling 5Y window
                  .0125




                                                                                     .0125
          0




                                                                             0
             -.0125




                                                                                -.0125
             -.025




                                                                                -.025




                     1980m1   1990m1     2000m1       2010m1   2020m1                   1980m1   1990m1        2000m1   2010m1   2020m1



                               (e) Treasury Premium                                              (f) Intermediary Returns
             .0375




                                                                                .0375
             .025




                                                                                .025
     t: rolling 5Y window




                                                                        t: rolling 5Y window
                  .0125




                                                                                     .0125
          0




                                                                             0
             -.0125




                                                                                -.0125
             -.025




                                                                                -.025




                     1980m1   1990m1     2000m1       2010m1   2020m1                   1980m1   1990m1        2000m1   2010m1   2020m1




Notes: The figure shows the 60 month rolling  for regressions of the average log change in the US dollar versus
the other G10 currencies against various indicators of risk, normalized as z-scores. The regression specification is
   B
eUSD    ,t =  +  Xt + t , where Xt corresponds to different variables depending on the model in question. For "VXO,"
Xt is the quarterly change in the log transformation of an index of implied volatility on the stocks in the S&P100, from
the CBOE. For "S&P500," Xt is the log total return on the S&P500 index. For "GZ Spread," Xt is the U.S. corporate
bond credit spread, taken from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). For "Global Factor," Xt is the global factor in world
asset prices constructed by Miranda-Agrippino and Rey26      (2018). The shaded errors correspond to 95% confidence
intervals, calculated using heteroskedasticity robust standard errors.
                                        Figure 4: Reconnect of Bilateral Exchange Rates and GZ Spread,  's for 2007-2018




                                 .1
                                 .05
                             i
27




                                 0
                                 -.05
                                          JPY
                                         CHF
                                         THB
                                         SGD
                                         PHP
                                         MYR
                                         CZK
                                         EUR
                                          INR
                                         RUB
                                         GBP
                                         SEK
                                         KRW
                                          IDR
                                         HUF
                                          PLN
                                         NZD
                                         MXN
                                         CAD
                                         TRY
                                          CLP
                                         NOK
                                         AUD
                                          BRL
                                         ZAR
     Notes: This figure reports the coefficient estimate of the following regression specification: e$                                $
                                                                                                         i,t = i + i ft + t , where ei,t is the monthly change in the log
     bilateral exchange rate against the US dollar and ft is the change in U.S. corporate bond spreads, as measured by the "GZ Spread" taken from Gilchrist and
     Zakrajsek (2012). The blue dots indicate the coefficient point estimates, i , and the red bars indicate two standard error bands. A positive coefficient indicates that
     the listed currency depreciates bilaterally against the US dollar when U.S. corporate bond spreads rise.
                 Figure 5: Reconnect of Risk Measures: Out-Of-Sample Forecasting
                                                                     (a) 10-Year Evaluation Periods

                                                   1



                      p-value (Diebold-Mariano)




                                                   .5




                                                   .1
                                                  .05

                                                        .625   .75             .875        1           1.125        1.25      1.375
                                                                                        RMSE Ratio

                                                               Global Factor          GZ Spread        VXO
                                                               S&P500                 Treasury Basis   Intermediary Returns




                                                                     (b) 5-Year Evaluation Periods

                                                   1
                      p-value (Diebold-Mariano)




                                                   .5




                                                   .1
                                                  .05

                                                        .625   .75             .875        1           1.125        1.25      1.375
                                                                                        RMSE Ratio

                                                               Global Factor          GZ Spread        VXO
                                                               S&P500                 Treasury Basis   Intermediary Returns




Notes: This figure reports the performance of exchange rate forecasts using each of our six risk proxies relative to
a random walk over different sample periods. Each marker reports the p-value of a Diebold-Mariano test for the
performance of the model relative to a random walk (y-axis) and the ratio of the model's root mean squared forecast
error relative to a random walk. Each observation represents a 120- or 60-month model evaluation period, using a 120-
or 60-month rolling estimation windows, as described in Appendix Section A.1. The "x" markers represent windows
where all forecasts are for periods prior to 2007, the hollow dots represent windows where the forecasts mix periods
before and after 2007, and the solid dots represent windows where all forecast periods occur after 2007.



                                                                                         28
             Figure 6: Comovement of U.S. Foreign Bond Purchases and Risk Measures
                                                                 (a) 10-Year Rolling Window




                                  .6
                       R : rolling 10Y window
                         .2             .4
                       2

                                  0




                                                   1990q1                2000q1                 2010q1               2020q1

                                                       Global Return Factor         GZ Spread               VXO
                                                       S&P500                       Treasury Premium        Intermediaries




                                                                  (b) 5-Year Rolling Window
                                  .8          .6
                         R : rolling 5Y window
                                    .4
                       2

                       .2         0




                                          1980q1             1990q1               2000q1           2010q1            2020q1

                                                       Global Return Factor         GZ Spread               VXO
                                                       S&P500                       Treasury Premium        Intermediaries




Notes: The figures show the R2 from 40-quarter and 20-quarter rolling regressions of U.S. Foreign Bond Purchases
against various indicators of risk. The regression specification is ft =  +  Xt + t , where ft refers to the net purchases
of foreign bonds by the United States, normalized as a percentage of the value of U.S. foreign bond holdings at the
end of the prior quarter. Xt corresponds to different variables depending on the model in question.For "VXO," Xt is
the quarterly change in the log transformation of an index of implied volatility on the stocks in the S&P100, from
the CBOE. For "S&P500," Xt is the log total return on the S&P500 index. For "Treasury Premium," Xt is the change
in the one-year Treasury Premium, the average one-year tenor CIP deviation between developed country government
bonds and U.S. Treasuries from Du et al. (2018). For "GZ Spread," Xt is the U.S. corporate bond credit spread, taken
from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). For "Intermediaries," Xt is the value-weighted return on a portfolio of NY Fed
primary dealers' holding companies and is taken from He     29et al. (2017). For "Global Return Factor," Xt is the global
factor in world asset prices constructed by Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2018).
                                                  Figure 7: Reconnect of The Broad Dollar and U.S. Foreign Bond Purchases: R2 's




                                      .6
                            R : rolling window
                                             .4
                           2

                            .2
30




                                      0




                                           1980q1                   1990q1              2000q1                 2010q1                   2020q1

                                                                                  5 year                 10 year


     The y-axis corresponds to the R2 of a 20- and 40-quarter rolling regression of the following specification: eUSD
                                                                                                                  B                            B
                                                                                                                      ,t =  +  Xt + t , where eUSD,t is the average log
     appreciation of the US dollar against all other G10 currencies and Xt is the U.S. net purchases of foreign bonds, normalized as a percentage of the U.S. value of
     foreign bond investment at the end of the prior quarter. Exchange rate data is from Thomson Reuters Datastream and bond purchase data is from the IMF Balance
     of Payments Database.
                                                             Figure 8: Exchange Rate Reconnect, 2007:Q1-2019:Q2




                                        .1
                                                                                                2010q3
                                                                                                                2009q2
                                                                                                                 2009q3
                                                                                            2008q1
                                                .05                                                    2007q3
                            Change in Broad Dollar
                                                                                         2016q1 2013q3
                                                                                                  2017q2
                                                                                                    2011q2
                                                                                                        2012q3        2007q2
                                                                                                 2010q4 2011q1
                                                                                                       2017q3
                                                                                         2012q1         2017q1
                                                                                              2015q2
                                                                                             2014q1 2018q1
                                                                                       2007q4
                                                                                          2016q3    2007q1
                                                                                       2011q4    2019q2  2014q2
                                       0



                                                                                            2019q1
                                                                                              2009q4
                                                                                                   2012q4
                                                                                     2015q4     2018q3 2017q4
                                                                                        2008q2
                                                                                         2016q2 2013q4
                                                                                      2018q4          2010q1
                                                                                           2012q2
                                                                                                          2009q1
                                                                                                     2013q1
                                                                                      2015q3 2013q2
                            -.05




                                                                                       2010q2 2018q2
                                                                                               2015q1
31




                                                                                     2011q32014q42016q4
                                                                                             2014q3
                                                                        2008q4
                                        -.1




                                                                          2008q3

                                                      -.15   -.1          -.05          0         .05                     .1               .15
                                                                          U.S. Foreign Bond Purchases

                                                              2007:Q1 - 2019:Q2                   Ex-crisis: 2009:Q3 - 2019:Q2



     The y-axis corresponds to the quarterly average change in the US dollar against all other G10 currencies, defined such that a positive value corresponds to a
     depreciation. The x-axis shows the purchases of foreign bonds by the United States in the contemporaneous quarter, normalized as a percentage of the United
     States' value of foreign bond investment at the end of the prior quarter. Regression lines are estimated using the full sample (2007:Q1 to 2019:Q2) and excluding
     the crisis (2009:Q3 to 2019:Q2). Exchange rate data are from Thomson Reuters Datastream and bond purchase data are from the IMF Balance of Payments
     Database.
         Figure 9: In-Sample Explanatory Power of Capital Flows and Other Fundamentals
                                                             (a) 10-Year Rolling Window




                                    .4
                           R : rolling 10Y window
                                      .2        .3
                          2

                          .1        0




                                             1990q1              2000q1             2010q1          2020q1

                                                      U.S. Foreign Bond Purchases   UIP      Backus-Smith
                                                      Monetary                      Taylor



                                                             (b) 5-Year Rolling Window
                                    .6
                          R : rolling 5Y window
                            .2              .4
                          2

                                    0




                                             1990q1              2000q1             2010q1          2020q1

                                                      U.S. Foreign Bond Purchases   UIP      Backus-Smith
                                                      Monetary                      Taylor




Notes: The figure shows the rolling R2 for regressions of the form eUSD
                                                                      B
                                                                          ,t =  +  Xt + t where eUSD,t B is the quar-
terly average log change in the US dollar versus the other G10 currencies against various models. Xt corresponds to
different variables depending on the model in question. For "U.S. Foreign Bond Purchases," Xt is net purchases of
foreign bonds by the United States, normalized as a percentage of the United States' value of foreign bond investment
at the end of the prior quarter. For the "UIP" model, Xt is the lagged interest rate spread between the United States
and the average of the other G10 countries. For the "Monetary" model, Xt contains two variables, the mean inflation
difference between the United States and the other G10 countries and the mean growth difference between the United
States and the other G10 countries. For "Taylor", Xt contains the (relative value of) the two variables in a Taylor
Rule, the mean inflation difference between the United States and the other G10 countries and the mean output gap
differential between the United States and the other G10 countries. All macroeconomic variables are computed as the
difference between the quarterly observation for the United States versus the average of all other G10 countries. Inter-
est rate differentials are computed from the series "Deposit Rates" from the IFS where available, and from "Treasury
Bills, 3 month" otherwise. Growth is measured as the log  32change in real Gross Domestic Product and the output gap
is calculated using the cyclical component of the same logarithmic series from a detrended HP filter with l = 1600.
Exchange rate data are from Thomson Reuters Datastream, international investment data are from the IMF Balance of
Payments, and macroeconomic data are from the IMF International Financial Statistics Database.
                                              Figure 10: Broad US Dollar and U.S. Foreign Bond Purchases by Subsets of Mutual Funds
                                        (a) Coefficients by Fund Characteristics                                                                                                             (b) R2 s by Fund Characteristics

                   Foreign Currency Specialist                                                 Foreign Issuer Specialist                                        Foreign Currency Specialist                                          Foreign Issuer Specialist
          .8




                                                                                 .8




                                                                                                                                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .5
                                                                                                                                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
          .6




                                                                                 .6




                                                                                                                                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .3
                                                                                                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
         .4




                                                                              .4
          




                                                                               




                                                                                                                                                     R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
          .2




                                                                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                         .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1
          0




                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
           Quintile 1   Quintile 2     Quintile 3   Quintile 4   Quintile 5       Quintile 1    Quintile 2    Quintile 3   Quintile 4   Quintile 5            Quintile 1 Quintile 2 Quintile 3 Quintile 4 Quintile 5            Quintile 1 Quintile 2 Quintile 3 Quintile 4 Quintile 5
                                        Rank                                                                   Rank                                                                  Rank                                                              Rank


                                     Fund Size                                                               Passive                                                           Fund Size                                                           Passive
          .8




                                                                                                                                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .5
                                                                                 .8




                                                                                                                                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
          .6




                                                                                 .6




                                                                                                                                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .3
                                                                                 .4
         .4




                                                                                                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
         




                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                     R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                 .2
33



          .2




                                                                                                                                                         .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                 0
          0




                                                                                 -.2




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
           Quintile 1   Quintile 2     Quintile 3   Quintile 4   Quintile 5       Quintile 1    Quintile 2    Quintile 3   Quintile 4   Quintile 5            Quintile 1 Quintile 2 Quintile 3 Quintile 4 Quintile 5            Quintile 1 Quintile 2 Quintile 3 Quintile 4 Quintile 5
                                        Rank                                                                   Rank                                                                  Rank                                                              Rank




                                                                                                                                                  q
     Notes: This figure reports the coefficient estimate (Panel A), and R2 (Panel B) of the following regression specification: e$                                 $
                                                                                                                                    i,t = i + q ft + t , where ei,t is the
     change in average log change in the US dollar versus the other G10 currencies against ftq which is U.S. mutual funds' foreign bond purchases, normalized as a
     percentage of the same mutual funds' value of foreign bond investment at the end of the prior quarter, subsetted into fund quantiles q. In each panel, we separately
     construct the flow measure for some quintile of the mutual fund universe. We first explain this process for fund size (the AUM in US dollar). For each quarter from
     2007:Q1 to 2019:Q2, we sort each fund i by AUM separately within 10 fund categories (e.g. Fixed Income, Equity, Money Market) as defined by Morningstar and
     measure their percentile ranking within each category for that quarter, Ri,t . We then average that percentile ranking for each fund over all t , to yield an average
     ranking R ¯ i . We then sort each category by R ¯ i into 5 quintiles of an equal number of funds. Then we aggregate the positions of each quintile and construct the
     flow in the usual way. The characteristic "foreign currency specialist" is defined by the percentage of bonds the fund holds in currencies other than the US dollar.
     The characteristic "foreign issuer specialist" is defined by the percentage of bonds the fund holds which were issued by a foreign parent, using the parent match
     procedure described in (Coppola et al., 2019). The characteristic "passive" is defined by the R2 of the fund's monthly returns with the monthly returns of any bond
     or equity index (we compare their returns with the returns of the 500 most popular indices and take the maximum). Quintile 5 corresponds to largest AUM, highest
     proportion of foreign currency bonds (by AUM), highest proportion of foreign country issuers (by AUM), highest R2 with a published index for fund size, foreign
     issuer specialist, foreign currency specialist, and passive respectively.
