                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE EFFECTS OF DECENTRALIZED AND VIDEO-BASED EXTENSION ON THE
  ADOPTION OF INTEGRATED SOIL FERTILITY MANAGEMENT ­ EXPERIMENTAL
                       EVIDENCE FROM ETHIOPIA

                                         Denise Hörner
                                        Adrien Bouguen
                                        Markus Frölich
                                         Meike Wollni

                                      Working Paper 26052
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26052


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




This research was financially supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) through
grant number RTG1666 (GlobalFood) and project number 390367541, as well as the German
Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ). Further support for research analysis was also
provided by DFG through SFB 884 at University of Mannheim. The authors thank in particular
Dr. Robert Poppe and all members of the Integrated Soil Fertility Management Project (ISFM+)
for their invaluable support, and Ibrahim Worku for his excellent field work coordination as well
as the whole team of research assistants and enumerators. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Denise Hörner, Adrien Bouguen, Markus Frölich, and Meike Wollni. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Decentralized and Video-based Extension on the Adoption of Integrated Soil
Fertility Management ­ Experimental Evidence from Ethiopia
Denise Hörner, Adrien Bouguen, Markus Frölich, and Meike Wollni
NBER Working Paper No. 26052
July 2019
JEL No. Q01,Q15,Q16

                                           ABSTRACT

The slow adoption of new agricultural technologies is an important factor in explaining persistent
productivity deficits among smallholders in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Farmers delay in
particular the uptake of technology packages. Since knowledge constraints are an important
barrier to adoption, effective extension approaches are key. In recent decades, extension systems
in many SSA countries have moved towards decentralized "bottom-up" models involving farmers
as active stakeholders.

In this study we assess the effects of a decentralized extension program and an additional video
intervention on the adoption of integrated soil fertility management (ISFM) among 2,382 farmers
in Ethiopia using a randomized controlled trial. ISFM should enhance soil fertility and
productivity by combining organic and inorganic soil amendments. We find that both extension-
only and extension combined with video increase ISFM adoption and knowledge. We further find
evidence for increased adoption of ISFM practices among farmers in treatment communities that
do not actively participate in the extension activities. The additional video intervention shows a
significant complementary effect for these non-actively involved farmers, in particular regarding
the combined use of the practices on the same plot. A causal mediation analysis reveals that
increases in knowledge explain part of the treatment effects on adoption.

Denise Hörner                                     Markus Frölich
Platz der Göttinger Sieben 5                      University of Mannheim
Göttingen 37073                                   froelich@uni-mannheim.de
Germany
denise.hoerner@uni-goettingen.de                  Meike Wollni
                                                  Platz der Göttinger Sieben 5
Adrien Bouguen                                    Goettingen 37073
Giannini Hall                                     Germany
University of California                          mwollni1@gwdg.de
Berkeley, CA 94720
abouguen@berkeley.edu




A data appendix is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26052
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/4406
   1. Introduction

The slow adoption of new agricultural technologies is an important factor in explaining per-
sistent productivity deficits among smallholder farmers, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa
(SSA). At the same time, underinvestment in the productive capacity of their soils is viewed
as a major cause for self-reinforcing poverty traps for the rural poor (Barrett and Bevis, 2015).
Recent evidence shows that farmers delay in particular the uptake of system technologies, i.e.
packages of agricultural practices that should be applied in combination in order to deploy
their full productivity-enhancing potential (Noltze et al., 2012; Sheahan and Barrett, 2017;
Ward et al., 2018). Even though farmers might simultaneously adopt several components at
the household level, it is a common behavior to scatter them across plots rather than combin-
ing them on the same plot, leaving much of their synergistic potential unexploited (Sheahan
and Barrett, 2017).
   A frequently cited barrier to the adoption of agricultural innovations is the lack of infor-
mation and knowledge (Foster and Rosenzweig, 1995; Aker, 2011). Providing agricultural
extension services to farmers can bridge the knowledge and capacity gap, as its overarching
goal is knowledge transfer from researchers to farmers. Extension systems are frequently sub-
ject to a series of shortcomings, such as high bureaucratic burden, excessive costs of direct
trainings, limited geographic coverage, and exclusion of marginalized, resource-poor farmers
(Anderson and Feder, 2007; Aker, 2011). In recent decades, this gave rise to the introduction
of decentralized approaches, especially in SSA, where extension agents only train selected
farmers (often referred to as contact, lead or model farmers) to adopt new techniques on their
farms. These model farmers should then in turn train other farmers, often organized in groups,
in a participatory and experiential way. This goes along with a shift in perspective from a
"top-down" to a more inclusive "bottom-up" strategy by involving farmers as active stake-
holders in the technology transfer process. Eventually, exposure to on-farm demonstrations,
trained contact farmers and group members is supposed to spur broader adoption in a com-
munity through peer learning (Gautam, 2000; Swanson, 2008; Kondylis et al., 2017). Often-
times, these developments are accompanied by a change from a mere output-growth to a more
holistic perspective, promoting sets of technologies that achieve productivity increases and
sustainable use of natural resources at the same time (Swanson, 2008).
   A crucial question with respect to decentralized extension models is how effectively in-
formation is passed on from farmer to farmer. Some studies suggest positive effects of partic-
ipatory extension approaches like farmer field schools on participants' knowledge, adoption

                                               2
of new practices or income (Feder et al., 2004; Godlandt, 2004; Davis et al, 2012). Yet, mul-
tiple studies conclude that knowledge gains hardly trickle down to neighboring farmers (Rola
et al., 2002; Feder et al., 2004; Tripp et al., 2005), and that increased technology adoption
among trained farmers does little to change behavior among their peers (Berg and Jiggins,
2007; Kondylis et al., 2017), or that diffusion highly depends on similarity between commu-
nicators and target farmers (BenYishay and Mobarak, 2018) as well as other context-specific
forms of social capital prevalent in communities (Pamuk et al., 2014).
   In their study on pit-planting knowledge transmission from extension agents to lead farm-
ers to other farmers, Niu and Ragasa (2018) show that information loss takes place due to
both teaching and learning failures. They find that even though knowledge is transmitted, im-
portant dimensions get lost along the chain due to selective attention on both the side of the
information senders and receivers. Due to the mental costs attached to processing new infor-
mation, individuals seem to neglect information they do consider less important. Yet, litera-
ture suggests that reminders about knowledge dimensions commonly neglected by farmers
can help to offset teaching and learning failures (Hanna et al., 2014; Niu and Ragasa, 2018).
   In this research, we assess the effect of a decentralized, participatory extension model as
well as an additional video intervention on the adoption of and knowledge about a package of
integrated soil fertility management (ISFM) practices among small-scale subsistence farmers
in rural Ethiopia. We use a randomized controlled trial (RCT) with two treatment arms, exten-
sion-only and extension in combination with video, as well as a control group. In particular,
we are interested in whether exposing farmers to additional explanations on why all individual
ISFM components are important via video can counterbalance incomplete information diffu-
sion that might occur in a decentralized extension set-up and therefore, foster adoption of the
practices and the ISFM technology package as a whole.
   ISFM is widely promoted in SSA, since it is viewed as a strategy to sustainably intensify
agricultural productivity and combating land degradation, caused by excessive deforestation
and inappropriate agricultural land use practices, such as overgrazing, improper crop rota-
tions, insufficient fallow periods, intensive tillage or immoderate use of mineral fertilizers
(Barrow, 1991). A fundamental feature of the ISFM paradigm is the integrated use of inor-
ganic and organic soil amendments (such as compost, crop residues or manure) in order to
enhance both nutrient availability as well as the soil's capacity to absorb nutrients, and is id e-
ally complemented by the use of improved seeds. Complementarily, ISFM aims at a general
improvement of agronomic techniques, like line application of seeds and fertilizers, and the
introduction of practices such as crop rotation, cereal-legume intercropping, minimum tillage,
                                                3
mulching, residue retention, agroforestry or green manuring, targeted to local conditions
(Place et al., 2003; Vanlauwe et al., 2010). ISFM provides a promising concept to tackle soil
degradation and increase productivity among smallholders in developing countries. Substan-
tial positive impacts of ISFM on soil fertility and crop yields are well documented by studies
using farm-level survey data (Adolwa et al., 2019), and in particular numerous experimental
trials (Nezomba et al., 2015; Agegnehu et al., 2016; Gnahoua et al., 2017; Tana and Wolden-
senbet, 2017). However, farmers face several adoption constraints, such as liquidity and labor
shortages, given that some practices involve additional costs (e.g. for improved seeds and
mineral fertilizer) or labor (e.g. for seeding in lines or compost production). Moreover, ISFM
involves trade-offs with other livelihood activities, since inputs for the production of organic
fertilizers are frequently used for other purposes, for example animal manure as fuel or crop
residues as animal feed.
   In addition, knowledge constraints are seen as a key factor hindering ISFM adoption or
leading to incomplete uptake of this relatively complex system technology (Vanlauwe et al.,
2010). This is even more likely since the adoption of technology packages is typically not
viewed as one single, but rather as a series of separate (even if interrelated) decisions (Ward et
al., 2018), so that farmers might only take up those practices they consider more important or
that are easier to learn. Further, in general extension activities often aim at providing aware-
ness for improved agricultural practices and instructions on how to implement them, but fre-
quently disregard the importance of providing sufficient information on why certain practices
are beneficial (Rogers, 1995; Anderson and Feder, 2007). Yet, individuals' "competence to
decide whether or not to adopt" a technology can be facilitated by being well informed about
their underlying principles and mechanisms due to enhanced capacity of appraising the con-
sequences of adoption (Rogers, 1995: 166). Hence, our experimental interventions are de-
signed to relaxing ISFM knowledge constraints in order foster its adoption.
   The study is conducted within the Integrated Soil Fertility Management Project of the
German Agency for International Cooperation in Ethiopia and focuses on a package of five
ISFM technologies: Compost, blended fertilizer, improved seeds, line seeding and liming for
acidic soils. The extension model builds on model farmers as entry points for ISFM
knowledge, who should pass on their knowledge to members of so-called Farmer Research
and Extension Groups, from where information should then ideally trickle down to other
farmers in a community. Since farmers might not consider each ISFM component as equally
important or some pieces of information are more difficult to grasp, knowledge transmission
is likely to occur incompletely. To counteract this, we designed a second intervention in form
                                                4
of a video emphasizing the importance of perceiving ISFM as a holistic concept and provid-
ing information on the underlying principles of each component. Previous research has shown
that video as information delivery channel has the potential to induce behavioral changes in
farming communities (Van Mele, 2006; Zoussou et al., 2010; Bernard et al., 2014), can in-
crease the effectiveness of standard extension activities (Gandhi et al., 2009; Van Campen-
hout et al., 2017; Vasilaky et al., 2018) and even trigger knowledge increases in areas not ex-
plicitly mentioned in the videos (Van Campenhout et al., 2017).
   Despite the high policy-relevance, there is little experimental evidence on the impact of
different extension models on the uptake of agricultural innovations (De Brauw et al., 2018;
Ogutu et al., 2018), and of decentralized extension in particular, with Pamuk et al. (2014) and
Kondylis et al. (2017) being closest to our study. We seek to extend this literature on the im-
pact of decentralized extension and agricultural learning by using an experimental research
design. We also assess the differential effects of the extension model on those who actively
take part in the activities and those who at most benefit indirectly, in order to assess the effec-
tiveness of information spillovers as a key principle of decentralized extension. Moreover,
whereas previous studies mostly focus on the adoption of individual technologies, or sets of
technologies that are viewed as a series of binary adoption decisions, we also study the inte-
grated uptake of ISFM practices. Additionally, we examine the importance of gains in ISFM
knowledge, in particular of knowing why and how a technology works, as drivers for adoption
using a causal mediation analysis. And ultimately, we contribute to the emerging literature on
the use of media and other non-traditional ways of agricultural education (Aker, 2011).
   The remainder of this article is structured as follows: In the next section we provide an
outline of the context and the conceptual model underlying our study. Subsequently, we de-
scribe the experimental design, the data used for analysis, as well as our estimation strategy.
In the results section, we first assess the impact of the interventions on ISFM adoption, before
analyzing treatment effects on knowledge as potential impact pathway. The last chapter dis-
cusses implications of our findings and concludes.


   2. Setting and Conceptual Framework

Agriculture forms the backbone of Ethiopia's economy, since it accounts for over 35% of the
country's GDP and presents the major income source for around three-fourths of the popula-
tion (CIA, 2018). Five cereals ­ teff, maize, wheat, barley and sorghum ­ are the most im-
portant staple food crops, both in terms of production and consumption (Taffesse et al., 2011).
                                                5
Despite the importance of the sector and substantial output growth in recent years, agricultural
yields remain comparatively low with average cereal yields below 2.5 t/ha (FAO, 2016). Land
degradation and declining soil fertility are among the most serious problems for the Ethiopian
agriculture. In the past decade, the Ethiopian government has responded to these challenges
with considerable investments in the extension system, estimated to around 2% of the agricul-
tural GDP (Spielman et al., 2010). At the same time, rural advisory services have undergone
substantial structural changes, away from a centralized top-down approach, typically only
reaching few, rather resource-rich farmers, towards a more decentralized inclusive outreach
program (Belay, 2003). In 2010, the Ethiopian government announced a "participatory exten-
sion system" as core of the national strategy for agricultural growth and development. Corner-
stone of this strategy is a strong emphasis on grassroots farmer groups and strengthening of
peer-to-peer learning (ATA, 2014).

    2.1 Study Context

Our study is conducted within the Integrated Soil Fertility Management Project (ISFM+ pro-
ject) of the German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ), which was launched in mid-
2015 and operates in the three Ethiopian highland regions Amhara, Oromia and Tigray. The
ISFM+ project is a component of the broader Ethiopian Sustainable Land Management Pro-
gramme (SLMP)1 and only operates in districts (in Ethiopia called Woredas) where physical
land rehabilitation measures (stabilization of hillsides, erosion control measures) have been
successfully introduced by the SLMP. During the initial phase of the project from 2015 to
2018, the use of five so-called "quickwin technologies" for all major cereal crops was pro-
moted among small-scale farmers in the three regions, since the combination of these practic-
es is considered to boost on-farm biomass production within a relatively short period of time.
The quickwin package consists of the following practices: Compost, prepared of crop residues
or other plant materials and animal dung, is supposed to increase soil organic matter, thus
improving nutrient supply, soil biota as well as water holding capacity. Blended fertilizer re-
fers to inorganic fertilizers that are aligned to a specific location's soil type and therefore pro-
vide a balanced nutrient supply. It is commonly composed of nitrogen (N), phosphor (P), po-
tassium (K), sulfur (S), zinc (Zn) and boron (B) and should replace the widely used Di-
ammonium phosphate (DAP) fertilizer. Fertilizer blending factories have recently started their
operation in Ethiopia. Improved seeds should increase biomass production of both grain and
1
  Beginning of 2018, the SLMP has been replaced by the successor project named Sustainable Use of Rehabili-
tated Land for Economic Development (SURED).

                                                    6
residues and are distributed to model farmers by the project for all major crop types. Line
seeding is promoted to replace the common practice of broadcasting seeds. It is thought to
reduce competition for space, nutrients and water among plants and thus, lead to more vigor-
ous growth. At the same time, line seeding allows to target inputs directly to the plants, and
hence reduce required amounts and enhance efficiency. Lime application is promoted in re-
gions where soil suffers from acidity in order to normalize its pH value.
   In line with the country's national strategy, it was chosen to use a decentralized "participa-
tory learning and extension approach" as delivery mechanism of the promoted practices (de-
scribed in more detail in section 3). The ISFM+ provides capacity building measures among
government agricultural advisory staff, which includes experts from provincial and Woreda
Bureaus of Agriculture as well as development agents, the extension officers at Kebele level,
(the lowest administrative unit in Ethiopia) who should then train model farmers on ISFM.
Model farmers act as leaders of so-called Farmer Research and Extension Groups (FREGs)
and should pass on their ISFM knowledge to the group members.

   2.2 Conceptual Model

As pointed out earlier, the key feature of ISFM is the combined use of a range of different
practices. Hence, it is pivotal for farmers to learn about each of its individual components as
well as the necessity of applying them jointly. This is, however, frequently neglected by
farmers, which may be a result of learning gaps.
   A useful way of conceptualizing this shortcoming is to view it as a learning failure in the
framework of selective attention theory, which is borrowed from psychology (Schwartzstein
2014), and has been applied in the context of agricultural learning before. Hanna et al. (2014)
as well as Niu and Ragasa (2018) developed a set of assumptions based on Schwartzstein's
(2014) model of selective attention that are relevant to the agricultural technology adoption
context: First, a new technology comes along with a certain set of parameters that are un-
known and must be learned by a farmer, e.g. through trainings, visits, or farmer-to-farmer
extension. Yet, farmers do often not consider all aspects equally important and therefore, a
priori, attach different weights to these. Second, paying attention involves costs, because
learning requires capacities in the form of mental energy and time, and individuals need to
economize these resources. Third, farmers seek to maximize their net payoffs, resulting from
expected yields minus attentional costs. Consequently, even when full information on a new
technology is readily available through trainings, field demonstrations or on neighbors' fields,


                                               7
farmers may not be able to pay attention to each of its parameters due to resource boundaries,
and therefore need to decide which dimensions to focus on.
   In the case of a system technology that requires learning about several individual practic-
es, a resource-constrained farmer might ­ consciously or unconsciously ­ base the decision
which components to focus on not only on how important she or he considers a certain prac-
tice, but also on its level of complexity. Since learning more complex technologies requires
more cognitive energy, payoff-maximizing farmers will only learn them when they are suffi-
ciently convinced of their benefits, but otherwise disregard.
   Knowledge dimensions that have been neglected from the beginning are often continuous-
ly ignored throughout the further process of experimentation and implementation, simply be-
cause farmers did initially not pay attention to them, due to low perceived importance or high
perceived complexity. In that sense, a learning failure essentially stems from a failure to no-
tice (Niu and Ragasa, 2018). As a result, farmers may persistently stick to suboptimal choices
or applications of technologies, if they do not get reminded of the ignored parts. Conversely,
reminders of neglected dimensions of a technology (package) may help to overcome this
learning failure and alter farmers' behavior (Hanna et al., 2014; Niu and Ragasa, 2018).
   The ISFM technology package promoted via the above described extension intervention
consists of several individual components. Yet, due to a failure to notice the importance of
each individual ­ and in particular the more complex ­ components, we expect learning and
teaching along the knowledge transmission chain from extension staff to model farmers to
members of Farmer Research and Extension Groups and other farmers to occur incompletely
and therefore, lead to incomplete adoption. Consequently, in order to overcome this potential
"failure to notice", farmers' attention needs to be drawn to each of the individual practices
and the need for their integrated adoption. To do so, we designed a video intervention to com-
plement the extension approach, which provides farmers with information on why each com-
ponent is important, that is, explanations about the underlying principles and mechanisms of
ISFM.
   Building on these considerations, we derive a set of hypotheses for the context of ISFM
knowledge diffusion and adoption in our experimental set-up. Firstly, we expect farmers to
learn about ISFM through the extension intervention, and therefore hypothesize:
         H1: ISFM adoption and knowledge will increase through the extension activities,
         both of its individual components and the integrated package.




                                               8
Further, we expect that farmers in treatment communities who are not actively involved in the
extension activities benefit from information spillovers that occur via farmer-to-farmer com-
munication or by observing neighbors' behavior, and therefore assume that:
          H1a: Due to information spillovers, ISFM adoption and knowledge will also increase
          among farmers not directly involved in extension activities.

Yet, farmers that "only" learn via informational spillovers are more likely to pick up incom-
plete pieces of information (primarily what they consider most important, or what is easier to
grasp), which lets us hypothesize:
          H1b: Since information spillovers occur incompletely, increases in ISFM adoption
          and knowledge will be lower for farmers not directly involved in extension activities.

We expect the additional video treatment to make farmers aware of potentially neglected
knowledge dimensions, which is particularly beneficial for those who do not directly learn via
extension. Thus, we hypothesize:
          H2: The additional video intervention counteracts incomplete information spillovers
          and therefore leads to higher ISFM knowledge and adoption.

          H2a: The additional "video effect" will be stronger for farmers that are not directly
          involved in extension activities.

Ultimately, since we expect that more complete knowledge fosters adoption, we hypothesize
that:

          H3: Increases in ISFM adoption are (partly) channeled through gains in ISFM
          knowledge triggered by the interventions.


    3. Experimental Design

This study builds on an RCT design with two treatment arms and a control group. We used
microwatersheds (mws) as units of randomization, which are common implementation units
for natural resource related interventions in Ethiopia. These are water catchment areas, i.e.
natural hydrological entities defined by the topography of the land, typically consisting of
around 250 to 300 households in one or several communities that share a common rainwater
outlet.




                                                9
   3.1 Treatment Description

The core elements of the extension intervention introduced by the ISFM+ project are the fol-
lowing: In each treatment mws, three Farmer Research and Extension Groups (FREG) were
formed, each consisting of 16 or 17 members who are "interested farmers working in collabo-
ration with research and extension in the process of technology generation, verification and
adoption" (ATA, 2014: 15), leading to a total of around 50 FREG members per mws. It is
important to note that FREG farmers were selected in a non-random manner by extension
agents and village heads, based on farmers' interest and social involvement. The FREGs con-
duct regular meetings to discuss on agricultural topics, typically once or twice per month.
Each group is led by three model farmers that were appointed based on their reputation and
farming skills in a participatory process with FREG members and extension staff during kick-
off workshops. Model farmers are trained by public extension agents on ISFM techniques and
provided with necessary inputs. Some of the model farmers or FREG members may be re-
placed from season to season, but this is not defined in a fixed way. The central activity of
model farmers is the establishment and maintenance of demonstration plots. To do so, model
farmers receive trainings from extension agents and are provided with all necessary inputs
from the ISFM+ project. Demonstration plots are on-farm trials on which the package of
ISFM practices is applied, next to plots that are managed according to traditional farming
practices. Hence, differences in biomass production and yields resulting from common prac-
tices in contrast to ISFM practices become clearly visible for farmers. For instance, results
from 280 demonstration plots combining improved seeds, blended fertilizer, compost, line
seeding and lime in Amhara and Oromia show average grain yield increases of 80% com-
pared to fields managed with common farmers' practices (MoANR, 2017).
   In each mws, farmer field days are conducted twice per harvest cycle, at critical stages
around mid-season and just before harvest. During these field days, model farmers share and
discuss their experience with FREG members regarding the implementation of ISFM and its
results, extension agents are present to complement information. Field day activities are main-
ly targeted to FREG members, although in some communities other farmers do also partici-
pate.
   The ISFM+ extension treatment mainly aims at creating awareness and know-how about
ISFM through a knowledge sharing process from development agents to model farmers, and
from model farmers to FREG members. Through that entry point, information should diffuse



                                              10
to the broader population of farmers in the communities. Hence, this model heavily relies on
peer-to-peer learning.


The video intervention has been designed to provide an additional stimulus to adoption by
exposing farmers to information about the ISFM concept with all its individual components,
in order to overcome potential knowledge gaps on key dimensions of the approach. The mov-
ie is composed of two parts: A narrative and documentary part which presents the example of
a farmer couple who has already successfully implemented the quickwin technologies and
visibly increased yields, serving as (potential) role models for treated farmers. These main
characters explain their experience with implementation, emphasizing benefits and successes,
but also critically discussing their initial reluctance and problems they have faced. In the nar-
ratives, particular emphasis was put on the fact that ISFM is a package approach and there-
fore, practices need to be combined on the same plot. The main characters were carefully cho-
sen to be as far as possible representative of the target audience in terms of socioeconomic
status and living environment. Given the cultural, linguistic as well as agro-ecological differ-
ences between Tigray, Amhara and Oromia, three different farmer couples were selected and
featured in the version for the respective region. Previous research has underlined the im-
portance of tailoring information to specific local conditions, as well as framing messages in a
way that the audience can relate to them, which is best achieved by presenting credible role
models from similar backgrounds (Jensen and Oster, 2009; Chong and La Ferrera, 2009;
Chong et al., 2012; Bernard et al., 2014; 2015; 2016; BenYishay and Mobarak, 2018). Not-
withstanding, all three versions strictly follow the same script in order to convey equal mes-
sages. Yet, it should be noted that, in contrast to the other two regions, the version for Tigray
did not feature any information on liming, since soils in the intervention areas in this region
do not suffer from acidity. In intervention areas in the other two regions, however, soil acidity
presents one of the most severe threats, which makes the promotion of lime crucial. The sec-
ond component of the film consists of animations that visualize processes taking place in the
soil ­ such as hydrological cycles, the "work" of roots, soil organic matter, microorganisms
and nutrients. Complex soil processes and the relationship between the individual ISFM com-
ponents, soil fertility and improved yields are presented in a simplified way. Ultimately,
farmers should gain a better understanding on why the integrated use of all techniques is im-
portant to improve soil fertility and productivity.




                                                11
   3.2 Sampling and Randomization Strategy

Since the participatory extension approach draws on the establishment of community-based
farmer groups and demonstration sites, a cluster randomization approach has been applied,
with mws as sampling unit. The decision to use microwatersheds was driven by the fact that
the Sustainable Land Management Programme (SLMP) as umbrella project of the ISFM+ has
equally been implemented at the mws level.
   The full sampling frame consists of 161 mws located in 18 Woredas, equally distributed
among the three regions Tigray, Amhara and Oromia. The list of target mws was compiled
based on the criteria (i) benefiting from the SLMP and (ii) no/minimal previous exposure to
soil fertility interventions. From this list, a sample of treatment mws was drawn randomly ­
stratified by region and Woreda ­ so that in in each Woreda four beneficiary mws were se-
lected, resulting in a total of 72 treatment mws. (The total number of 72 treatment mws was
given by the capacity constraint of the ISFM+ project, while the remaining 161-72 = 89 mws
serve as control observations.)
   Of these 72 treatment mws, half were assigned to the additional video intervention. Con-
sequently, 36 mws received the extension treatment only (in the following referred to as T1),
and another 36 mws received the extension treatment plus the additional video intervention
(T2). In the second stage, in all treatment and control mws 15 households were randomly
drawn from all households in a mws. To do so, complete lists of households living in a re-
spective mws were compiled from administrative village lists of registered households. Thus,
in treatment mws, the proportions of non-FREG and FREG farmers in the sample should on
average represent their distribution in the population.
   Figure 1 graphically depicts our full original sample, consisting of 2,416 households.

                                      Figure 1 about here

   3.3 Treatment Implementation

The ISFM+ project was launched in mid-2015. Yet, in the first months of operation, the pro-
ject was still in the consolidation phase, i.e. conducting planning and kick-off workshops,
while the implementation of the above described extension intervention on a broad scale
started in the 2016 main cropping season. Since then, extension activities in T1 and T2 com-
munities are on-going, regionally aligned with the course of the main harvest cycle (meher
season).



                                               12
    The video screenings were conducted in T2 communities in early 2017, around six weeks
prior to the start of the main growing season. Typically, the video was shown in public spaces
such as farmer training centers, health posts or schools, and followed by group discussions
that were facilitated by extension agents. In each microwatershed, the 15 households from our
sample were invited by village heads a few days prior to the screenings orally and with writ-
ten invitation cards. In the case of double-headed households we invited both spouses, other-
wise only household heads.2


    4. Data and Empirical Strategy

    4.1 Data

In order to assess the interventions' impact, two rounds of survey data were collected. A base-
line survey took place in early 2016, shortly after the launch of the ISFM+ project in mid-
2015. (The timing of the survey may raise concerns that baseline data might be influenced by
first project activities. While this cannot be ruled out completely, it appears very unlikely be-
cause all structured extension activities in all treatment mws started only in 2016.)
    The endline survey took place in early 2018 among the same rural households. Data in
both rounds were collected during tablet-based face-to-face interviews (CAPI) with the
household head or spouse, using a structured questionnaire. Our attrition rate was remarkably
low, since 2,382 (98.6%) of the 2,416 baseline sample households could be re-interviewed
during endline, and we cannot detect any non-random patterns in this.


Both surveys covered modules on household sociodemographic characteristics, income and
assets, food security level, social relationships, farming practices and agricultural production
data for the preceding cropping season, as well as exposure to agricultural extension. During
endline, we assessed most information in the same way, yet had to adapt the mode of meas-
urement for some variables. For the key outcome variables, the adoption of ISFM practices,
enumerators cross-checked self-reported data whenever possible. In order to verify infor-
mation on compost production, farmers were asked to show their compost pits or heaps to
enumerators, who assessed their size with a measurement tape. Further, in addition to ques-
tions on the final compost product (such as color, texture or odor), detailed questions on the

2
 After the endline data collection, the video became freely available for extension staff to be used in T1 as well
as control communities.

                                                       13
production process were posed in order to assess compost quality. For example, we asked
which ingredients were used, how much time the composting process took, whether and how
often materials were turned, whether the pit/heap was covered, or if tubes for aeration were
used.3
    To make sure which kind of inorganic fertilizers farmers applied, enumerators checked the
labels on (empty) fertilizer bags from the previous season.4 In addition, they showed farmers
pictures of different types of fertilizer granulate in order to identify the correct product. 5 For
lime, stored bags were checked as well. In order to verify the use of improved seeds, the sur-
vey contained detailed questions on the name of the seed, its original source and for how long
it had been reused (should not exceed four seasons).
    Besides, we added detailed questions on awareness for and participation in ISFM+ activi-
ties. In addition to the household-level questionnaire, in endline we included two individual-
level modules administered to the household head as well as the spouse (in case the household
was not single-headed), covering questions on the video content, psychological variables as
well as a detailed knowledge exam. For the knowledge part, we first assessed farmers' aware-
ness by asking them which ISFM components they actively remembered, and in a second
step, letting enumerators read through a list of practices and record which techniques re-
spondents remember by name.6 Subsequently, questions on their underlying principles and
purpose ("principles knowledge") as well as their mode of implementation ("how-to
knowledge") were posed. We combined different types of asking knowledge questions, in-
cluding open questions, multiple choice tasks and statements on which respondents needed to
decide between correct or incorrect (or a neutral "don't know" option) to minimize fatigue
effects (for details of the knowledge exam, see Appendix B2). Enumerators were intensively
trained and supervised during a ten-day training period. Questionnaire contents were carefully
translated into the three local languages Amharic, Afan Oromo and Tigrigna and pretested in
several rounds.


3
 Since the survey took place after the 2017 season, it was not possible for enumerators to check the finished or
nearly-finished compost themselves, because of which we need to rely on farmers' self -reports.
4
  Most farmers keep even empty fertilizer bags to use them for other purposes, e.g. to sit on them or to store
other things.
5
  During pretesting, we found out that it is common for farmers to call any kind of inorganic fertilizer "DAP",
irrespective of whether it is really Di-ammonium phosphate or a different fertilizer type (e.g. NPK or NPS).
Recognizing by pictures turned out to be an easy task for farmers.
6
  Inspired by Kondylis et al. (2015), we included a placebo practice ("seeding in circles") in this list to get a
sense for possible response bias, which does not appear to threaten our results since yes-answers regarding this
practice are close to zero.

                                                       14
   In addition to the farm household survey, we administered two community level question-
naires to key informants at the Woreda and mws levels, in order to collect data on infrastruc-
ture, extension exposure, rainfall and temperature, as well as other contextual characteristics.

   4.2 Descriptive Statistics and Balance at Baseline

Table 1 depicts descriptive statistics on selected variables at baseline using data of the bal-
anced panel of 2,382 households, which includes a test for covariate balancing between the
three treatment groups to verify the success of our randomization process. Table 1 shows
those variables that are used as additional covariates in the adoption and knowledge regres-
sions, Table A1 in Appendix A presents further balance checks on selected household, farm-
ing and community characteristics.
   On average, household heads are 47 years old and have slightly over two years of school-
ing (Panel A, Table 1). 85% of the sample households are male-headed. The mean household
consist of 5.3 members, of which three are age 15 and above. Around 19% of households earn
income from a non-farm family business or wage employment, respectively. Further, farmers
are involved in around 4.5 local organizations. Access to communication technologies is lim-
ited, as only 29% of smallholders own a radio, and 52% a mobile phone. On average, a
household possesses livestock equivalent to 3.4 tropical livestock units (TLU). Whereas
around 73% of households consider themselves eligible for a formal credit (from a bank, gov-
ernmental institution or microcredit institute), roughly 34% contracted a credit in the year
preceding baseline, with a small imbalance between farmers in T1 and C. According to a food
insecurity score, which is based on self-reported incidents of food shortage, around 28% of
the sample households can be classified as food insecure at baseline. Average walking dis-
tances from farmers homestead to the closest farmer training center, paved road and market
are 33, 27, respectively 74 minutes. Farmers in the control group seem to live somewhat fur-
ther away from the nearest road than T2 farmers, respectively the nearest market than farmers
in both treatment groups.
   On average, smallholders manage 1.3 ha of land (Panel B, Table 1). The vast majority
(94%) cultivates at least one of the main crops teff, wheat, barley, maize or sorghum. At base-
line, farmers on average adopted 1.4 out of the five quickwin technologies, with treatment
farmers somewhat more than control farmers (1.5 vs. 1.3). Looking at the individual quickwin
components, this imbalance seems to stem from a more widespread use of improved seeds
among T1 than C households (64% vs. 53%), and line seeding among treatment compared to


                                               15
control farmers (52% vs. 39%).7 Further, compost was used by around 36% of smallholders at
baseline, while the use of blended fertilizer and lime was very limited, with adoption rates of
1.4% and 0.8%; 70% and 19% of households used Diammonium phosphate (DAP) fertilizer
and some kind of irrigation during the first survey round. At the mean, farmers had 5.5 con-
versations with the development agent in the year before baseline, and around 27% participat-
ed in at least one agricultural training, with treatment more often than control farmers (30%
and 34% vs. 23%).
    All in all, households in the three groups seem largely balanced on a series of sociodemo-
graphic and economic indicators. Yet, they exhibit a few differences regarding agricultural
production-related characteristics, which need to be taken into account in our outcome estima-
tion framework. Moreover, we learn that ISFM practices are not necessarily new to farmers,
since some were already used prior to the interventions, yet mostly to a relatively low extent.
    Furthermore, Panel C of Table 1 and Panel C of Table A1 (Appendix A) show that there
are no significant differences regarding a set of community level indicators related to climate,
extension provision (other than from the ISFM+ project) or input supply.

                                            Table 1 about here

    4.3 Key Outcome Variables

Since our key concern is the increase in ISFM adoption, we measure how many ISFM prac-
tices farmers adopted in the preceding harvest cycle (2017), and therefore assess the number
of ISFM technologies adopted, ranging from 0 to 5. We use this variable despite the fact that
lime is not relevant in one of the regions (and thus, farmers in Tigray do effectively not reach
a value of 5), but provide robustness checks verifying that implications do not change if we
exclude lime and employ a 0 to 4 measure instead. Since the complementary use of practices
is pivotal to ISFM, our second main outcome is the integrated adoption of the full ISFM
package. We assess this with a binary variable that measures whether a farmer has used all
four quickwin practices in combination on at least one plot.8 Here we exclude the use of lime,
since adoption would otherwise always be zero in Tigray. Yet, to check sensitivity of our re-
sults with respect to this definition, we also use several alternative measures. Firstly, a varia-
ble that equals 1 when at least four out of five practices (including lime) are adopted. Second-

7
  Yet, line seeding was assessed on a more general level during baseline, asking farmers how they usually plant
crops, but not at the plot level.
8
 Due to data availability, we restrict these analyses to plots planted with main crops, i.e. wheat, maize, teff,
barley and sorghum, which are also the main focus of the interventions.

                                                      16
ly, a measure for the joint adoption of compost, blended fertilizer and line seeding, that is,
excluding improved seeds, which might possibly be concentrated around a certain crop type.
And lastly, a regionally-specific measure that requires all five practices to be adopted in Am-
hara and Oromia, but only four in Tigray. Although effect sizes naturally vary with the choice
of this measure, results remain qualitatively unaltered. Furthermore, we are interested in the
adoption of the individual ISFM quickwin components, which are compost, blended fertilizer,
improved seeds, line seeding and lime. For each technology, we define a dummy variable tak-
ing the value of 1 if the household has applied the respective practice in the 2017 main crop-
ping season on any of its plots, for any crop type.
   In addition, we assess the quantity of compost farmers produce, measured in m3 per hec-
tare of crop land a household manages. Moreover, since the effect of compost on the im-
provement of soil fertility also depends on its quality, we calculate a compost quality index,
ranging from 0 to 9, based on farmers' self-reported information. The index is composed of
six questions on the compost production process and three questions on the compost end
product (see Appendix B1 for details).
   We are further interested in the effect of our treatments on ISFM knowledge as potential
impact pathway to adoption. We construct an overall ISFM knowledge score based on ques-
tions on each of the individual ISFM components (but exclude the questions on lime). It rang-
es from 0 to 1, with 1 standing for full knowledge, i.e. having answered all questions correct-
ly. Since the number of questions is not the same for all practices, we first calculate a
knowledge score for each component individually and then combine it to an overall score, so
that each ISFM dimension is included with the same weight in that indicator. Farmers who
were not aware of a practice in the first place, were immediately given a value of zero in the
respective follow-up questions. Since the aim of the video treatment was to increase farmers'
knowledge on why ISFM is important (and not on how to implement it), we also construct two
individual indicators for principles and a how-to knowledge, depending on whether a question
was on the purpose (the "why") of a technology, or its mode of implementation (the "how"),
which also range from 0 to 1. For the how-to score, we weigh knowledge on how to correctly
produce compost double, since this is a more complicated process than the implementation of
the other ISFM practices. For the principles score we weigh all ISFM components equally,
and include one indicator for the general understanding of the necessity to integrate organic




                                               17
and inorganic soil inputs, that is, whether the respondent agrees with the statement "The soil
needs both organic and inorganic inputs to be healthy and fertile".9

     4.4 Estimation Strategy for Intent-to-Treat Effect using RCT Design

In order to assess the effect of our experimental interventions on ISFM adoption and
knowledge, we estimate regressions of the following form:
                                  1 =  +  1 +  2 +  +                                                         (1)
where 1 denotes the respective outcome variable for household , measured at endline. 1 is
a dummy variable indicating whether farm household  lives in mws  assigned to the exten-
sion intervention, and 2 indicates whether household  lives in an extension mws  that has
additionally been randomly selected for the video screening.  presents a cluster level error
term, j the individual level error term. In order to allow for arbitrary correlation of house-
holds and individuals within clusters, standard errors are clustered at the mws level.
     Although treatment indicators should be orthogonal to further explanatory variables due to
randomization, we will re-estimate all models including additional covariates in order to in-
crease precision of our estimates and to control for small-sample imbalances in our sample:
                1 =  +  1 +  2 +  0 +  Wj1 +  0 +  +                                                          (2)
In these models, 0 represents a vector of control variables related to farmer and household
characteristics captured at baseline, while with Wj1, we add indicators for rainfall, temperature
and remoteness measured at the community level. If available, we include the baseline level
of outcome 0 in the equation in order to reduce the overall variance, since we assume some
degree of path dependency on previously gained experience with a technology. This treatment
effect model is appropriate in our case, since for some outcomes, baseline and endline
measures are not completely identical, or baseline data is not available at all.10 In addition,
this specification has been shown to be more powerful than the difference-in-difference esti-
mator in the presence of relatively low autocorrelation, which can at least be stated for some

9
  Intent-to-treat (ITT) effects on crop yields will not be considered in this paper since at this stage, we expect
farmers to experiment with ISFM on rather small shares of their land, which might not directly translate into
higher average crop yields among farmers in treatment communities.
10
   Baseline data is available for adoption of compost, blended fertilizer, improved seeds and lime. Regarding
blended fertilizer, we additionally control for ex-ante use of any inorganic fertilizer, since during time of base-
line, blended fertilizer was largely unavailable (only 1.4% of sample households used it in baseline). Instead,
farmers used the widely available DAP fertilizer (over 70% in baseline). In the two years between baseline and
endline, supply-side structures changed in the way that more blended fertilizer factories were set up in Ethiopia
and NPS/NPK fertilizer blends partly replaced other inorganic fertilizer types. Line seeding can only be proxied,
since it was assessed on a more general level during baseline, asking farmers how they usually plant crops, but
not at the plot level. Knowledge variables were not measured in the baseline survey.

                                                        18
of our outcome variables (McKenzie, 2012a; De Brauw et al., 2018).11 Further, in each model
we run a test of equality between  and , in order to evaluate the additional impact of the
video intervention.

     4.5 Differential Effects for Members and non-Members of "Farmer Research and
        Extension Groups"

In the previous section the ITT of the randomly allocated interventions was identified, which
measures the average effect of living in a randomly assigned T1 or T2 mws, irrespective of
actual treatment participation. ITT estimates are of particular interest for policy makers, since
in reality, participation is never expected to be perfect, and in our case not even intended.


In this section we seek to disentangle the effects for FREG members and the remaining popu-
lation. That is, beyond average effects, we are interested in potentially differential effects of
the treatment on the primary beneficiary group, i.e. FREG members, and those who might
only benefit indirectly, i.e. non-FREG farmers. Let the binary variable F indicate whether an
observation is FREG member or not. The ITT can thus be decomposed as
                                                                   
           E Y 1  Y 0  E Y 1  Y 0 | F  1  Pr(F  1)  E Y 1  Y 0 | F  0  Pr(F  0)        
By randomized allocation, the ITT is identified as
                                             
                                 E Y 1  Y 0  EY | Z  1  EY | Z  0
where the binary variable Z refers to the randomization of the mws, i.e. Z=1 for ISFM+ wa-
tersheds and Z=0 for control watersheds. By randomized allocation, the effects for FREG
members and non-members would be analogously identified, where, however, FREG mem-
bership is unknown for the non-members since the farmer groups are formed as part of the
intervention.


Since FREG membership is not randomized, we need to consider that FREG members and
non-members are likely to be different. For identification of the separate effects we need to
use quasi-experimental methods and rely on a selection-on-observables assumption, where we
assume that conditional on a set of baseline covariates X, the potential outcomes do not differ
between members and non-members (see e.g. Frölich and Sperlich, 2019), i.e.
                                            Y 0 F | X , Z 1

11
   Autocorrelation for outcomes: blended fertilizer: .0231; lime: .1159; improved seeds: .2555; line seeding:
.4146; compost: .4785; no. of practices adopted: .4987.

                                                     19
where the symbol  denotes statistical independence. Basically, this assumption is saying

that we can control for all systematic differences between members and non-members by con-
trolling for X. Because of randomized allocation of Z it is also natural to assume conditional
independence in the control group
                                       Y 0F | X , Z  0

where F refers to the hypothetical membership in the control mws, i.e. the latent membership
type of each observation corresponding to member status if it randomly had been allocated to
treatment. With random allocation of Z we also have
                                          FZ | X

for baseline covariates X, i.e. covariates not causally affected by the intervention, and thus
obtain
                                        Y 0  (F , Z ) | X   .




This implies that we can identify the ITT on members as
                              
             E Y 1  Y 0 | F  1  EY | F  1, Z  1   EY | X , Z  0  dFX |F 1,Z 1

and we can estimate this by matching using the two groups of observations: (F=1,Z=1) and
(Z=0). It is also straightforward to show that propensity score matching can also be used,
where the propensity score is defined as belonging to the former of these two groups, condi-
tional upon belonging to any of these two groups.


Analogously, we can identify the ITT on non-members as
                               
              E Y 1  Y 0 | F  0  EY | F  0, Z  1   EY | X , Z  0 dFX |F 0,Z 1

In the propensity score matching approach for members and non-members we control for
farmer and household covariates X which are assumed to influence the decision to become a
FREG member. The set of covariates used is not exactly identical to the covariates in the pre-
vious subsection as they serve a different purpose. Here, the covariates X are important in
order to reduce (or hopefully) eliminate the bias due to systematic differences between FREG
and non-FREG members, where the problem arises because FREG membership status is not
observable in control mws. In the previous subsection, on the other hand, bias was not a con-
cern because of the randomized assignment of treatment, and covariates were only included
for efficiency reasons and any finite sample imbalances. (The results are robust to the choice
of control variables, though. Results available upon request.)



                                               20
    Propensity score matching is implemented via probit regression and subsequent one-
nearest neighbor regression without replacement. That is, to each FREG member in the treat-
ment group the closest observation from the control mws is matched, which we refer to as
"matched controls". We proceed analogously for the non-members.

    4.6 Causal Mediation Analysis

In order to assess the importance of additional knowledge as potential impact pathways to
adoption, we apply a causal mediation analysis, following Imai et al. (2011), Frölich and Hu-
ber (2017) and de Brauw et al. (2018). The aim is to estimate the average effect of our treat-
ments  that is occurring through changes in knowledge as a mediating variable  ( ) that
are triggered by the treatment. The causal mediation effect can be written as

        (t)   (,  (1)) -  (,  (0))                                                           (4)

in which t = 0, 1 denotes the treatment status. By holding the treatment status otherwise con-
stant at t and therefore eliminating all other causal mechanisms,  (t) isolates the change in
the outcome  that stems from changing the mediator  from the control to the treatment
condition.
    The direct effect of the treatment  (t), that is, the portion of the treatment effect not ex-
plained by the mediator, can be identified by changing the treatment status from 0 to 1, while
fixing the effect of the mediator at t:

        (t)   (1,  ()) -  (0,  ())                                                           (5)

When averaging over all observations, the average causal mediation effect (ACME) is given
by (), and the average direct effect (ADE) is estimated by (), while the sum of the two
() + () represents the total average treatment effect.
    Two ignorability assumptions have to be made in order to estimate the ACME and the
ADE (see Frölich and Huber, 2017). The first is given by the RCT design. The second impos-
es a selection-on-observables assumption in the form of sequential ignorability. Firstly, treat-
ment assignment is assumed to be independent of potential outcomes and mediators, condi-
tional on baseline confounders. This exogeneity assumption holds due to randomization. Sec-
ondly, when controlling for actual treatment status and observed pretreatment characteristics,
the mediating variable is statistically independent of potential outcomes. This assumption is
called sequential ignorability and implies that no unobserved confounders exist that affect


                                               21
both our outcome and the mediator. Subsequently, we can estimate the ACME and ADE by
sequentially estimating the following equations:

     1 = 2 + 2  1 + 2  2 + 2 0 + 2  + 2 0 + 2                                                                (6)

     1 = 3 + 3  1 + 3  2 +  + 3 0 + 3  + 3 0 + 3                                                             (7)

The ACME of knowledge for T1 is given by    
                                          2 , where 2 represents the effect of T1 on the

mediator variable, and  the effect of the mediator on the outcome measure. Similarly,    
                                                                                       2 ,

gives the ACME of knowledge for T2.12 Due to sequential ignorability, non-correlation be-
tween the error terms 2 and 3 is assumed, denoted by  = 0. Yet, since we can reasonably
think of potential unobservable confounders that affect both knowledge and adoption (e.g.
farmers' level of motivation or commitment) and would consequently bias our ACME esti-
mates, we perform sensitivity tests in which we relax the assumption of  = 0 and re-estimate
equations (6) and (7) for different hypothetical values of .


     5. Results

In this section, first we briefly present a descriptive overview on farmers' participation in the
interventions. Subsequently, we present and discuss ITT results on the effects of our interven-
tions. Finally, we examine the contribution of gains in knowledge as potential impact path-
ways to adoption.

     5.1 Treatment Participation

Among the two treatment groups, 82 farmers (8% of T1 and T2) were active model farmers in
the 2017 cropping season, that is, they were responsible for the implementation and mainte-
nance of an ISFM demonstration plot and provided with inputs from the project. In addition to
model farmers, we find 120 further farmers (around 12% of T1 and T2) that are active FREG
members, meaning they belong to a group and have participated in field day activities along
the course of the preceding season. In addition, 77 (8%) of the treatment farmers who are no


12
  Note that this formal description of causal mediation analyses assumes to fit linear regressions, in which both
the outcome and the mediating variable are continuous measures. When the outcome is binary (as it is the case
for the integrated adoption of the full ISFM package), the product of coefficients does not correspond to the
ACME (Imai et al., 2010; Hicks and Tingley, 2011). Methods to correctly estimate mediation effects for binary
outcomes and continuous mediators have been developed and are applied accordingly (Hicks and Tingley,
2011).



                                                       22
FREG members state to have participated in a field day in 2017, plus 39 (3%) of control
group farmers. Regarding the visit of demonstration plots, 55 treatment farmers (6% of T1
and T2) not belonging to a FREG report to have visited a demonstration site on their own
behalf, i.e. independently of a field day, in addition to 39 farmers in the control group (3% of
C). Consequently, although to a low extent, we find indications of treatment spillovers both
within and across groups, which also means our ITT estimates might suffer from a slight
downward bias due to "contamination" of the control group.
     Compliance in the video intervention was remarkably high, 499 (94%) of T2 households
attended the screenings. Considering that in double-headed households we invited both
spouses to the sessions, compliance at the individual level was 83%, equal to 804 participants.

     5.2 ISFM Adoption Decision

Aggregated adoption measures

Columns (1) to (6) of Table 2 show the ITT effects of the two treatment arms on our first core
outcome, the number of adopted ISFM quickwin technologies (0-5) obtained with three dif-
ferent regression specifications.13 Since the dependent variable essentially is a count variable,
we estimate a Poisson model. Yet, taking into account that it can also be perceived as either
an underlying continuous or ordered process, we also estimate a linear as well as an ordered
probit model to underline the robustness of our findings.

                                              Table 2 about here

The results of all models indicate positive and highly statistically significant effects of both
treatments on the number of adopted practices, which are robust to the inclusion of baseline
control variables. Furthermore, all models lead to larger point estimates for T2 compared to
T1. From the linear model we see that farmers in T1 adopt additional .683 practices, while
households in T2 communities on average adopt .840 more practices than those in the control
group. When we include further baseline covariates, these coefficients drop to .448 and .569,
respectively (Columns (1) and (2)).14 Columns (3) and (4) present the average marginal ef-
fects (AME) of the Poisson coefficients, which are well in line with the point estimates of the

13
  In the following, we always relay on the 0-5 measure when referring to the number of adopted practices, i.e.
including lime. Yet, implications of our results do not change when using the 0-4 measure (excluding lime), see
Table A2 (Appendix A).
14
  In the following, we will always revert to the estimates of the second specification when interpreting our re-
sults, since conditioning on further control variables ­ and in particular the baseline value of the respective out-
come (respectively its best available proxy) ­ should unarguably increase precision of the results.

                                                        23
linear model and can equally be interpreted as additional practices adopted. Finally, results of
the ordered specifications provide further evidence for positive and highly statistically signifi-
cant effects of both the extension-only and the extension-plus-video treatment (Columns (5)
and (6)).15 Yet, across all specifications, p-values of the test of equality of T1 and T2 (.432,
.175, .431, .354, .412, .160) indicate that the average difference between the two treatment
groups with regard to the number of adopted ISFM practices is not statistically significant.
     Columns (7) and (8) of Table 2 depict the AME of being assigned to T1 and T2 on the in-
tegrated adoption of the full quickwin package, using a probit regression. As outlined earlier,
we define integrated adoption as having adopted all four practices (compost, blended fertiliz-
er, improved seeds, line seeding) together on at least one (main crop) plot.16 The estimated
ITT effects are positive and statistically significant. The AME indicate that households in T1
are on average 8.4 percentage points more likely than control group households to adopt the
full set of practices on the same plot, while the likelihood for farmers in T2 is 10.9 percentage
points above the control group mean. However, again we do not detect a statistically signifi-
cant difference between the effect sizes of T1 and T2 (p-values of equality tests .485 and .360,
Columns (7) and (8)).
     In order to test whether the estimated treatment effects might be driven by the 82 model
farmers in our sample that have been trained by development agents and provided with inputs,
we re-estimate the ITT models on the two adoption outcomes excluding these 82 model farm-
ers. We find that all treatment effects remain highly statistically significant while only de-
creasing slightly in their magnitude and can therefore conclude that the interventions affect
farmers in treatment communities beyond model farmers (Table A4, Appendix A).

Adoption of individual components

In order to shed light on which components are the main drivers of increased ISFM adoption,
we subsequently examine the effects of the two treatment arms on the decision to adopt each
of the five practices individually. We assess households' decision to adopt each quickwin
technology using binary probit models for each practice.17, 18

15
  Since the coefficients of the ordered probit regressions cannot be interpreted in a straightforward way, we stick
to interpreting results obtained from the OLS and Poisson models, relying on the ordered models as robustness
checks. In addition, the assumption of parallel regressions underlying ordered probit models is violated which
makes these results less reliable (Cameron and Trivedi, 2009).
16
   Yet, in Table A3 (Appendix A) we show that using the three alternative specifications of this measure does not
alter the interpretation of our results.
17
  When assessing several binary outcomes within one regression framework, a multivariate probit model may be
favored over five individual binary models, since it is usually more efficient (Cappellari and Jenkins, 2003).

                                                        24
     Table 3 presents the AME of being assigned to the two treatments on the decision to adopt
compost, blended fertilizer, improved seeds, line seeding and lime. Our primary estimates
indicate that both the extension-only and the combined intervention exert positive and statisti-
cally significant effects on the decisions to adopt compost, improved seeds, line seeding and
lime. In contrast, effects for blended fertilizer are not significant (T1) or do not remain signif-
icant with the inclusion of additional explanatory variables (T2).

                                            Table 3 about here

When assessing the effects of our interventions on five different, even if interrelated, out-
comes, we are concerned that the observed effects in reality cannot be attributed to the inter-
ventions, but are rather detected by chance due to multiple outcome testing (Duflo et al.,
2007). To account for the probability of false discoveries, we therefore follow Sankoh et al.
(1997) and Aker et al. (2012) and use a version of the Bonferroni correction which takes into
account inter-outcome correlations for families of outcomes (cp. Appendix B3). Although this
procedure is less conservative than other corrections and presents a rather approximate fix, it
nonetheless provides informative insights regarding the sensitivity of our findings (Sankoh,
1997; McKenzie, 2012b). With this form of adjustment, p-values of the estimated coefficients
of both T1 and T2 remain, respectively increase, above the .10 threshold for blended fertilizer
and improved seeds, while results for compost, line seeding and lime remain significant for
both treatment arms.
     For these robust results, the estimated effect sizes of the extension-plus-video intervention
are larger than those of the extension-only intervention, which is in line with the findings on
the aggregated ISFM adoption measures. However, again we fail to detect any statistically
significant differences between the effects of T1 and T2 on technology adoption (p-values of
equality tests .116, Column (2); .537 Column (8); .387 Column (10)). For compost, the AME
of T1 suggests that farmers in the extension treatment are on average 14.3 percentage points
more likely to adopt than farmers in the control group. For T2, the AME indicate an increased
likelihood of compost adoption of 19.2 percentage points (Column (2)). Column (8) reports
the AME for T1 and T2 regarding the adoption of line seeding, suggesting an increased likeli-
hood to sow in lines of over 9 respectively 11 percentage points. Columns (9) and (10) show


However, we find very similar estimates and standard errors with the mvprobit, and therefore opt for using the
binary probit models, which allow for easier computation of AME and inclusion of covariates.
18
  Regarding the specifications with control variables, note again that line seeding at baseline can only be ap-
proximated.

                                                      25
the AME for lime adoption, indicating that farmers in Amhara and Oromia who are assigned
to T1 are on average around 21.4 percentage points more likely to adopt lime than those in the
control group. Similarly, being assigned to T2 goes along with a likelihood to adopt lime that
is about 23.9 percentage points above the control group mean. These effects seem substantial,
considering that in the control group only 4% of households adopt.
   In summary, our results indicate significant ITT effects of the extension intervention on
the adoption of ISFM, both on aggregated measures as well as on some of its individual com-
ponents. Yet, despite consistently larger point estimates, we do not find significant evidence
for an additional "video effect".

Compost quantity and quality

Table 4 depicts ITT estimates on compost quantity (measured in m3/ha) and compost quality.
Recognizing that we might introduce some sort of bias (since these values are only observed
for compost-producing households), this appears still useful and might provide insights on
treatment effects regarding agronomic quality, as the production of organic fertilizer is a piv-
otal component of ISFM.

                                      Table 4 about here

Columns (1) and (2) of Table 4 show negative, yet statistically insignificant coefficients for
both T1 and T2 regarding the amount of compost produced. In contrast, Columns (3) and (4)
show robustly significant positive effects of both treatments on our measure of compost quali-
ty, with no significant difference regarding their effect sizes (p-values of equality tests .787
and .888). Hence, we can conclude that farmers in T1 and T2 mws are not only more likely to
be compost producers, but that they also produce qualitatively better compost, once they have
decided to produce.

Differential effects for FREG members

As described above, the ITT estimates represent the average effects of living in a treatment
mws. Considering the video treatment, we assume the ITT to be very close to the treatment-
on-the treated effect, given the high compliance in the screenings (94% at household level).
Yet, with regards to the extension intervention, the definition of actual compliance is not as
straightforward. Recall that the core idea of the extension treatment is to spur ISFM adoption
via peer-to-peer learning and the success of the intervention relies on information-sharing. For
our analyses, this means that a large proportion of farmers in T1 and T2 have essentially not
actively attended any extension activities. In fact, among the 1,071 farmers in T1 and T2, only
                                              26
202 (19%) are FREG members, i.e. the primary target group of the extension activities, and of
those 82 are model farmers. Consequently, the remaining 869 farmers (81%) might only ben-
efit from the extension treatment through spillover effects. Hence, we are interested in wheth-
er the extension treatment has an effect on ISFM adoption beyond FREG membership ­ or
whether the estimated ITT is solely concentrated among FREG farmers ­, and whether the
additional video treatment might influence FREG members and non-FREG members differ-
ently. To do so, we use the approach outlined in section 4.5.19
     Table 5 reports that in both subsamples, treatment effects of the two interventions regard-
ing the number of adopted ISFM practices remain positive and statistically significant. Yet,
both the linear and the Poisson specification indicate that the effects of the treatments are sub-
stantially larger in the FREG than in the non-FREG sample. While in the non-FREG sample,
being assigned to T1 on average increases the number of applied technologies by .278, this
coefficient is 1.232 in the FREG sample. Similarly, T2 is estimated to increase average adop-
tion by .483 practices in the non-FREG sample, but by 1.117 technologies in the FREG sam-
ple (OLS results in Columns (1) to (4)).20 Further, for non-FREGs, coefficients of the com-
bined treatment are larger than of the extension-only treatment, a difference which is estimat-
ed to be significant in both the OLS the Poisson model and points towards a reinforcing effect
of the video for this group of farmers (p-values of equality tests .018 and .028, Columns (2)
and (6)).
     Similarly, we examine the differential effects in the two subsamples regarding the inte-
grated adoption of the technology package. Columns (9) to (12) of Table 5 report that T1 does
no longer carry a statistically significant coefficient in the non-FREG sample, while in the
FREG sample, this effect stays significant at the 1% level, indicating that if T1 goes along
with membership in a FREG, the likelihood of integrated adoption on average increases by
around 28 percentage points in comparison to their matched controls. In contrast, if extension
is complemented by the video intervention, the coefficient of the treatment variable (T2) stays
statistically significant in both subsamples. In the FREG sample, extension-plus-video in-
creases the likelihood of integrated adoption compared to the matched control observations by


19
  We find a high level of common support with our matching algorithm, since only one treated observations is
off support. See Table A5 for first-stage propensity score matching regression results and Figure A1 for a histo-
gram of the estimated propensity score (Appendix A). In Tables A6 and A7 in Appendix A we provide balance
checks between the treatment groups for the constructed FREG and non-FREG samples and find that they are
well balanced (with only few exceptions).
20
   The AME estimates of the Poisson specification (Columns (5) to (8) of Table 5) are fairly close to the OLS
estimates and are therefore not explicitly discussed.

                                                       27
23 percentage points. For non-FREG farmers assigned to T2, the likelihood to adopt all prac-
tices in combination on average appears over 8 percentage points higher compared to their
matched controls.

                                       Table 5 about here

These findings let us draw the following two conclusions: Firstly, the effect of the extension
treatment seems substantially larger for FREG members ­ even after taking into account that
they may be the better farmers anyways. Yet, it does still show a positive influence on non-
FREG farmers when it comes to the number of adopted ISFM practices at the household lev-
el. However, most interestingly, our findings indicate that extension alone does not signifi-
cantly affect non-FREG farmers when it comes to integrated adoption, i.e. using the practices
together on the same plot. Yet, it seems that the video intervention has a significant comple-
mentary effect that adds to that of the extension treatment for the group of non-FREG farmers
­ who do not directly benefit from the latter ­ in particular when it comes to the combined
adoption of the practices.

   5.3 ISFM Knowledge

Treatment effects on knowledge

Columns (1) and (2) of Table 6 depict ITT estimates on the overall knowledge indicator. The
positive and significant estimates in Column (2) show that T1 on average seems to increase
overall ISFM knowledge by around 3.6 percentage points, while T2 increases farmers'
knowledge by almost 7 percentage points in comparison to the control group mean. The p-
value of .016 indicates that extension-plus-video exerts a significantly stronger effect on
knowledge than extension alone and thus, points towards an additional effect of the video
regarding ISFM knowledge formation. We also assess the ITT effects on the two distinct do-
mains, principles and how-to knowledge. Regarding principles knowledge, Column (4) of
Table 6 shows that the positive coefficient of extension alone does not remain statistically
significant with the introduction of further covariates, whereas extension combined with video
on average increases this knowledge indicator by 5.4 percentage points on a highly significant
level. How-to knowledge seems to be positively affected by both T1 and T2, with no statisti-
cal difference regarding their effect sizes (p-value of equality test .206 Columns (6)).

                                       Table 6 about here



                                               28
Next we follow our earlier approach and disaggregate the sample into a FREG and a non-
FREG sample (Table 7). We find that the significant difference between the effect sizes of T1
and T2 on overall knowledge persists in the non-FREG, but not in the FREG sample, as the p-
values of the tests of equality of T1 and T2 (.013, .011, and .413, .188) in Columns (1) to (4)
indicate. In the non-FREG sample, the coefficient of extension alone on overall knowledge is
positive, but not significant, while for the combined intervention it is highly statistically sig-
nificant.
    Similarly, extension alone does not show a significant effect on principles knowledge in
the non-FREG sample, while extension-plus-video does (Columns (5) and (6)). In the FREG
sample, both T1 and T2 affect principles knowledge positively on a highly significant level
(Columns (7) and (8)).
    Regarding knowledge on how to implement ISFM, both extension-only and extension-
plus-video exert a positive influence for FREG members, with no statistical difference in their
effect size (Columns (11) and (12)). For non-FREG farmers, both T1 and T2 significantly
increase how-to knowledge compared to their matched controls. The effect of the combined
treatment seems to increase this knowledge indicator significantly stronger than extension-
only, albeit this difference between T1 and T2 is only significant at the 10% level (p-value of
equality test .098, Column (10)). Further analyses reveal that this effect mainly stems from
improved knowledge on how to produce compost among this group of farmers. This is fairly
surprising, since the video did not convey any information on how to implement any of the
practices. Yet, it may be that increased awareness and understanding of why ISFM is benefi-
cial induced further knowledge-seeking processes on the mode of compost production among
non-FREG farmers.

                                       Table 7 about here

Causal mediation analysis

Our findings provide evidence that both extension-only as well as extension-plus-video in-
crease farmers' knowledge about ISFM. Moreover, the video has triggered additional gains in
knowledge, especially among those farmers that do not actively participate in the activities of
the extension intervention. In particular, the video has shown success in understanding why
the ISFM practices are important. Therefore, we seek to understand the contribution that these
gains in ISFM knowledge make to the adoption decision. To do so, we conduct a causal me-
diation analysis, in which we use first the overall, and subsequently both the how-to and the
principles knowledge indicator as mediating variables.
                                               29
Panel A of Table 8 suggests positive and highly statistically significant effects of all
knowledge variables on both the number of adopted technologies as well as integrated adop-
tion, while the effects of T1 and T2 remain highly statistically significant. Looking at the co-
efficient sizes, how-to knowledge appears to have a stronger effect on adoption than princi-
ples knowledge.
   Panel B presents the estimated ACME and ADE of T1 for all three mediators and both
adoption outcomes separately, Panel C the corresponding effects for T2.

                                       Table 8 about here

Looking at overall knowledge, which entails both questions on why and on how to implement
ISFM, Columns (2) and (8) show that for both outcome variables, on average around 11% of
the treatment effect of T1 and 16 to 17% of the effect of T2 seem to be explained by gains in
knowledge.
   Looking at the two different knowledge types, on average, gains in principles knowledge
do not seem to significantly contribute to the effect of T1 on both adoption variables (Panel B,
Columns (3), (4), (9) and (10)). In contrast, for the combined treatment (T2), the ACME is
significant, albeit relatively small, for both outcome indicators. Estimates show that on aver-
age, around 6.9% respectively 6.4% of the effect of T2 on the number of adopted practices
and on integrated adoption are driven by an increase in principles knowledge (Panel C, Col-
umns (4) and (10)).
   The ACME for how-to knowledge is robustly significant for both treatments and both out-
come variables (Columns (5), (6), (11) and (12)). The effect sizes indicate that on average,
increases in how-to knowledge triggered through T1 account for 16.1% respectively 23.0% of
its total effect on adoption, while 17.5% respectively 23.3% of the effect of T2 seem to be
transmitted through how-to knowledge gains (Columns (6) and (12)).
   Hence, in line with the results presented earlier (Table 6), both extension-only and exten-
sion combined with video induce increases in understanding how to implement ISFM, and
these increases partly account for higher ISFM adoption. In contrast, only the combined
treatment leads to robustly significant gains in understanding why ISFM works, which ac-
counts for a small, but significant portion of the T2 effect on adoption.


Since the sequential ignorability assumption we made to identify causal mediation effects is
unjustifiably strong, we perform a sensitivity test to assess how severely our ACME estimates
may be biased due to potential correlation of the error terms   0 of equations (6) and (7).

                                               30
Figures A2 to A13 in Appendix A depict the ACME for both mediators and both treatment
variables as functions of varying values for . Results show that only relatively large negative
correlations between the error terms would imply a strong impact of the knowledge mediators
on both adoption outcomes. Yet, a positive correlation of error terms appears far more plausi-
ble, since unobservables determining additional unexplained knowledge should also positive-
ly affect unexplained adoption. In fact, when we estimate the correlation between error terms
of equations (6) and (7) for both knowledge and both adoption variables, we find positive, but
fairly small correlations never exceeding  =.003 for the number of adopted practices, and 
=.089 for integrated adoption. Hence, our estimated ACMEs should be considered upper
bounds.


   6. Discussion and Conclusion

In this study we have assessed the impact of a decentralized extension model and an addition-
al video intervention on knowledge and adoption of an ISFM technology package among
smallholder farmers in Ethiopia using an RCT design. The success of decentralized approach-
es depends on information spillovers between farmers, since only a relatively small fraction of
farmers actively takes part in extension activities. In line with selective attention theory, we
argue that information loss occurs in the knowledge transmission process from actively partic-
ipating farmers to their peers in communities. Since both information senders and receivers
might not consider all aspects of ISFM important, they fail to teach and learn about it, espe-
cially when it comes to more complex aspects of a technology (package) that require more
cognitive resources. Consequently, we expect ISFM adoption ­ both of its individual compo-
nents, but in particular of the full integrated package ­ to be higher among active extension
participants than among their non-participating peers in communities. To counteract infor-
mation failures and draw farmers' attention to all component technologies as well as the ne-
cessity of applying them jointly, we designed a second intervention in form of a video ex-
plaining farmers the relevance of each individual practice and their synergistic potential.
   We show that both extension-only and extension in combination with video lead to in-
creased adoption of ISFM technologies ­ in particular of compost, line seeding and lime ­, as
well as increased integrated adoption, i.e. the use of the full set of practices together on the
same plot. However, on average, we do not find evidence for a significant complementary
effect of the video on adoption of the integrated package or any individual component, despite
larger effect sizes of the combined over the extension-only treatment.
                                               31
     Using matching techniques, our findings reveal, as expected, that treatment effects on the
number of adopted technologies and adoption of the complete package are larger for those
farmers who are members of a Farmer Research and Extension Group, the core component of
the extension treatment. Yet, we still find positive and significant effects of T1 and T2 on
non-FREG farmers in treated communities regarding the number of adopted practices. This
points towards the existence of information spillovers from FREG farmers to their peers, that
occur either through active information-sharing or through observation and imitation. Yet,
since some farmers in treatment communities state to have attended a field day or visited a
demonstration plot on their own behalf, even though they do not belong to a FREG, we rerun
the analyses excluding all treatment farmers that have participated in any extension activity in
any way and find that our positive treatment effects persist (results available upon request).21
These results provide support for the rationale of decentralized extension models and contra-
dict previous research finding weak evidence for diffusion effects (Rola et al., 2002; Feder et
al., 2004; Tripp et al., 2005; Kondylis et al., 2017).
     However, when it comes to the integrated adoption of all technologies on the same plot,
the extension-only treatment seems to do little for non-FREG farmers, while extension in
combination with video does positively affect integrated adoption also among this group.
     We hypothesized that increases in ISFM adoption are (partly) caused by gains in ISFM
knowledge induced through our interventions. In fact, both interventions lead to higher
knowledge about ISFM. In line with our expectations, results suggest that the video provides
a significant additional effect on overall knowledge, and in particular on understanding why
ISFM is beneficial. These additional gains seem to particularly benefit non-FREG farmers.
This provides evidence that the video intervention indeed contributed to counterbalance in-
complete information transmission by drawing farmers' attention to dimensions of the ISFM
technology package they might not have noticed before or that are not transmitted via farmer-
to-farmer extension at all.
     In fact, we find evidence that possessing ISFM knowledge is positively associated with
adoption. A causal mediation analysis reveals that higher knowledge on ISFM does partly
account for the ITT effects of our interventions on ISFM adoption. These results suggest that
a better understanding of ISFM as a package consisting of technologies that are all important


21
  Farmers in control mws might have also received ISFM information by communicating with extension staff at
the Woreda or Kebele level. Being aware of potential endogeneity, we perform another specification in which
we control for contact with extension agents and likewise find that the significant treatment effects persist (re-
sults available upon request).

                                                       32
and complement each other might indeed have positively influenced the decision to adopt the
full package in an integrated manner, especially for those farmers that are excluded from the
extension activities but did take part in the video intervention.
   Yet, all in all we conclude that increases in knowledge only partly explain the effects of
our experimental treatments, which is in line with previous studies finding effects of exten-
sion on adoption that are only modestly explained by gains in knowledge (Kondylis et al.,
2017; De Brauw et al., 2018). The limited explanatory effect of knowledge as impact channel
might partly be attributed to imperfect measurement that knowledge assessments are frequent-
ly prone to, in the sense that with our questions we missed to capture some adoption-relevant
dimensions of knowledge the treatments might have altered (Laajaj and Macours, 2017). Yet,
as Kondylis et al. (2017) argue in the context of adoption of sustainable land management
practices, knowledge constraints might simply not be the most decisive barrier to adoption,
but rather a lack of awareness for their productivity benefits. In line with this, our treatments
might have played a more crucial role in influencing farmers' awareness for the environmen-
tal and in particular the yield-enhancing benefits of ISFM, which has shown to be an im-
portant driver of adoption in the literature (Knowler and Bradshaw, 2007). Testimonies of the
farmers about improvements of yields and their livelihoods presented in the video might have
further increased the credibility of information.
   Interestingly, for the group of non-FREG farmers, we find some evidence that the addi-
tional video intervention triggered gains in knowledge on how to implement ISFM practices,
albeit no explicit how-to messages were conveyed in the video. Further analyses reveal that
these gains mostly stem from improved knowledge on the process of compost production,
probably the most complex ISFM component. A possible explanation is that the video spurred
how-to knowledge seeking processes. Increased awareness for ISFM and understanding why
it is beneficial might have encouraged farmers to gather information on its mode of imple-
mentation, in particular on compost. This fits our argumentation in line with selective atten-
tion theory that additional information is especially needed for more complex technologies
that farmers might otherwise disregard if they are not sufficiently convinced of their im-
portance. In line with van Campenhout et al. (2017), another plausible explanation is that the
video triggers affirmative processes, activating and making farmers feel more confident about
latent knowledge they already possess, even in areas not explicitly mentioned in the video.
   All in all, providing information via video seems a valuable method to complement decen-
tralized extension activities in order to raise awareness for and knowledge about agricultural
technologies. It might be especially beneficial for more marginalized farmers that are exclud-
                                                33
ed from farmer groups and more likely to be bypassed by the information diffusion chain.
This result is particularly relevant given that video screenings are relatively simple to conduct,
also in more remote geographical areas that typically benefit less from regular extension. The
high compliance in the video screenings underline that farmers perceive video as an appealing
format of information provision, which is in line with previous studies (e.g. Bernard et al.,
2014). While in our case we only treated our 15 sample households in each mws, the use of
video might easily be scaled-up by conducting repeated screenings and admitting any inter-
ested farmer to participate. While most costs occur during video production and purchase of
equipment, variable costs are low. Thus, video has the potential to achieve substantial out-
reach at a relatively low cost. However, its success in reaching those groups that are otherwise
typically excluded still depends upon these farmers knowing about the screening to happen,
which is certainly more difficult to achieve outside of an experimental setting in which we
explicitly invited the sampled farmers. Screening videos during other community events or
festivities might at least increase the chance of reaching more and different types of farmers.


Regarding the individual ISFM components, we find significant treatment effects on the
adoption of compost, line seeding and lime, while impacts on adoption of blended fertilizer
and improved seeds are not robust to conditioning on baseline covariates or adjusting p-values
for multiple testing. This can be explained by the fact that farmers are probably less uncertain
about these two technologies. Blended fertilizer and improved seeds are relatively unambigu-
ous practices, since the benefits of mineral fertilizer and quality seeds are rather common
knowledge among farmers. For these two technologies, supply and liquidity shortages appear
to be much more decisive than information constraints. About 50% of respondents mention
financing problems as major obstacle to adoption for both practices, followed by a lack of
(timely) availability (around 20%), while knowledge constraints are hardly mentioned. In ad-
dition, the use of improved seeds and mineral fertilizer is heavily promoted by the overall
advisory system, which equally affects control farmers.
   In contrast, compost, line seeding and lime are less straightforward technologies, both in
terms of their benefits and their application. The purpose and use of lime is largely unknown
by farmers (around 60% of farmers have never heard of it) and often received rather skeptical-
ly. The production of compost is not a trivial process and needs to be learned. The benefits of
line seeding are often unclear to farmers. Since less seeds and fertilizer are used when crops
are planted in rows, they commonly associate it with lower yields. In addition, the preparation
of compost as well as seeding in lines are labor-intensive technologies (around 46% respec-
                                               34
tively 65% of farmers mention labor or time constraints as major obstacles). Hence, farmers
need to be sufficiently convinced of their benefits in order to be willing to reallocate labor to
these activities and gather knowledge on how to implement them. Consequently, information
interventions appear more crucial for these knowledge- and labor-intensive practices.


A central question of experimental studies is to what extent findings are replicable or general-
izable to other contexts or populations. For our case, we have to bear in mind that ISFM+
sites were chosen based on the precondition to already benefit from the Sustainable Land
Management Programme. Building on SLMP achievements, it is thought that smallholders
have higher capacities to address issues of soil fertility and productivity increase, which might
not be the case in other contexts. Yet, although a replication of our interventions in other set-
tings or with different populations may require adaptations, an advantage of our study regard-
ing external validity is the comparatively large sample size spread over three regional states
that in part differ quite substantially regarding agro-ecological, farming, climatic, cultural and
other characteristics.


Our results add valuable insights towards the effectiveness of decentralized, group-based ex-
tension approaches and the potential to close information gaps with complementary interven-
tions, which can ultimately lead to more widespread adoption of system technologies such as
ISFM. They appear particularly interesting given that the behavior of farmers to spread differ-
ent types of inputs across plots rather than exploiting their complementary potential is largely
understudied to date (Sheahan and Barrett, 2017).




                                               35
    Tables and Figures

Figure 1. Diagrammatic illustration of the full sample


                                             Total Sample
                                              161 MWS
                                              2,416 HH




          Treatment Group 1               Treatment Group 2    Control Group
              Extension                    Extension + Video
               36 MWS                          36 MWS            89 MWS
               549 HH                           542 HH           1,325 HH


Note: MWS stands for microwatershed, HH for household.

Source: Own illustration.




                                                         36
  Table 1. Baseline descriptive statistics and balance between treatment groups

                                                                                                                Regression
                                   Overall      T1             T2        C       T1 - T2   T1 - C     T2 - C     controls
                                                                                                                 A     K
Panel A: Household Characteristics
Age HH head (in years)              47.027     46.269      47.323      47.219    -1.054    -0.950     0.104      x     x
                                   (14.610)   (14.610)    (14.543)    (14.637)   (1.018)   (0.847)   (0.936)
Gender HH head (1=male)              0.850      0.861       0.844       0.847     0.017     0.013    -0.003      x     x
                                    (0.357)    (0.346)     (0.363)     (0.360)   (0.024)   (0.021)   (0.021)
Education HH head (grades
                                     2.154     2.186          2.419    2.034      -0.234    0.152     0.386      x     x
compl.)
                                    (3.356)   (3.360)     (3.607)     (3.243)    (0.370)   (0.317)   (0.283)
Non-farm family business (1=yes)     0.185     0.204       0.177       0.180      0.027     0.024    -0.003      x     x
                                    (0.388)   (0.403)     (0.382)     (0.384)    (0.037)   (0.030)   (0.031)
Off-farm wage employment
                                     0.194     0.182          0.229    0.184      -0.048   -0.002     0.045      x     x
(1=yes)
                                    (0.395)   (0.386)     (0.421)     (0.387)    (0.034)   (0.024)   (0.033)
No. of HH members over age 14        3.062     3.082       3.113       3.034     -0.031     0.048     0.079      x
                                    (1.305)   (1.342)     (1.310)     (1.288)    (0.110)   (0.096)   (0.080)
No. of organizations involved
                                     4.474     4.532          4.382    4.487      0.151     0.045     -0.106     x     x
(0-12)
                                    (1.873)   (1.906)     (1.782)     (1.895)    (0.209)   (0.190)   (0.178)
Basic assets score (0-4)             1.836     1.785       1.912       1.827     -0.127     -0.042    0.085      x
                                    (0.889)   (0.844)     (0.901)     (0.901)    (0.104)   (0.086)   (0.089)
No. of TLU owned                     3.394     3.255       3.478       3.416     -0.223     -0.161    0.062      x
                                    (2.823)   (2.610)     (2.925)     (2.866)    (0.290)   (0.258)   (0.248)
Radio owned (1=yes)                  0.289     0.271       0.288       0.297     -0.017     -0.027   -0.010      x     x
                                    (0.454)   (0.445)     (0.453)     (0.457)    (0.034)   (0.029)   (0.031)
Cellphone owned (1=yes)              0.520     0.531       0.532       0.511     -0.001      0.020    0.021      x     x
                                    (0.500)   (0.500)     (0.499)     (0.500)    (0.042)   (0.034)   (0.039)
Contracted any credit (1=yes)        0.341     0.382       0.348       0.321      0.034    0.061**    0.027      x
                                    (0.474)   (0.486)     (0.477)     (0.467)    (0.040)   (0.031)   (0.035)
Eligible for formal credit (1=yes)   0.734     0.709       0.729       0.746     -0.021     -0.037   -0.017      x
                                    (0.442)   (0.455)     (0.445)     (0.435)    (0.054)   (0.040)   (0.049)
Food insecurity score (0-12)         2.335     2.286       2.075       2.461      0.211     -0.175   -0.386      x
                                    (2.993)   (3.053)     (2.713)     (3.071)    (0.310)   (0.266)   (0.264)
Walking distance to nearest FTC
                                    33.296    33.337      32.939      33.423      0.397    -0.087     -0.484     x     x
(in min)
                                   (25.554)   (26.209)    (25.307)    (25.400)   (3.836)   (3.033)   (3.291)
Walking distance to nearest (all-
                                    27.363    25.558      22.343      30.142      3.215    -4.584    -7.799**    x
season) road (in min)
                                   (29.473)   (23.664)    (25.975)    (32.498)   (3.343)   (3.021)   (3.560)
Walking distance to nearest market                                                            -
                                    74.174    67.027      67.911      79.654      -0.884             -11.743*    x
(in min)                                                                                   12.627*
                                   (48.150)   (44.823)    (46.863)    (49.312)   (7.842)   (6.956)   (6.474)




                                                         37
    Table 1. Baseline descriptive statistics and balance between treatment groups (cont.)

Panel B: Agricultural Production Characteristics
Total land size (in ha)             1.340        1.370                  1.400        1.303       -0.030        0.067        0.097       x
                                   (1.111)     (1.156)                 (1.179)      (1.063)      (0.176)      (0.145)      (0.137)
Grows main crop (1=yes)             0.938        0.942                  0.953        0.930       -0.011        0.013       0.023*       x
                                   (0.241)     (0.233)                 (0.212)      (0.256)      (0.014)      (0.015)      (0.014)
No. of adopted quickwins (0-5)              1.403         1.514         1.534        1.304       -0.020       0.210*      0.230**       x      x
                                           (0.990)       (1.001)       (0.967)      (0.985)      (0.137)     (0.125)      (0.113)
Compost applied (1=yes)                     0.364         0.340         0.385        0.365       -0.046       -0.025       0.021        x
                                           (0.481)       (0.474)       (0.487)      (0.482)      (0.061)     (0.054)      (0.053)
Blended fertilizer applied (1=yes)          0.014         0.009         0.021        0.014       -0.011       -0.004       0.007        x
                                           (0.119)       (0.096)       (0.142)      (0.116)      (0.011)     (0.007)      (0.011)
Improved seeds used (1=yes)                 0.567         0.636         0.594        0.528        0.042      0.109**       0.066        x
                                           (0.496)       (0.481)       (0.492)      (0.499)      (0.055)     (0.049)      (0.049)
Plants crops usually in lines
                                            0.450         0.519          0.524       0.391        -0.005      0.129*       0.134*       x
(1=yes)
                                           (0.498)       (0.500)       (0.500)      (0.488)      (0.085)      (0.069)      (0.071)
Lime applied (1=yes)                        0.008         0.009         0.009        0.007        0.000        0.002        0.003       x
                                           (0.089)       (0.096)       (0.097)      (0.083)      (0.007)      (0.005)      (0.005)
DAP applied (1=yes)                         0.701         0.757         0.735        0.664        0.022       0.093*        0.071       x
                                           (0.458)       (0.429)       (0.442)      (0.472)      (0.053)      (0.049)      (0.051)
Used irrigation (1=yes)                     0.189         0.169         0.194        0.196       -0.025       -0.027       -0.002       x
                                           (0.392)       (0.375)       (0.395)      (0.397)      (0.049)      (0.042)      (0.041)
Last farming season was bad
                                            0.482         0.464          0.445       0.505        0.018       -0.041       -0.059       x
(1=yes)
                                           (0.500)       (0.499)       (0.497)      (0.500)      (0.079)      (0.069)      (0.066)
No. of times talked to DA in last
                                            5.525         5.761          6.417       5.066        -0.657       0.694        1.351       x      x
year
                                          (10.973)      (11.055)      (14.353)      (9.197)      (1.230)      (0.904)      (1.056)
Attended agric. training in last year
                                            0.269         0.304          0.336       0.227        -0.032     0.078**     0.110***       x      x
(1=yes)
                                 (0.443)                 (0.461)       (0.473)      (0.419)      (0.045)      (0.037)      (0.037)
Panel C: Community Level Characteristics
Mean annual temperature in 2017
                                  20.56                  20.451        20.400       20.677        0.050       -0.226       -0.277       x
(in °C)
                                 (4.103)                 (4.213)       (4.240)      (3.999)      (0.995)      (0.817)      (0.825)
Mean annual rainfall in 2017
                                 1108.84                1140.526     1140.105      1083.123       0.420       57.403       56.982       x
(in mm)
                                (396.228)               (381.884)     (380.26)     (406.663)     (90.841)    (77.589)     (77.130)
Distance to Woreda capital (km)            14.62         13.660        15.523       14.654       -1.862       -0.994        0.868       x
                                          (15.421)      (16.312)      (13.692)     (15.692)      (3.670)      (3.272)      (2.851)
N                                           2382          539           532          1311         1071         1850         1843
Note: A stands for adoption regressions, K for knowledge regressions. HH stands for household. Basic asset score comprises the following: hh has
modern roof, improved stove, modern lighting, toilet facility. TLU=Tropical livestock unit, conversion factors used for calculation of TLU: cam-
el=1, horse=0.8, oxen/cow/mule=0.7, donkey=0.5, goat/sheep=0.1, chicken=0.01. Calculation of food insecurity score based on self-experienced
events of food insecurity, based on Household Food Insecurity Access Scale (HFIAS). FTC stands for farmer training center. Main crops are teff,
wheat, barley, maize, sorghum. DA stands for development agent. Baseline adoption of individual practices used as control in respective outcome
regressions. Temperature and rainfall measured assessed at endline. For means, standard deviations in parentheses. For mean comparisons, robust
standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the microwatershed level. Significance levels indicated as following: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                    38
Table 2. ITT effects on number of adopted ISFM technologies and integrated adoption of the full ISFM package

                                            Number of ISFM technologies adopted                                 Integrated adoption of full
                                      OLS                  Poisson              Oprobit                               ISFM package
                                (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)      (5)         (6)                         (7)            (8)
           T1                0.683*** 0.448*** 0.688*** 0.468*** 0.542*** 0.529***                               0.103**       0.084***
                              (0.184)     (0.080)   (0.178)      (0.088)  (0.136)    (0.085)                     (0.043)         (0.025)
         p-value               0.000       0.000     0.000        0.000    0.000      0.000                       0.016           0.001
           T2                0.840*** 0.569*** 0.822*** 0.551*** 0.671*** 0.671***                              0.137***       0.109***
                              (0.174)     (0.079)   (0.164)      (0.088)  (0.134)    (0.086)                     (0.043)         (0.024)
        p-value                0.000       0.000     0.000        0.000    0.000      0.000                       0.002           0.000
 Test T1=T2 (p-value)          0.432       0.175     0.431        0.354    0.412      0.160                       0.485           0.360
 Endline control mean                                       2.222                                                   No             Yes
 Additional controls            No          Yes        No          Yes      No          Yes                               0.152
 (Pseudo) R-squared            0.071       0.531     0.016        0.122    0.025      0.223                       0.023           0.271
 Observations                  2,382       2,382     2,382        2,382    2,382      2,382                       2,160           2,160
 Note: All models show outcomes measured at endline, controlling for baseline level of the outcome (respectively a proxy) in one specifica-
 tion each. Poisson and probit models (Columns (3), (4), (7) and (8)) show average marginal effects (AME). Number of ISFM technologies
 adopted ranges from 0 to 5. Full quickwin package is a dummy variable taking 1 if all four practices (compost, blended fertilizer, line
 seeding and improved seeds) have been adopted together on at least one main crop plot. Additional baseline control variables at household
 level are age, gender and education (in completed years) of hh head; whether hh participated in off-farm work or a non-farm business
 activity; number of hh members above age 14; walking distances to nearest farmer training center, paved road and market (in minutes);
 number of local organizations involved; use of irrigation, total land size in ha, tropical livestock units (TLU), a basic assets score, a food
 insecurity score, whether hh is eligible for formal credit and has contracted a credit in the last farming season; whether household had a
 below-average preceding farming season; number of times hh had contact with a development agent whether it has participated in agricul-
 tural training; whether hh grew main crops (teff, wheat, barley, maize, sorghum) and used any kind of inorganic fertilizer. Community
 level covariates are rainfall, temperature, and distance to Woreda capital (in km). Two region dummies for Oromia and Amhara included.
 Tests of equality of T1 and T2 are Wald tests. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the microwatershed level. Significance
 levels indicated as following: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                   39
Table 3. ITT effects on adoption of individual ISFM components

                                                                         Adopted blended         Adopted improved
                                              Adopted compost                                                               Adopted line seeding            Adopted lime
                                                                              fertilizer                seeds
                                               (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)            (7)           (8)            (9)         (10)
                   T1                       0.150*** 0.143***            0.097         0.039     0.129**    0.065*         0.157***      0.091***       0.222*** 0.214***
                                             (0.057)     (0.028)        (0.062)       (0.042)    (0.058)    (0.036)         (0.057)       (0.029)        (0.042)     (0.029)
Unadjusted p-value                            0.008       0.000          0.118         0.348      0.027       0.070          0.006         0.002          0.000       0.000
Adjusted p-value                              0.025       0.000          0.334         0.749      0.092       0.225          0.022         0.007          0.000       0.000
                T2                          0.219*** 0.192***           0.111**        0.046     0.129**    0.067*         0.204***      0.112***       0.254*** 0.239***
                                             (0.054)     (0.025)        (0.055)       (0.037)    (0.058)    (0.040)         (0.057)       (0.030)        (0.042)     (0.028)
Unadjusted p-value                            0.000       0.000          0.043         0.218      0.027       0.093          0.000         0.000          0.000       0.000
Adjusted p-value                              0.000       0.000          0.132         0.539      0.092       0.291          0.000         0.000          0.000       0.000
Robust to Adjustment?                                Yes                         No                      No                           Yes                        Yes
Test T1=T2 (p-value)                          0.282       0.116          0.842         0.884      0.998       0.963          0.490         0.537          0.452       0.387
Endline mean in control group                       0.405                       0.596                   0.574                        0.624                      0.040
Additional control variables                   No          Yes             No           Yes         No         Yes            No            Yes            No          Yes
(Pseudo) R-squared                            0.027       0.361          0.009         0.220      0.014       0.257          0.033         0.388          0.137       0.336
Observations                                  2,382       2,382          2,382         2,382      2,382       2,382          2,382         2,382          1,464       1,464
Note: Average marginal effects (AME) of probit models for outcomes measured at endline, controlling for baseline level of the outcome (respectively a proxy) in one spec-
ification each. For lime, Tigray is excluded since it is not recommended in this region and adoption is zero. Additional control variables identical to those listed in notes of
Table 2. Bonferroni-adjusted p-values taking into account correlations between outcomes. Tests of equality of T1 and T2 are Wald tests. Robust standard errors in paren-
theses, clustered at the microwatershed level. Significance levels indicated as following: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                  40
Table 4. ITT effects on compost quantity and compost quality

                                              Compost quantity           Compost quality
                                                (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)
                   T1                         -1.259     -0.718        0.547** 0.423***
                                             (1.303)    (1.179)        (0.216)     (0.126)
 p-value                                      0.336       0.544         0.013       0.001
                   T2                         -1.667     -1.238       0.614*** 0.443***
                                             (1.298)    (1.014)        (0.211)     (0.124)
 p-value                                      0.201       0.224         0.004       0.001
 Test T1=T2 (p-value)                         0.757       0.694         0.787       0.888
 Endline mean in control group                      8.342                     4.365
 Additional control variables                   No         Yes            No         Yes
 (Pseudo) R-squared                           0.004       0.083         0.030       0.277
 Observations                                 1,178       1,178         1,127       1,127
 Note: Subsample of compost producers only. Compost quantity measured in m3 per ha of
 crop land. Compost quality is an index ranging from 0 to 9. Additional control variables
 identical to those listed in notes of Table 2. Tests of equality of T1 and T2 are Wald tests.
 Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the microwatershed level. Significance
 levels indicated as following: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                               41
Table 5. ITT effects on number of adopted ISFM technologies and integrated adoption of the full ISFM package, FREG- and non-FREG samples separately

                                                            Number of ISFM technologies adopted
                                                                                                                                            Integrated adoption of full ISFM package
                                                     OLS                                               Poisson
                              Non-FREG sample               FREG sample              Non-FREG sample            FREG sample               Non-FREG sample               FREG sample
                                (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)              (9)        (10)            (11)        (12)
           T1                 0.322*     0.278***       1.257*** 1.232***            0.329*     0.293*** 1.260*** 1.228***                 0.030      0.034         0.273*** 0.280***
                              (0.193)     (0.080)        (0.200)     (0.123)         (0.194)     (0.088)     (0.193)     (0.128)          (0.048)    (0.024)         (0.058)     (0.048)
p-value                        0.097       0.001          0.000       0.000           0.090       0.001       0.000       0.000            0.528      0.161           0.000       0.000
           T2                0.550*** 0.483***          1.140*** 1.117***           0.540*** 0.478*** 1.161*** 1.131***                   0.079* 0.084***           0.231*** 0.231***
                              (0.181)     (0.082)        (0.184)     (0.137)         (0.173)     (0.086)     (0.183)     (0.147)          (0.046)    (0.025)         (0.066)     (0.043)
p-value                        0.003       0.000          0.000       0.000           0.002       0.000       0.000       0.000            0.082      0.001           0.001       0.000
Test T1=T2 (p-value)           0.289       0.018          0.578       0.394           0.289       0.028       0.576       0.449            0.351      0.081           0.561       0.334
Additional controls             No          Yes            No          Yes             No          Yes         No          Yes              No         Yes              No         Yes
Endline control mean                 2.444                      2.775                       2.444                   2.775                        0.168                      0.225
(Pseudo) R-squared             0.031       0.496          0.224       0.570           0.006       0.094       0.030       0.077            0.007      0.285           0.059       0.299
Observations                   1,606         1,606          400          400          1,606        1,606          400           400        1,606        1,606          400           400
Note: All models show outcomes measured at endline, controlling for baseline level of the outcome (respectively a proxy) in one specification each. Poisson and probit models (Col-
umns (5) to (12)) show average marginal effects (AME). Number of quickwin technologies adopted ranges from 0 to 5. Full quickwin package is a dummy variable taking 1 if all four
practices (compost, blended fertilizer, line seeding and improved seeds) have bee n adopted together on at least one main crop plot. FREG stands for "Farmer Research and Extension
Group". FREG- and non-FREG samples consist of actual FREG respectively non-FREG farmers in treatment mws and their matched controls. Additional control variables identical to
those listed in notes of Table 2. Tests of equality of T1 and T2 are Wald tests. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the microwatershed level. Significance levels indicated
as following: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                        42
Table 6. ITT effects on different knowledge outcomes

                                                            ISFM Knowledge
                                    Overall              Principles knowledge           How-to knowledge
                               (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
           T1               0.050*** 0.036***             0.030*         0.020        0.068***     0.052***
                             (0.015)      (0.013)         (0.016)       (0.014)        (0.015)       (0.013)
 p-value                      0.001        0.006           0.062         0.152          0.000         0.000
           T2               0.082*** 0.068***            0.063***     0.054***        0.091***     0.073***
                             (0.013)      (0.011)         (0.014)       (0.011)        (0.016)       (0.013)
 p-value                      0.000        0.000           0.000         0.000          0.000         0.000
 Test T1=T2 (p-value)         0.027        0.016           0.037         0.013          0.204         0.206
 Endline control mean                0.448                        0.522                        0.382
 Additional controls           No           Yes             No            Yes            No            Yes
 R-squared                    0.034        0.219           0.012         0.155          0.048         0.221
 Observations                 2,334        2,334           2,334         2,334          2,334         2,334
 Note: All models show treatment effects on household heads' knowledge scores measured at endline, using
 OLS regressions. Knowledge scores range from 0 to 1, are calculated based on the number of correct answers
 relative to the total number of questions in a respective domain. Additional control variables are age, gender,
 education (in completed years), whether respondent had access to off-farm work or a non-farm family business,
 whether hh adopted the ISFM quickwin package at baseline, whether hh has a cell phone and radio, number of
 times hh had contact with a development agent, whether it has participated in agricultural training, number of
 local organizations involved, and walking distance to nearest farmer training center. Two region dummies for
 Oromia and Amhara included. Tests of equality of T1 and T2 are Wald tests. Robust standard errors in paren-
 theses, clustered at the microwatershed level. Significance levels indicated as following: *** p<0.01, **
 p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                    43
Table 7. ITT effects on different knowledge outcomes, FREG- and non-FREG samples separately

                                                                                                  ISFM Knowledge
                                                   Overall                                      Principles knowledge                                   How-to knowledge
                                  Non-FREG                      FREG                     Non-FREG                   FREG                      Non-FREG                  FREG
                                (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)              (9)         (10)       (11)        (12)
           T1                  0.011       0.012        0.131*** 0.125***            -0.006      -0.001     0.090*** 0.081***             0.025*     0.026** 0.179*** 0.177***
                              (0.015)     (0.013)        (0.025)     (0.021)        (0.018)     (0.016)      (0.029)     (0.026)          (0.013)     (0.012)    (0.027)     (0.024)
p-value                        0.450       0.371          0.000       0.000           0.719      0.929        0.003       0.002            0.064       0.031      0.000       0.000
           T2                0.047*** 0.047***          0.150*** 0.154***           0.033** 0.040*** 0.132*** 0.129***                   0.051*** 0.050*** 0.158*** 0.163***
                              (0.013)     (0.012)        (0.021)     (0.020)        (0.016)     (0.014)      (0.027)     (0.024)          (0.014)     (0.013)    (0.020)     (0.019)
p-value                        0.001       0.000          0.000       0.000           0.036      0.005        0.000       0.000            0.001       0.000      0.000       0.000
Test T1=T2 (p-value)           0.013       0.011          0.413       0.188           0.030      0.013        0.172       0.089            0.103       0.098      0.440       0.554
Endline control mean                 0.465                      0.508                       0.541                   0.577                        0.398                  0.440
Additional controls             No          Yes            No          Yes             No         Yes          No          Yes              No          Yes         No         Yes
R-squared                      0.012       0.140          0.150       0.254           0.005      0.105        0.074       0.180            0.016       0.135      0.201       0.305
Observations                   1,573       1,573           395         395            1,573      1,573         395         395             1,573       1,573       395         395
Note: All models show treatment effects on household heads' knowledge scores measured at endline, using OLS regressions. Knowledge scores range from 0 to 1, are calculated based on the
number of correct answers relative to the total number of questions in a respective domain. FREG stands for "Farmer Research and Extension Group". FREG- and non-FREG samples consist
of actual FREG respectively non-FREG farmers in treatment mws and their matched controls. Additional control variables identical to those listed in notes of Table 6. Tests of equality of T1
and T2 are Wald tests. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the microwatershed level. Significance levels indicated as following: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                         44
Table 8. ITT and knowledge effects on number of adopted ISFM technologies and integrated adoption of the full ISFM package, ADE of treatments and ACME
of overall, principles and how-to knowledge as mediating variables

                                    Number of ISFM technologies adopted                              Integrated adoption of full ISFM package
                          (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)        (11)      (12)
Panel A: Coefficient Estimates
T1                     0.546***   0.406***   0.643***   0.437***   0.480***   0.380***   0.084**    0.074***    0.098**   0.081***     0.070*   0.066***
                        (0.163)    (0.075)    (0.175)    (0.080)    (0.162)    (0.075)   (0.042)     (0.025)    (0.042)    (0.026)    (0.041)    (0.024)
T2                     0.609***   0.490***   0.744***   0.542***   0.568***   0.479***   0.108**    0.097***   0.125***   0.106***    0.098**   0.089***
                        (0.161)    (0.074)    (0.171)    (0.077)    (0.157)    (0.074)   (0.043)     (0.024)    (0.043)    (0.024)    (0.042)    (0.023)
Overall knowledge
                       2.909***   1.443***                                               0.398***   0.254***
score
                        (0.180)   (0.147)                                                (0.050)    (0.057)
Principles knowledge
                                             1.663***   0.760***                                               0.227***   0.114***
score
                                             (0.142)    (0.109)                                                (0.039)     (0.039)
How-to knowledge
                                                                   3.102***   1.422***                                               0.483***   0.344***
score
                                                                   (0.193)    (0.157)                                                 (0.056)   (0.057)
(Pseudo) R-squared      0.214      0.559      0.144      0.545      0.223      0.557      0.052      0.282      0.038       0.274      0.065     0.293




                                                                              45
Table 8. ITT and knowledge effects on number of adopted ISFM technologies and integrated adoption of the full ISFM package, ADE of treatments and ACME
of overall, principles and how-to knowledge as mediating variables (cont.)

                                    Number of ISFM technologies adopted                                                 Integrated adoption of full ISFM package
                           Overall              Principles              How-to                                    Overall               Principles                How-to
                       (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)                            (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)       (11)        (12)
Panel B: ACME and ADE Estimates of T1
ACME (T1)           0.147*** 0.051***       0.050*      0.015    0.212*** 0.073***                         0.019**        0.009**       0.004         0.002      0.034***     0.020***
                     (0.044)    (0.019)    (0.027)     (0.011)    (0.049)    (0.020)                       (0.008)        (0.004)      (0.005)       (0.002)      (0.010)      (0.006)
ADE (T1)            0.553*** 0.410*** 0.651*** 0.441*** 0.488*** 0.383***                                  0.094**       0.077***      0.107**      0.085***       0.079*     0.069***
                     (0.153)    (0.080)    (0.165)     (0.085)    (0.153)    (0.078)                       (0.045)        (0.027)      (0.045)       (0.028)      (0.045)      (0.026)
Total effect (T1)   0.700*** 0.460*** 0.700*** 0.456*** 0.700*** 0.457***                                  0.109**       0.085***      0.111**      0.086***      0.108**      0.086**
                     (0.163)    (0.080)    (0.168)     (0.083)    (0.161)    (0.079)                       (0.045)        (0.028)      (0.045)       (0.028)      (0.045)      (0.027)
Share of T1 effect
explained by          20.9%     11.0%        7.1%       3.2%       30.2%     16.1%                          17.3%         11.2%          4.0%         2.1%         31.6%        23.0%
knowledge
Panel C: ACME and ADE Estimates of T2
ACME (T2)           0.240*** 0.097*** 0.105*** 0.041*** 0.281*** 0.102***                                  0.038***      0.020***     0.017***       0.008**     0.049***     0.028***
                     (0.042)    (0.019)    (0.025)     (0.010)    (0.052)    (0.022)                        (0.008)       (0.006)      (0.005)       (0.003)      (0.011)      (0.007)
ADE (T2)            0.616*** 0.493*** 0.751*** 0.546*** 0.575*** 0.483***                                  0.125***      0.106***     0.142***      0.115***      0.115**     0.097***
                     (0.152)    (0.079)    (0.161)     (0.082)    (0.148)    (0.078)                        (0.048)       (0.027)      (0.049)       (0.027)      (0.048)      (0.026)
Total effect (T2)   0.856*** 0.590*** 0.856*** 0.586*** 0.855*** 0.585***                                  0.155***      0.122***     0.155***      0.121***      0.154**     0.120***
                     (0.160)    (0.078)    (0.165)     (0.080)    (0.159)    (0.080)                        (0.048)       (0.027)      (0.049)       (0.027)      (0.048)      (0.026)
Share of T2 effect
explained by          28.0%     16.4%       12.3%       6.9%       32.8%     17.5%                          24.9%         16.9%         11.2%         6.4%         32.0%        23.3%
knowledge
Additional controls    No          Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes                            No            Yes          No            Yes          No           Yes
Observations          2,334      2,334      2,334       2,334      2,334      2,334                          2,116         2,116        2,116         2,116        2,116        2,116
Note: Causal mediation estimates for overall, principles, and how-to knowledge variables on number of practices adopted (OLS specification) and integrated adoption of full quickwin
(probit specification, AME shown), measured at endline. ACME stands for average causal mediation effect, ADE for average direct effect. Additional control variables identical to those
listed in notes of tables 2 and 6. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the microwatershed level. Significance levels indicated by asterisks as following: *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                               46
References

Adolwa, I. S., Schwarze, S. and A. Buerkert, 2019. Impacts of integrated soil fertiliy man-
agement on yield and household income: The case of Tamale (Ghana) and Kakamega (Ken-
ya). Ecological Economics 161: 186-192.
Agegnehu, G., Nelson, P. N. and M. I. Bird, 2016. Crop yield, plant nutrient uptake and soil
physiochemical properties under organic soil amendments and nitrogen fertilization on Niti-
soils. Soil & Tillage Research 160: 1-13.
Aker, J. C., 2011. Dial "A" for agriculture: A review of information and communication tech-
nologies for agricultural extension in developing countries. Agricultural Economics 42: 631-
647.
Aker, J. C., Boumnijel, R., McClelland, A. and N. Tierney, 2011. Zap it to me: The short-term
impacts of a mobile cash-transfer program. Working Paper 268. Washington D.C.: Center for
Global Development.
Anderson, J. R. and G. Feder, 2007. Agricultural Extension. In: Evenson, R. and P. Pingali
(eds.): Handbook of Agricultural Economics 3: 2343-2378. Washington D.C.: The World
Bank.
Angrist, J. D. and G. Imbens, 1994. Identification and estimation of Local Average Treatment
Effects. Econometrica 62(2): 467-475.
ATA, 2014. National Strategy for Ethiopia's Agricultural Extension System ­ Visions, Sys-
temic Bottlenecks and Priority Interventions. Addis Abeba: Ethiopian Agricultural Transfor-
mation Agency (ATA).
Barrett, C. B. and L. E. M. Bevis, 2015. The self-reinforcing feedback between low soil fertil-
ity and chronic poverty. Perspectives. Nature Geoscience 8: 907-912.
Barrow, C. J., 1991. Land Degradation: Development and Breakdown of Terrestrial Environ-
ments. Cambridge University Press.
Belay, K., 2003. Agricultural extension in Ethiopia: The case of participatory demonstration
and training extension system. Journal of Social Development in Africa 18 (1): 49-84.
BenYishay, A. and A. M. Mobarak, 2018. Social Learning and Incentives for Experimenta-
tion and Communication. Review of Economic Studies 0: 1-34.
Berg, G. and B. Zia, 2013. Harnessing Emotional Connections to Improve Financial Deci-
sions ­ Evaluating the Impact of Financial Education in Mainstream Media. World Bank Pol-
icy Research Working Paper 6407. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.
Bernard, T., Makhija, S., Orkin, K., Taffesse, A. S. and D. J. Spielman, 2016. Video-Based
Agricultural Extension ­ Analysis of a Pilot Project in Ethiopia. Project Note. Washington
D.C.: IFPRI.
Bernard, T., Dercon, S., Orkin, K. and A. S. Taffesse, 2015. Will video kill the radio star?
Assessing the potential of targeted exposure to role models through video. World Bank Eco-
nomic Review 29 (1): 226-237.
Bernard, T., Dercon, S., Orkin, K., and A. S. Taffesse, 2014. The Future in Mind: Aspirations
and Forward-looking Behaviour in Rural Ethiopia. Working Paper 2014-16. University of
Oxford: Center for the Study of African Economies (CSAE).

                                              47
Bernard, T., Dercon, S. and A. S. Taffesse, 2012. Beyond Fatalism ­ An Empirical Explora-
tion of Self-efficacy Aspirations Failure in Ethiopia. Ethiopia Strategic Support Program
Working Paper 46. Addis Abeba/Washington D.C.: Ethiopian Development Research Insti-
tute (EDRI)/IFPRI.
Cameron, A. C. and P. K. Trivedi, 2009. Microeconometrics using Stata. College Sta-
tion/Texas: Stata Press.
Cappellari, L. and S. P. Jenkins, 2003. Multivariate probit regression using simulated maxi-
mum likelihood. The Stata Journal 3 (3): 278-294.
Chong, A., Duryea, S. and E. La Ferrara, 2012. Soap operas and fertility: Evidence from Bra-
zil. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (4): 1-31.
Chong, A. and E. La Ferrara, 2009. Television and divorce: Evidence from Brazilian novelas.
Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2-3): 458-468.
CIA, 2018. The World Factbook: Ethiopia. Available:
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/et.html, accessed: October
2018.
Davis, K., Nkonya, E., Kato, E., Mekonnen, D. A., Odendo, M., Miiro, R. and J. Nkuba,
2012. Impact of farmer field schools on agricultural productivity and poverty in East Africa.
World Development 40 (2): 402-413.
De Brauw, A., Eozenou, P., Gilligan, D. O., Hotz, C., Kumar, N. and J. V. Meenakshi, 2018.
Biofortification, crop adoption and health information: Impact pathways in Mozambique and
Uganda. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 100 (3): 906-930.
Duflo, E., Glennerster, R. and M. Kremer, 2007. Using Randomization in Development Eco-
nomics Research: A Toolkit. Discussion Paper 6059. London: Centre for Economic Policy
Research (CEPR).
FAO, 2016. FAOSTAT: Ethiopia. Available: http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#country/238,
accessed: October 2018.
Feder, G., Murgai, R. and J. B. Quizon, 2004. The acquisition and diffusion of knowledge:
The case of pest management training in farmer field schools, Indonesia. Journal of Agricul-
tural Economics 55 (2): 221-243.
Foster, A. D. and M. Rosenzweig, 1995. Learning by doing and learning from others: Human
capital and technical change in agriculture. Journal of Political Economy 106 (3): 1176-1209.
Frölich, M. and M. Huber, 2017. Direct and indirect treatment effects ­ causal chains and
mediation analysis with instrumental variables. Journal of Royal Statistical Society B 79, Part
5: 1645-1666.
Frölich, M. and S. Sperlich, 2019. Impact Evaluation. Cambridge University Press.
Gandhi, R., Veeraraghavan, R., Toyama, K. and V. Ramprasad, 2009. Digital Green: Partici-
patory video and mediated instruction for agricultural extension. Information Technologies &
International Development 5 (1): 1-15.
Gautam, M., 2000. Agricultural extension: The Kenya experience ­ An impact evaluation.
Washington D.C.: The World Bank.
Gnahoua, J.-B. G., Ettien, D .J. B., N'zué, B., Ebah, C., Koné, B., De Neve, S. and P. Boeckx,
2017. Intensification pathway for improvement of smallholder cassava production systems in
southern Côte D'Ivoire. Experimental Agriculture 53 (1): 44-58.

                                              48
Godtland, E. M., Sadoulet, E., De Janvry, A., Murgai, R. and O. Ortiz, 2004. The impact of
farmer field schools on knowledge and productivity: A study of potato farmers in the Peruvi-
an Andes. Economic Development and Cultural Change 53: 63-92.
Hanna, R., Mullainathan, S. and J. Schwartzstein, 2014. Learning through noticing: Theory
and evidence from a field experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3): 1311-
1353.
Hicks, R. and D. Tingley, 2011. Causal mediation analysis. The Stata Journal 11(4): 605-619.
Imai, K., L. Keele, and D. Tingley, 2010. A general approach to causal mediation analysis.
Psychological Methods 15: 309-334.
Imai, K., Keele, L., Tingley, D. and T. Yamamoto, 2011. Unpacking the black box of causali-
ty: Learning about causal mechanisms from experimental and observational studies. American
Political Science Review 105(4): 765-789.
Jensen, R. and E. Oster, 2009. The power of TV: Cable television and women's status in In-
dia. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (3): 1057-1094.
Knowler, D. and B. Bradshaw, 2007. Farmers' adoption of conservation agriculture: A review
and synthesis of recent research. Food Policy 32: 25-48.
Kondylis, F., Mueller, V. and J. Zhu, 2017. Seeing is believing? Evidence from an extension
network experiment. Journal of Development Economics 125: 1-20.
Kondylis, F., Mueller, V. and J. Zhu, 2015. Measuring agricultural knowledge and adoption.
Agricultural Economics 46 (3): 449-462.
Laajaj, R. and K. Macours, 2017. Measuring skills in developing countries. Policy Research
Working Paper 8000. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.
McKenzie, D., 2012a. Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments.
Journal of Development Economics 99: 210-221.
McKenzie, D., 2012b. Tools of the trade: A quick adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing.
World Bank Development Impact Blog.
Available: http://blogs.worldbank.org/impactevaluations/tools-of-the-trade-a-quick-
adjustment-for-multiple-hypothesis-testing, accessed: October 2018.
MoANR, 2017. Unlocking the potential for transformational agricultural development of
acidic soils in Ethiopia. Policy Brief produced by the Soil Fertility Improvement Directorate
of the MoANR with support from IFPRI, CIMMYT, Pelum and GIZ. Addis Abeba: Ministry
of Agriculture and Natural Resources.
Nezomba, H., Mtambanengwe, F., Chikowos, R. and P. Mapfumo, 2015. Sequencing inte-
grated soil fertility management options for sustainable crop intensification by different cate-
gories of smallholder farmers in Zimbabwe. Experimental Agriculture 51 (1): 17-41.
Niu, C. and C. Ragasa, 2018. Selective attention and information loss in the lab-to-farm
knowledge chain: The case of Malawian agricultural extension programs. Agricultural Sys-
tems 165: 147-163.
Noltze, M., Schwarze, S. and Matin Qaim, 2012. Understanding the adoption of system tech-
nologies in smallholder agriculture: The system of rice intensification (SRI) in Timor Leste.
Agricultural Systems 108: 64-73.
Ogutu, S., Fongar, A., Godecke, T., Jackering, L., Mwololo, H., Njuguna, M., Wollni, M. and
M.Qaim, 2018. How to make farming and agricultural extension more nutrition-sensitive:

                                              49
evidence from a randomised controlled trail in Kenya. European Review of Agricultural Eco-
nomics: 1-24, doi: 10.1093/erae/jby049.
Pamuk, H., Bulte, E. and A. A. Adekunle, 2014. Do decentralized innovation systems pro-
mote agricultural technology adoption? Experimental evidence from Africa. Food Policy 44:
227-236.
Place, F., Barrett, C. B., Freeman, H. A., Ramisch, J. J. and B. Vanlauwe, 2003. Prospects for
integrated soil fertility management using organic and inorganic inputs: Evidence from small-
holder African agricultural systems. Food Policy 28: 365-378.
Rogers, E. M, 1995. Diffusion of Innovations. 4th edition. New York: Free Press.
Rola, A. C., Jamias, S. B. and J. B. Quizon, 2002. Do farmer field school graduates retain and
share what they learn? An investigation in Iloilo, Philippines. Journal of International Agri-
cultural and Extension Education 9 (1): 65-76.
Sankoh, A. J., Huque, M. F. and S. D. Dubey, 1997. Some comments on frequently used mul-
tiple endpoint adjustment methods in clinical trials. Statistics in Medicine 16 (22): 2529-2542.
Schwartzstein, J., 2014. Selective attention and learning. Journal of the European Economic
Association 12(6):1423-1452.
Sheahan, M. and C. B. Barrett, 2017. Ten striking facts about agricultural input use in Sub-
Saharan Africa. Food Policy 67: 12-25.
Spielman, D. J., Byerlee, D., Alemu, D. and D. Kelemework, 2010. Policies to promote cereal
intensification in Ethiopia: The search for appropriate public and private roles. Food Policy
35: 185-194.
Swanson, B. E., 2008. Global Review of Good Agricultural Extension and Advisory Service
Practices. Rome: FAO.
Taffesse, A. S., Dorosh, P. and S. Asrat, 2011. Crop Production in Ethiopia: Regional Patterns
and Trends. Washington D.C.: IFPRI.
Tana, T. and Woldensebet, M., 2017. Effect of Combined Application of Organic and Mineral
Nitrogen and Phosphorus Fertilizer on Soil Physico-chemical Properties and Grain Yield of
Food Barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) in Kaffa Zone, South-western Ethiopia. Momona Ethiopi-
an Journal of Science 9 (2): 242-261.
Tripp, R., Wijeeratne, M. and V. H. Piyadasa, 2005. What should we expect from FFS? A Sri
Lanka case study. World Development 33 (10): 1705-1720.
Van Campenhout, B., Vandevelde, S., Walukano, W. and P. van Asten, 2017. Agricultural
extension messages using video on portable devices increased knowledge about seed selec-
tion, storage and handling among smallholder potato farmers in Southwestern Uganda. PLoS
ONE 12(1): e0169557.
Van den Berg, H. and J. Jiggins, 2007. Investing in farmers ­ the impacts of farmer field
schools in relation to integrated pest management. World Development 35 (4): 663-686.
Vanlauwe, B., Bationo, A., Chianu, J., Giller, K. E., Merckx, R., Mokwunye, U., Ohiokpehai,
O., Pypers, P., Tabo, R., Shepherd, K. D., Smaling, E. M. A., Woomer, P. L. and N. Sang-
inga, 2010. Integrated soil fertility management: Operational definition and consequences for
implementation and dissemination. Outlook on Agriculture 39 (1): 17-24.
Van Mele, P., 2006. Zooming-in Zooming-out: A novel method to scale up local innovations
and sustainable technologies. International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability 4 (2): 131-
142.
                                              50
Vasilaky, K., Toyama, K., Baul, T. and D. Karlan, 2018. Learning Digitally: Evaluating the
Impact of Farmer Training via Mediated Videos. Working Paper. Columbia University: Earth
Institute and Department of Economics.
Ward, P. S., Bell, A., Droppelmann, K. and T. G. Benton, 2018. Early adoption of conserva-
tion agriculture practices: Understanding partial compliance in programs with multiple adop-
tion decisions. Land Use Policy 70: 27-37.
Zoussou, E., Van Mele, P., Vodouhe, S. D. and J. Wanvoeke, 2010. Women groups formed in
response to public video screenings on rice processing in Benin. International Journal of Ag-
ricultural Sustainability 8 (4): 270-277.




                                             51
