                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      A CLASSICAL VIEW OF THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                       Michael T. Belongia
                                        Peter N. Ireland

                                       Working Paper 26056
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26056


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




We are especially grateful to David Laidler for his encouragement during the development of this
paper and to John Taylor, Kenneth West, two referees, and seminar participants at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta for helpful comments on previous drafts. All errors that remain are our
own. Neither of us received any external support for, or has any financial interest that relates to,
the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Michael T. Belongia and Peter N. Ireland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Classical View of the Business Cycle
Michael T. Belongia and Peter N. Ireland
NBER Working Paper No. 26056
July 2019
JEL No. B12,E31,E32,E41,E43,E52

                                           ABSTRACT

In the 1920s, Irving Fisher extended his previous work on the Quantity Theory to describe,
through an early version of the Phillips Curve, how changes in the money stock could be
associated with cyclical movements in output, employment, and inflation. At the same time,
Holbrook Working designed a quantitative rule for achieving price stability through control of the
money supply. This paper develops a structural vector autoregressive time series model that
allows these "classical" channels of monetary transmission to operate alongside the now-more-
familiar interest rate channel of the New Keynesian model. Even with Bayesian priors that
intentionally favor the New Keynesian view, the United States data produce posterior
distributions for the model's key parameters that are consistent with the ideas of Fisher and
Working. Changes in real money balances enter importantly into the model's aggregate demand
relationship, while growth in Divisia M2 appears in the estimated monetary policy rule.
Contractionary monetary policy shocks reveal themselves through persistent declines in nominal
money growth instead of rising nominal interest rates and account for important historical
movements in output and inflation.


Michael T. Belongia
University of Mississippi
Department of Economics
Box 1848
University, MS 38677
mtbelong@olemiss.edu

Peter N. Ireland
Boston College
Department of Economics
140 Commonwealth Ave.
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3859
and NBER
irelandp@bc.edu
1. Introduction

       The New Keynesian model used for much of modern business cycle analysis consists, at

its core, of three equations: forward-looking Phillips and IS Curves, together with an interest

rate rule for monetary policy. A central element of this model is some form of administrative

cost or information rigidity that prevents firms from adjusting their output prices fully and

immediately in response to shocks that hit the economy. As well, households exhibit a

willingness to rearrange their spending patterns in response to changes in the real interest rate

as an intertemporal price. In this model, the effects of monetary policy actions on output and

inflation are transmitted exclusively through the central bank's manipulation of the short-term

nominal interest rate. Temporary rigidity in goods prices allows these nominal interest rate

movements to affect real interest rates. These changes in turn generate adjustments in

household spending that affect the output gap and feed back into firms' pricing decisions via

the Phillips Curve. Notably missing from the model is any separate role for variations in the

quantity of money.1

       Approximately ninety years ago, Irving Fisher (1923, 1925, 1926) and Holbrook Working

(1923, 1926) developed an alternative view of the monetary transmission mechanism that is

associated here with a "classical" school of thought. Quite unlike modern real business cycle

models, this older classical view does not deny the importance of nominal price rigidities and

the resulting monetary non-neutralities in shaping business cycle dynamics. For example, as

explained in more detail below, Fisher (1926) discovered a statistical relationship between

inflation and employment that resembles closely what would later become known as the

Phillips Curve.2 And Fisher's (1923, 1925) description of the "so-called business cycle" as a



1 More precisely, changes in the real and nominal quantities of money play no independent role
in determining the dynamics of inflation, the output gap, and the short-term nominal interest
rate in the standard New Keynesian model. However, one can still view the central bank's
choice for the average rate of nominal money supply growth as important for the determination
of the model's steady-state rate of inflation. See Ireland (2004) and Nelson (2008) for more
detailed discussions of this distinction.

2In fact, Fisher (1926) was republished as Fisher (1973) under the alternative title "I
Discovered the Phillips Curve."

                                                1
product of the "dance of the dollar" singles out nominal impulses as the primary driver of

aggregate fluctuations.

       Missing from Fisher's analyses was a full explanation of how this nominal instability

could be traced back to the effects of monetary policy itself. Based on Fisher's earlier research,

however, Laidler (2013) argues that Fisher must have seen variations in the quantity of money

as the more fundamental source of what today would be labeled as a "monetary policy shock."

Along those lines, Fisher (1925) refers to Holbrook Working's then-forthcoming 1926 paper,

which found that movements in bank deposits tended to lead movements in the aggregate price

level. In related research, Working (1923) uses a Quantity Theory framework complementary

to Fisher's to characterize a path for the money stock that would be consistent with long-run

price stability and, by extension, enhanced real stability as well.

       After reviewing in greater detail the original work behind this classical view of the

monetary business cycle, this paper proceeds to sharpen both its points of similarity to and its

departures from the more contemporary, New Keynesian perspective. The paper then conducts

an empirical exercise aimed at discovering whether classical channels of monetary

transmission, working through Quantity-Theoretic interactions between money supply and

demand, might operate alongside of the now much more familiar interest rate channels.3

       Adapting methods outlined by Baumeister and Hamilton (2015, 2018), the econometric

study begins by estimating a structural vector autoregression (VAR) for inflation, the output

gap, and the federal funds rate under Bayesian priors that reflect the mainstream, New

Keynesian view of the cycle. Next, the VAR is expanded to include a Divisia monetary

aggregate and its associated user-cost index, using both of these new variables to help

distinguish fluctuations in money supply from those in money demand. Although the Bayesian

priors selected for this expanded model are deliberately chosen to reflect the New Keynesian

view that any additional, classical channels of monetary transmission are of limited

importance, quarterly data for the United States turn out to speak strongly in favor of their

3 Laidler (1973) develops a model similar in spirit to investigate the same question and finds
significant associations between money and aggregate activity. This early paper, however, does
not embed a monetary policy rule.

                                                 2
existence. Posterior distributions tilt heavily towards specifications that allow terms involving

real and nominal money growth to enter the IS and monetary policy equations that, according

to the strict New Keynesian view, ought to involve real and nominal interest rates alone.

Contractionary monetary policy shocks appear, in this more general framework, to be triggered

mainly by persistent reductions in nominal money growth that are followed by declines in

inflation, the output gap, and the short-term nominal interest rate. The expanded, "classical"

VAR points, in addition, to a larger role for monetary policy disturbances in shaping historical

fluctuations in inflation and the output gap. The paper's conclusion discusses the implications

of these findings for business cycle theory because, at a minimum, they seem to call for a new

class of models capable of capturing a wider range of channels through which monetary policy

affects the economy. The results also suggest that, even today, monetary aggregates could play

a useful role in the Federal Reserve's policymaking strategy.



2. A Classical View of the Monetary Business Cycle

A. Intellectual Origins

        Long before the development of real business cycle and New Keynesian theories, Irving

Fisher (1923, 1925) published his own ideas on what forces might be behind aggregate

fluctuations. In these papers, Fisher conjectured that unanticipated movements in inflation

would alter expectations of future profits because prices received by producers for their output

adjusted more quickly than prices paid by firms for their inputs. Under these conditions,

unanticipated variations in the inflation rate represent a key component of the mechanism

generating "the cycle." Fisher also argued that movements in inflation would affect real

interest rates, potentially changing the cost of borrowing by firms. As bank loans were affected

by these changes in output and interest rates, the growth of bank deposits and, hence, the

quantity of money, would be altered as well. The effects following an inflation surprise on

output would end when input prices eventually adjusted and returned profits to normal levels.4


4 Laidler (2013) argues that this research can be seen as an effort by Fisher to confirm his
long-standing belief in the power of the Quantity Theory to explain aggregate fluctuations and

                                                3
Missing from this analysis was any explicit treatment of a causal force that led to inflation

variations in the first place but, based on his earlier research, it seems likely that Fisher

believed that these variations could be traced to aggregate demand fluctuations that had a

monetary origin.5

       Fisher (1926) extended his work linking variations in inflation to the business cycle by

outlining a relationship similar to what would later become known as the Phillips Curve. While

his earlier papers explored the correlations between inflation and the volume of trade, his 1926

paper analyzed the association between inflation and employment.6 Fisher now had found

more evidence that variations in real activity were related to inflation but, as in his previous

work, did not explain why prices varied. Nonetheless, based on his earlier (1911) investigations

of the Quantity Theory and, specifically, that book's Chapter IV ("Disturbance of Equation [of

Exchange] and of Purchasing Power during Transition Periods"), which connected variations in

money to variations in the price level and, subsequently, to changes in the real rate of interest

and output, it is again reasonable to infer that he saw variations in the quantity of money as

an underlying source of aggregate fluctuations.7


to support his advocacy of a rule that would direct the newly-created Federal Reserve to
achieve price stability. This was his "compensated dollar" plan (see Fisher (1913, 1920)).
Similar thinking was behind a significant effort at the International Labor Organization in the
1920s on mechanisms to achieve price stability (see Endres and Fleming (1998)). Simons
(1936) later articulated similar logic for the adoption of a monetary policy rule.

5 For example, Fisher treated the subject extensively in his (1911) Purchasing Power of Money
and, for several years, he published forecasts of inflation in the American Economic Review
(e.g., Fisher (1912)). These forecasts were derived from Quantity Theory relationships and
based on regressions of the aggregate price level on the quantity of money. Fisher was not
alone in making empirical investigations of Quantity Theory relationships in the early 20th
century. For more background, see the retrospectives in Humphrey (1973) and Laidler (2013).

6 Throughout the paper, Fisher refers to both employment and unemployment. His statistical
evidence, however, is limited only to variations in employment. In a subsequent paper, Fisher
(1936) revisited the question by investigating the relationship between the rate of change in
wholesale prices and factory employment. The theoretical reasoning for this exercise remained
the same as that articulated in Fisher (1925, 1926). Dimand (1993) discusses Fisher's ideas in
greater detail. Loef and Monissen (1999) develop a formal model based on Fisher's discussion
of the cycle.

7 Although the focus in this paper is specifically on Fisher's work, it should be noted that
others, notably Hawtrey (1913), also were developing monetary theories of the cycle at this
time. While similar in many respects, however, the disturbances in these other models that

                                                 4
       If variations in the quantity of money were, in fact, the cause of fluctuations in

aggregate activity, it would be natural to ask if there was a mechanism by which price stability

might be achieved and, indeed, Fisher (1913, 1920) had already proposed that price stability be

adopted formally as the operating objective of the Federal Reserve. In this context, Working's

contribution, discussed in more detail below, was to use the Quantity Theory to define a

mechanism by which a value for the money supply consistent with long-run price stability

could be identified. Moreover, Working recognized the role of lags between changes in the

quantity of money and changes in the price level and embedded these lags in a policy

framework based on a long-run simulated path for price stability. By comparing the current

price level against the simulated long-run path, a central bank could then evaluate whether the

stance of monetary policy was too accommodative or too restrictive.8

       Although the details of these models are different, the foregoing discussion suggests

that business cycle dynamics as viewed from a classical perspective reflect the operation of the

same three relationships found in the New Keynesian model: a relationship between the output

gap (or unemployment) and inflation, a relationship between monetary policy and the output

gap, and a rule for the conduct of monetary policy. But, while both classical and New

Keynesian theories depend on similar notions of the Phillips curve relation between output and

inflation, the role of the money stock, both in transmitting monetary policy actions through the

economy and in describing the stance of monetary policy itself, differs importantly across the

two perspectives.

initiated fluctuations in real activity were seen to originate from different sources. Fisher
emphasized exogenous shocks to high-powered money that caused the price level to change
and, if nominal interest rates did not adjust quickly enough, changes in the real rate would
affect expected profits, output, and employment. Hawtrey's "model," summarized in a series of
bullet points (Hawtrey (1913, pp.267-272)), tended to focus instead on endogenous changes in
money and the money multiplier resulting from changes in expected profits and adjustments in
credit markets. Thus, whereas Fisher focused on preventing exogenous changes in money, as
in his "compensated dollar" plan, Hawtrey's analysis led him to emphasize control of
commercial banks' behavior. A discussion of other work on monetary theories of the cycle
during the early twentieth century can be found in Laidler (1991, Chapter 4).

8 Humphrey (2001) conjectures that a Quantity Theoretic rule of this type would have indicated
to the Fed that monetary policy was excessively tight in the late 1920s and early 1930s in
contrast to the signal of monetary ease given by the Real Bills Doctrine that guided the Fed at
that time.

                                                5
B. The IS Curve and the Determination of Output

       The New Keynesian model includes a forward-looking IS curve derived as a log-

linearized version of an optimizing household's Euler equation that links expected consumption

growth to the ex-ante real interest rate. Therefore, the New Keynesian IS curve merely extends

Fisher's (1930) theory of interest and intertemporal choice to the case of uncertainty and

rational expectations.9 The New Keynesian model, however, translates this Euler equation into

the foundations of theory of short-run output determination by assuming, additionally, that

monopolistically competitive firms sell output on demand at their pre-set nominal prices and

that the central bank exploits the temporary rigidity of nominal goods prices to translate

policy-induced movements in nominal interest rates into corresponding movements in the real

interest rate. After imposing equilibrium conditions that link household spending to the

output gap, the New Keynesian IS curve relates the output gap to the difference between the

actual real interest rate and a corresponding measure of the natural real rate of interest.10

       The body of classical thought discussed earlier pre-dates any notion of an IS curve that

might be compared directly to the New Keynesian specification. Nonetheless, a contrast can be

made by recalling that, for Fisher and Working, it was changes in money growth that set off the

dynamics through which monetary policy affected output and inflation. This observation

suggests a classical alternative to the New Keynesian IS curve in which real money balances

appear, in addition to the real interest rate, as a summary statistic representing the channels

through which monetary policy affects real economic activity. Ireland (2004) derives an IS

curve of this form by assuming real money balances enter non-separably with consumption


9 Thus, scattered throughout Fisher's work appear variants of all the basic building blocks of
contemporary macroeconomic models, including those that evolved into the New Keynesian IS
and Phillips Curves. Tobin (1987, p.376) concludes: "Had Fisher pulled these strands together
into a coherent theory, he could have been an American Keynes. Indeed the `neoclassical
synthesis' would not have had to wait until after World War II. Fisher would have done it all
himself."

10See Woodford (2003, Chapter 4) for a derivation of this "Neo-Wicksellian" view of aggregate
demand and Neiss and Nelson (2003) for further theoretical and empirical analysis. Laidler
(1999), however, discusses how the same two interest rate model widely associated with
Wicksell and the Stockholm School also can be interpreted in a manner that leads to money,
rather than credit and interest rates, as the source of aggregate fluctuations.

                                                6
into a representative household's utility function, so that the intertemporal optimality condition

that forms the basis for the New Keynesian aggregate demand relation includes real balances

as well as the real interest rate. Likewise, Nelson (2002) introduces adjustment costs of money

demand into a New Keynesian model to derive a specification in which changes in real money

balances reflect movements in long-term interest rates that are important in influencing

aggregate demand; this model variant also motivates an empirical specification in which

aggregate demand depends on changes in real money balances as well as the real short-term

rate. In a similar spirit, Meltzer (2001) incorporates real money growth as well as interest rates

into an empirical aggregate demand formulation, interpreting changes in real balances as

proxies for the wider range of effects that monetary policy actions have on spending patterns.

The classical specification outlined below takes the same approach, using the New Keynesian

IS curve as its benchmark but allowing changes in real balances to enter that relationship as

well so as to see, more broadly, which variables appear most important in transmitting the

effects of monetary policy to output.

C. The Monetary Policy Rule

       The New Keynesian model is closed by a third equation that represents a monetary

policy rule for the central bank. With the path for the short-term interest as a key driver of

output, the rule adopted for this purpose is focused on how the target value for that interest

rate should be adjusted in response to prevailing economic conditions. Moreover, because the

Federal Reserve's mandate specifies goals for two variables ­ stable prices and maximum

employment ­ and because the output gap appears more frequently as the measure of resource

utilization in the New Keynesian model, this rule naturally takes the same general form as

Taylor's (1993) and prescribes a setting for the nominal interest rate with reference to

movements in inflation away from the central bank's target and fluctuations in the output gap.

       In a classical setting, however, the quantity of money is the focus of a rule for monetary

policy and, in contrast to the joint objectives of full employment and price stability for the

central bank in New Keynesian models, classical rules directed their attention only to price

stability. To this end, Working (1923) used the basic Equation of Exchange and assumptions


                                                 7
about the behavior of velocity and the volume of transactions to focus on the value of real

money balances. To determine a smooth path for prices, Working estimated a trend value

using a regression of the logarithm of the price level on time, time squared, and time cubed and

then identified targets for future values of the price level by extrapolating from this trend

regression. With this information, Working could plot, on a log scale, values for M/P to

illustrate the value of the money stock that would be consistent with the long-run trend path

for the aggregate price level P.11 And, in the same sense that the Taylor Rule directs the central

bank to raise or lower its target for the short-term nominal interest rate as realized values for

inflation and the output gap differ from their targets, the rule proposed by Working would have

the central bank increase or decrease the quantity of money as the price level differed from its

desired path.

       The feedback rule proposed by Working (1923) can be interpreted as proscriptive, the

outline of a strategy the Fed would follow if it used its influence over the money supply to

stabilize inflation around a target path. Here, instead, the focus shifts to the role that money

growth plays in describing the implications that Federal Reserve policy decisions actually have

had over various historical periods extending from the late 1960s through the present.

Accordingly, meant as a positive description of Fed behavior over these periods, the monetary

policy rule in the classical variant of the model estimated below allows for contemporaneous

links among the short-term nominal interest rate, the rate of nominal money growth, the

output gap, and inflation. Then, in the special case where no separate role for money growth

appears, this rule collapses to the standard Taylor Rule. More generally, however, the

specification allows monetary policy shocks to manifest themselves in movements in interest

rates, money growth, or some combination of the two. The model's expanded IS curve then

allows movements in both interest rates and money growth to affect aggregate demand and,

from there, inflation as well through the Phillips Curve.

11 The "P-star" model of Hallman, Porter, and Small (1991) was adapted from Working's (1923)
framework. But whereas that study specified long-run equilibrium velocity, "V-star," as a
constant, Orphanides and Porter (2000) and Belongia and Ireland (2015a, 2017) introduced
time-varying measures of equilibrium velocity, a change that tightened the links between
money and nominal objectives.

                                                 8
D. Money Demand and Supply

       Leeper and Roush (2003) emphasize that a standard Taylor Rule describes part of a

broader monetary regime in which Federal Reserve policy makes the supply of monetary assets

infinitely elastic for any given target value for the short-term nominal interest rate. It is this

infinite elasticity of money supply that implies that a money demand equation, if added to the

New Keynesian model, serves only to determine the equilibrium stock of money, given the

behavior of inflation, output, and interest rates. By contrast, a policy rule allowing for

simultaneity between interest rates and money growth makes the money supply function less

than fully elastic, and therefore requires an explicit consideration of money demand to pin

down the dynamics of all other variables. Thus, the classical specification developed below

must go beyond the three-variable New Keynesian one, not only by making the IS curve and

monetary policy rules more flexible, but also by including entirely new relationships that clarify

the distinction between money supply and money demand. The resulting description of

monetary policy and its effects, working through the interactions between money supply and

demand, highlights the deeper connections between the analysis conducted here and the

classical ideas of Fisher and Working and, likewise, reveals a more fundamental departure

from the standard New Keynesian approach.



3. The New Keynesian Benchmark

       To demonstrate, first, that the empirical approach taken here is capable of producing

results consistent with conventional New Keynesian theory as a benchmark, the analysis

begins by focusing on a three-variable structural vector autoregression for inflation pt , the


output gap yt , and the short-term nominal interest rate rt . The quarterly data used to

estimate this VAR begin in 1967:1, to match the availability of the monetary series used to

extend the model later on, and run through 2017:4. In those data, inflation is measured by

year-over-year percentage changes in the price index for personal consumption expenditures,

and the output gap is measured as the percentage-point difference between real GDP and the


                                                  9
Congressional Budget Office's estimate of potential GDP. From the beginning of the sample

period through 2008:4 and starting again in 2016:1, the short-term nominal interest rate is

measured by the effective federal funds rate. From 2009:1 through 2015:4, it is measured

instead using Wu and Xia's (2016) shadow federal funds rate, which provides a convenient one-

dimensional index summarizing the full effects of the Federal Reserve's policies of forward

guidance and quantitative easing on the entire term structure of interest rates over the interval

when the federal funds rate itself was constrained by the zero lower bound.12 All data come

from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis' FRED database, except for the shadow funds rate

series, which was downloaded from Jing Cynthia Wu's website at the Booth School of

Business, University of Chicago.

       Collecting the data series in the 3x1 vector

                                                                     
                                          xt =  pt          yt   rt 
                                                                    

allows the structural VAR to be written compactly as
                                                     q
                                        Axt = µ +  B j xt - j +  t ,                                   (1)
                                                     j =1


where A is a 3x3 matrix of impact coefficients with ones along the diagonal,         µ is a 3x1 vector

of intercept terms, each B j ,   j = 1,2,..., q , is a 3x3 matrix of autoregressive coefficients, and  t

is a 3x1 vector of serially and mutually uncorrelated structural disturbances, assumed to be

normally distributed with zero mean and diagonal 3x3 covariance matrix D . While (1) leaves

the autoregression unconstrained, and thereby stops short of imposing all of the cross-

equation restrictions implied by a fully-specified dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium New





12It should be noted that the term structure model used by Wu and Xia (2016) to estimate
their shadow rate series allows for changes in bond risk premia that, strictly speaking, would
not be captured by most New Keynesian models. However, the Wu-Xia model does share with
New Keynesian theories the assumption that inferences about the stance of monetary policy
can be gleaned from data on interest rates alone, without reference to changes in the stock of
money. An alternative shadow rate series could be derived, instead, using Gust, Herbst, Lopez-
Salido, and Smith's (2017) nonlinear estimates of a New Keynesian model.

                                                     10
Keynesian model, the matrix A of impact coefficients is parameterized with broader reference

to New Keynesian theory to give each equation its structural interpretation.

       More specifically, with

                                             1           - py                0    
                                                                                  
                                        A =  - yr            1               yr   ,                      (2)
                                                                                  
                                             - rp          - ry              1    
                                                                                  

the first equation from (1) can be written as

                                                                 q
                                    pt =  py yt + µ (1) +  B(1)
                                                            j
                                                                xt - j +  tas ,                          (3)
                                                             j =1



where, here and below,    µ ( i ) and B(j i ) refer to the elements from row i = 1,2,3 of the vector µ

and the matrices B j ,   j = 1,2,..., q .   Equation (3), like the New Keynesian Phillips curve,

describes a contemporaneous relationship between movements in inflation and the output gap.

Likewise, the second equation from (1),

                                                                      q
                               yt = - yr ( rt - pt ) + µ   (2)
                                                                 +  B(2)
                                                                     j
                                                                         xt - j +  tad ,                 (4)
                                                                     j =1


captures the essence of the New Keynesian aggregate demand relationship, linking the output

gap to monetary-policy induced movements in the real short-term interest rate. The third

equation,

                                                                     q
                               rt =  rp pt +  ry yt + µ (3) +  B(3)
                                                                j
                                                                    xt - j +  tmp ,                      (5)
                                                                     j =1


is similar in spirit to the Taylor (1993) Rule and describes how the central bank adjusts the

federal funds rate systematically in response to movements in inflation and the output gap.

Under these interpretations, the structural disturbances in the vector

                                                                            
                                            t =   tas  tad             tmp 
                                                                           




                                                       11
correspond to aggregate supply, aggregate demand, and monetary policy shocks, which are

assumed, by imposing the diagonal structure on their covariance matrix D , to be mutually

uncorrelated.

        The reduced form implied by the structural model (1) can be written as

                                                  q
                                        xt =  +   j xt - j +  t ,                                    (6)
                                                 j =1



where    = A-1µ ,  j = A-1 B j for j = 1,2,..., q , and  t = A-1 t is a 3x1 vector of reduced-form

innovations that is normally distributed with zero mean and 3x3 covariance matrix

 = A-1 D( A-1 ) . The reduced form (6) summarizes all of the information contained in the

data, and the availability of only three distinct off-diagonal elements in the reduced-form

covariance matrix  implies that the structural model as shown in (1) and (2) remains

unidentified unless at least one more restriction is imposed on the four parameters entering

into the matrix A . As an alternative, Baumeister and Hamilton (2015, 2018) outline methods

for combining Bayesian prior distributions with information contained in the data, and

therefore communicated through the likelihood function, to characterize the posterior

distributions for the structural parameters. These methods do not solve the frequentist

identification problem: within the Bayesian framework, the same problem manifests itself in

the continued influence of the prior distribution in shaping the posterior, even as the number

of observations in the data sample approaches infinity. Nevertheless, this Bayesian approach

provides a coherent way of assessing how the information that is available in the data can be

used to update optimally one's priors about the values of the structural parameters.

        Thus, the analysis here follows Baumeister and Hamilton (2018) by using New

Keynesian theory as a guide for calibrating prior distributions for the elements of A and, after

characterizing the posterior distributions of the same parameters, asking whether the data

provide any reason for doubting the statistical adequacy of that theory. Specifically, each of

the four coefficients in (2) is assigned a Student t prior distribution with two degrees of freedom

and scale parameter equal to 0.3. The location parameter determining the prior mean of the

                                                      12
Phillips Curve coefficient    py is set equal to 0.5, consistent with the choice made by Lubik and

Schorfheide (2004). Meanwhile, the prior mean for the aggregate demand coefficient       yr is set

at 1.0, as would be implied by a logarithmic utility function for the representative household in

a New Keynesian model. Finally, the original Taylor (1993) Rule assigns values of 1.5 and 0.5

to describe the policy responses of the federal funds rate to changes in inflation and the output

gap, but these response coefficients correspond most closely to the cumulative, or long-run,

effects of those variables on the funds rate in the general specification (5), which allows more

flexibility for interest rate smoothing behavior. Accordingly, values of 0.375 and 0.125 are

chosen for the prior means of the impact coefficients    rp and  ry . These settings are derived

by taking Taylor's original values 1.5 and 0.5 and multiplying each by 0.25, thereby assuming

that one-quarter of the gap between the actual funds rate and its long-run target gets closed

each period.

        In contrast to Baumeister and Hamilton (2018), the prior distributions for all these

impact coefficients are not truncated at zero; this choice reflects a willingness to consider the

possibility that the posterior distributions assign non-negligible weight to negative values for

one or more of the structural parameters, which would then be interpreted as evidence against

the theory. Baumeister and Hamilton's (2018) specification also differs from the one used here

by allowing for separate impact coefficients on the nominal interest rate and inflation in the

aggregate demand equation (4); the hard restriction that these parameters are equal in

absolute value and opposite in sign is imposed here in order to emphasize the New Keynesian

model's implication that the effects of monetary policy on output are transmitted through the

effects of policy on the real interest rate.

        After calibrating these Student t priors for the elements of A , the analysis continues by

forming priors first for the diagonal elements of the covariance matrix D for the structural

shocks and then for the coefficients in the intercept and autoregressive coefficients in (1) by

factoring the overall prior as



                                                 13
                          p( A, D, µ , B1 , B2 ,..., Bq ) = p( A) p( D ) p( µ , B1 , B2 ,..., Bq | D ).

Specifically, the reciprocals of the three diagonal elements dii , i = 1,2,3 , of D are assigned


independent Gamma prior distributions with parameters                         i and  i such that  i /  i

represents its prior mean and            i /  i2 its prior variance. Setting  i = 2 for i = 1,2,3 can be

interpreted as placing a weight on these priors equal to that provided by 2 i = 4 observations


of data. The settings for each           i , i = 1,2,3 are then obtained by fitting univariate fourth-order

autoregressions to each of the three series, computing the covariance matrix

                                                                 T
                                                      S = T -1  et et  ,                                       (7)
                                                                t =1


where et denotes the 3x1 vector of residuals from these univariate models, and assigning to                    i

a value equal to      i times the corresponding diagonal element of ASA , where A is the matrix

formed by substituting into (2) the prior mean value for each of the unknown elements of A .

          Finally, conditional on D , normal priors for the autoregressive parameters in the

matrices B j ,     j = 1,2,..., q , are calibrated based on modifications to Litterman's (1986)

"Minnesota" prior introduced by Sims and Zha (1998) and Baumeister and Hamilton (2018).

With reference to the parameters of the structural model (1), this involves setting the prior

mean of each element of the matrix B1 equal to a scalar                        times the corresponding element of


the matrix     A   defined above and the prior mean of each element of the matrices B j ,

   j = 2,3,..., q , equal to zero.   With    = 1 , this specification would imply random walk behavior in

each variable according to the reduced form (6), consistent with Litterman's (1986) original

specification; the alternative setting           = 0.75     suggested by Baumeister and Hamilton (2018)

and adopted here as well reflects the fact that variables included in the VAR ­ inflation, the




                                                              14
output gap, and the federal funds rate ­ more likely follow persistent, but stationary, first-order

autoregressive processes.

         The prior covariance matrix for the elements of B1 , B2 ,..., Bq considered jointly is


diagonal, with variance of the coefficient on lag                 j = 1,2,..., q   for variable     h = 1,2,3    in equation

i = 1,2,3 given by

                                                           02 12 dii
                                                                        ,
                                                            j 2 2 shh

where shh denotes the appropriate diagonal element of the covariance matrix S from (7). The

three elements of the intercept vector             µ are assigned independent normal priors, each with

mean zero and variance          02 32 . Thus, as in Sims and Zha (1998), the hyperparameter 0

governs the overall weight on the Minnesota-style prior,                     1 determines the weight on the belief

that the reduced-form (6) describes first-order autoregressive behavior for each variable,                                 2

controls how the tightness of the prior increases on autoregressive coefficients for longer lags,

and   3 applies specifically to the tightness of the prior on the intercept terms. Following

Baumeister and Hamilton (2015), these hyperparameters are calibrated as                                 0 = 0.2 ,

1 = 2 = 1 , and 3 = 100 after setting the lag length truncation parameter at q = 4 .

         Starting from these priors, the Metropolis-within-Gibbs sampling algorithm outlined by

Baumeister and Hamilton (2015, p.1989) is used to draw from the posterior, factored as

           p( A, D, µ , B1 , B2 , B3 , B4 ) = p( A | X 1:T ) p( D | A, X 1:T ) p( µ , B1 , B2 , B3 , B4 | A, D, X 1:T ),

where X 1:T denotes the sample of data on the three elements of xt , t = 1,2,..., T . Draws for the

reciprocals of the volatility parameters in D and the intercept and autoregressive parameters

in   µ and B j , j = 1,2,3,4 , are taken directly from their conditional Gamma and Normal

posterior distributions, whereas a random-walk Metropolis-Hastings step is required to



                                                               15
generate draws from the posterior for the elements of A .13 After discarding the first one

million draws to allow for burn in, the next one million draws are used to produce the results

described below. Convergence and adequate mixing of this Markov Chain Monte Carlo

procedure is confirmed, informally, by checking that the results do not change when the

algorithm is initialized from different randomly chosen starting points and, more formally, by

monitoring the convergence diagnostic and relative numerical efficiency statistics described by

Geweke (1992).

       Unlike the standard method of identifying structural disturbances from a VAR through

a Cholesky factorization of the covariance matrix of its reduced-form shocks, the Bayesian

approach to estimation taken here does not automatically produce time series for the fitted

structural disturbances that are completely uncorrelated. An informal test of the restriction,

imposed during estimation, that the covariance matrix D of the structural shocks is diagonal

can be performed by computing the correlations between the fitted values of those shocks to

confirm that they are small. In fact, median estimates of these correlations are all smaller than

0.10 in absolute value.

       Table 1 summarizes the posterior distributions for the four coefficients in A by

reporting medians together with 16 and 84th percentiles; the graphs in the first column of

figure 1, meanwhile, compare in more detail the posterior density for each parameter, shown

with blue bars, to the prior density, traced out with red lines. But while the graphs in figure 1

focus on results when the model is estimated using the full sample of data running from

1967:1 through 2017:4, the table provides more detail in another way by reporting results

when the model is re-estimated over three subsamples corresponding to different episodes of

United States economic and monetary history. The "pre-1984" subsample, running from

1967:1 through 1983:4, spans the period of the Great Inflation and "stop-go" monetary policy

through the end of the Volcker disinflation. Meanwhile, the "post-1984" subsample, running

from 1984:1 through 2007:4, focuses on the Great Moderation. Finally, the "post-2000"

13 The tuning parameter  = 1 for this Metropolis step is chosen here, again following

Baumeister and Hamilton (2015), to target a 30 percent acceptance rate.

                                               16
subsample, from 2000:1 through 2017:4, covers the period running up to, including, and since

the financial crisis and Great Recession of 2007-2009.

       For the full sample and across all subsamples, the top rows of table 1 and figure 1 show

the posterior distribution of the Phillips Curve parameter    py shifting noticeably to the left and

tightening around a smaller median, relative to the prior. These smaller values for      py

correspond to longer intervals between individual price adjustments in the Calvo (1983) model

and, hence, additional price rigidity in the aggregate. For the post-1984 subsample, in fact, the

posterior distribution places heavy weight on negative values for this coefficient, suggesting

that this variant of the Phillips Curve struggles to explain the dynamics linking inflation and

the output gap during the Great Moderation. Although the posterior median values of the

parameter    yr measuring the real interest elasticity of aggregate demand also fall below the

prior mean, they remain positive and sizeable across all sample periods.

       In general, posterior estimates of the response coefficient    rp on inflation in the

monetary policy rule decrease, while estimates of the response coefficients     ry to the output

gap increase, compared to the corresponding priors. The estimated strength of the policy

response to inflation relative to output increases, however, moving from the pre-1984 to the

post-1984 subsample, consistent with the findings of Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000). The

policy emphasis shifts strongly back towards output in the most recent, post-2000 subsample,

confirming the view that the Federal Reserve has been unusually aggressive in its efforts to

promote the recovery from each of the past two recessions in 2001 and 2007-2009.14 Table 2

displays similar patterns in the long-run policy coefficients, computed by summing the values

of parameters on the current and lagged values of each variable on the right-hand side of the

policy rule (5). For the full sample and all subsamples, the posterior means for these long-run

14Belongia and Ireland (2016b) characterize this recent shift towards output stabilization in
more detail, using a three-variable Bayesian VAR that allows the parameters of the identified
policy rule to drift continuously over time. Similarly, Reifschneider (2016) documents a
stronger responsiveness of the Fed's interest rate target to movements in unemployment over
the period from 2000 through 2008.

                                               17
coefficients are consistent with a large degree of interest rate smoothing and, except for the

post-1984 subsample that encompasses the Great Moderation, a stronger policy response to

the output gap than inflation.

        Graphs in the left-hand columns of figures 2 through 4 plot impulse responses to the

aggregate supply, aggregate demand, and monetary policy shocks that appear in (3)-(5).

Although the methods used here, which draw on prior information to help estimate the

parameters of the aggregate supply, aggregate demand, and monetary policy equations directly,

were proposed by Baumeister and Hamilton (2015) as alternatives to those that constrain the

model's impulse responses using "sign restrictions," the impulse responses in the graphs

generally display their expected patterns. In particular, the aggregate supply disturbance

raises inflation and (with a lag) lowers the output gap, while calling forth a monetary policy

tightening in the form of higher nominal interest rates. The aggregate demand shock increases

inflation, the output gap, and the interest rate, while monetary policy shocks associate interest

rate increases with reductions in inflation and output. The initial increase in the output gap

that follows an aggregate supply shock in figure 2 and the small initial increase in inflation

that follows a contractionary monetary policy shock in figure 4 appear as the only puzzles in

these results, but each is followed by a more persistent movement in the relevant variable that

is consistent with the predictions of the theory.

        In general, therefore, this three-variable model appears successful in capturing the New

Keynesian view of the business cycle, with parameter estimates and impulse responses that

have the expected magnitudes and signs. Like the New Keynesian model itself, however, this

three-variable model omits any consideration of the role that changes in nominal and real

money growth may play in shaping how monetary policy affects the economy. Therefore, the

results so far leave open the possibility that interactions between money supply and demand,

unseen by the New Keynesian model with its deliberate exclusion of them, may also be

affecting the dynamics of the United States economy. The analysis now turns to exploring this

possibility.




                                                18
4. A Classical Alternative

       To detect evidence that classical channels of monetary transmission operate alongside

the New Keynesian mechanisms highlighted above, the set of variables included in the VAR is

enlarged to include two more: the year-over-year growth rate mt of the Divisia M2 monetary


aggregate and the associated monetary user cost index ut . Use of a Divisia monetary

aggregate, in place of one of the Federal Reserve's official simple-sum measures, offers two

distinct advantages. First, as emphasized by Barnett (1980, 2012), Divisia monetary

aggregates use economic aggregation theory to measure more accurately the flow of monetary

services generated in an economy in which agents have the ability and willingness to substitute

between various liquid assets paying interest at different rates.15 Divisia aggregates do this by

weighting individual components based on their expenditure shares, which depend in turn on

their user costs, defined in terms of the spread between a market rate of interest on an illiquid

asset and the lower rate of interest that consumers and non-financial firms will accept to

obtain the liquidity services provided by each monetary asset. Second, as discussed originally

by Barnett (1978) and more recently by Belongia (2006) and Belongia and Ireland (2015b,

2016a, 2018, 2019), the process of Divisia quantity aggregation yields, in the form of the price

dual, a corresponding aggregate of the user costs of the individual monetary assets. Because

this user-cost dual depends not on the level of market rates alone but rather on the spread

between market rates and the "own rates" paid by monetary assets, it represents the own-price

of money and, as such, is a variable that is likely to influence money demand but not money

supply. Therefore, data on this variable can be put to good use in distinguishing movements in





15Consistent with Barnett's (1980, 2012) theory, empirical studies, including Belongia (1996),
Hendrickson (2014), and Belongia and Ireland (2015b, 2016a), find evidence of statistical links
between Divisia monetary aggregates and key macroeconomic variables including inflation and
output that are noticeably stronger than those between corresponding simple-sum measures
and the same macroeconomic indicators.


                                               19
money growth that reflect shocks to monetary policy from movements in money growth that

have worked, instead, to accommodate shifts in money demand.16

       Barnett, Liu, Mattson, and van den Noort (2013) describe in more detail the procedures

behind the construction of the series for the Divisia M2 quantity and user-cost indices

employed here, which are available through the Center for Financial Stability's website. With

these series included, the data vector expands to become

                                                                         
                                     xt =  pt      yt    rt     mt   ut  .
                                                                        

The descriptions of the structural VAR and its reduced form shown previously in (1) and (6)

remain unchanged after all vectors and matrices are enlarged to accommodate the presence of

the two additional variables. The autoregressive dynamics in (1) remain unconstrained, but

the matrix of impact coefficients is again restricted to give the model its structural

interpretation:

                                   1             - py          0      0         0    
                                                                                     
                                ym -  yr            1          yr    - ym       0    
                                                                                     
                          A =  - rp              - ry          1     - rm       0    .         (8)
                                                                                     
                                  -1             - my          0      1         mu   
                                                                                     
                                  um                0         - ur   - um       1    
                                                                                     

       In this expanded system, the first equation implied by (1) and (8) retains the same form

shown in (3), of a Phillips Curve relationship drawing a contemporaneous link between

inflation and the output gap. The second equation, which represents an augmented version of

the New Keynesian aggregate demand curve, can be written as

                                                                          q
                     yt = - yr ( rt - pt ) +  ym ( mt - pt ) + µ (2) +  B(2)
                                                                         j
                                                                             xt - j +  tad ,   (9)
                                                                        j =1




16Belongia and Ireland (2006) show how the Divisia monetary user cost variable can be used,
as well, to directly measure the inflation-tax effects that allow monetary policy shocks to be
non-neutral even in models such as Cooley and Hansen's (1989) that provide a role for money
as a medium of exchange while assuming that nominal goods prices and wages remain
perfectly flexible.

                                                        20
where, here and below as before,      µ ( i ) and B(j i ) refer to the elements from row i = 1,2,...,5 of the

vector   µ and the matrices B j , j = 1,2,..., q . As discussed in Meltzer (2001), Ireland (2004),

and Nelson (2008), this augmented aggregate demand curve incorporates the classical view

that changes in nominal money growth, which translate into changes in the growth rate of real

money balances over the interval during which nominal prices are slow to adjust, play a direct

role in transmitting monetary policy actions to the real economy.

         Likewise, the third equation, written as

                                                                   q
                          rt =  rp pt +  ry yt +  rm mt + µ (3) +  B(3)
                                                                    j
                                                                        xt - j +  tmp ,                  (10)
                                                                   j =1


can be interpreted as an expanded Taylor (1993) Rule that includes the contemporaneous rate

of nominal money growth, as well as inflation and the output gap, on the short list of variables

to which the Federal Reserve is assumed to respond in setting its target for the federal funds

rate.17 Alternatively, this monetary policy rule can be seen as taking the same general form as

those used by Sims (1986), Leeper and Roush (2003), Leeper and Zha (2003), Sims and Zha

(2006), Belongia and Ireland (2015b, 2016a, 2018), and Keating, Kelly, Smith, and Valcarcel

(2019) to identify, within structural vector autoregressions, monetary policy shocks based on

the contemporaneous effects those policy disturbances are allowed to have on both the federal

funds rate and the rate of money growth. According to this interpretation, (10) associates a

contractionary monetary policy shock ­ that is, a positive realization of              tmp ­ with some

combination of higher short-term interest rates and slower money growth, depending on the

value of    rm .

         The fourth and fifth equations implied by (1) and (8) are entirely new and help

distinguish movements in money growth triggered by monetary policy shocks from those

reflecting shifts in the demand for monetary services by the non-bank public and in the



17Ireland (2001) estimates an equation of this form within a dynamic, stochastic, New
Keynesian model. Qureshi (2017) estimates the relationship using single equation methods.

                                                      21
behavior of the private banks that create deposits that contribute to broad measures of the

money supply. The fourth equation takes the form of a money demand relationship,

                                                                      q
                         mt - pt =  my yt -  muut + µ    (4)
                                                                   +  B(4)
                                                                       j
                                                                           xt - j +  tmd ,      (11)
                                                                      j =1


linking the growth rate of real money balances to the output gap as a scale variable and the

user cost as an opportunity cost variable. As noted by Belongia (2006), besides their ability to

track accurately movements in the non-bank public's demand for monetary services, Divisia

monetary aggregates offer the additional advantage of having, in their corresponding price dual

ut , a theoretically-coherent measure of the user cost of real monetary services. By contrast,

more conventional money demand specifications estimated for simple-sum aggregates typically

use the short-term nominal interest rate to measure the opportunity cost of money, despite the

fact that nominal interest rates reflect more closely the price of a money substitute (bonds)

than the price of the liquidity services yielded by monetary assets themselves. Drawing on this

distinction, (10) and (11) work to disentangle shocks to money supply from those to money

demand in two ways. The first imposes the Quantity Theory's assumption that "money supply"

refers to changes in the nominal quantity of money and "money demand" to changes in the real

quantity of money. The second draws a sharper distinction between the role of the nominal

interest rate as a variable that belongs only in the money supply function and the user cost of

money as a variable that belongs only in the money demand equation.

       Finally, the fifth equation implied by (1) and (8),

                                                                        q
                         ut =  ur rt +  um ( mt - pt ) + µ   (5)
                                                                   +  B(5)
                                                                       j
                                                                           xt - j +  tms ,      (12)
                                                                       j =1


summarizes the behavior of the "monetary system" through which private banks create

deposits that contribute to the broad money supply. Belongia and Ireland (2014) derive a

theoretical relationship between the federal funds rate and the user cost of Divisia money by

incorporating a competitive banking system into a dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium

New Keynesian model. In this extended model, banks hold reserves against the deposits they



                                                    22
issue to consumers. When the federal funds rate rises, increasing the opportunity cost of

holding reserves, banks pass their higher costs along to consumers by lowering the interest

rate paid on deposits. Through this channel, an increase in the federal funds rate rt generates


a simultaneous increase in the user cost of money ut as captured by the parameter       ur in (12).

The additional parameter    mu included here in (12) also allows ut to rise as well in response to

an increase the volume of real money balances created, as it would if banks' technology for

creating deposits exhibits decreasing returns to scale.

       Thus, in the expanded model, the five structural disturbances

                                                                   
                               t =  t t
                                    as ad
                                                  tmp  tmd    tms 
                                                                  

include the shock    tmd to money demand as well as the shock  tms to the monetary system that

makes it more or less costly for banks to create deposits that, together with currency, provide

monetary services to the non-bank public. Belongia and Ireland (2015b, 2016a, 2018) use

frequentist statistical methods to identify the last three shocks, to monetary policy, money

demand, and the monetary system, imposing the same structure shown here in (10)-(12) to

help distinguish between money supply and money demand. The vector autoregressions in

those previous studies were constrained further by hard zero restrictions on each of the non-

diagonal elements of the first two rows of the matrix A shown in (8), except for the single

element in the first column of the second row. These additional restrictions work to identify

the model, in the frequentist sense, by imposing the stronger timing assumption that shocks to

monetary policy, money demand, and the monetary system affect the aggregate price level and

output only after a one-quarter lag. The Bayesian methods employed here allow these

restrictions to be relaxed, while also distinguishing further between shocks to aggregate supply

and aggregate demand via the specifications shown in (3) and (9). In addition, through the

more flexible aggregate demand relation in (9), the Bayesian framework used here sheds light

on the relative importance of the real interest rate versus real money balances in transmitting



                                                23
monetary shocks to aggregate output and then, through the Philips Curve (3), to inflation as

well, something that the previous studies with more restrictive assumptions were unable to do.

        Student t prior distributions for the Phillips Curve parameter    py , the aggregate

demand elasticity    yr , and the monetary policy response coefficients  rp and  ry are specified

and calibrated exactly as before for the smaller New Keynesian model. Meanwhile, the new

parameters that appear in the expanded aggregate demand relationship (9) and monetary

policy rule (10) but not in their simpler New Keynesian counterparts (4) and (5) also are

assigned Student t priors with two degrees of freedom and scale parameters equal to 0.3.

However, both    ym , measuring the direct impact of changes in real money balances on

aggregate demand in (9) and      rm , measuring the importance of changes in nominal money

growth within the monetary policy rule (10), are assumed to have zero prior mean. These prior

distributions are thereby centered so as to remain in alignment with the New Keynesian view

that changes in real and nominal money play no role in shaping the dynamics of inflation, the

output gap, and the short-term interest rate. But, at the same time, their large spread and fat

tails leave ample opportunity for the data to either sharpen that New Keynesian perspective or

shift it in favor of a more "classical" alternative.

        Implementing this Bayesian exercise also requires the specification and calibration of

prior distributions for the entirely new parameters that enter into the money demand and

monetary system relationships (11) and (12). Belongia and Ireland (2019) specify cointegrating

money demand equations for the Divisia M2 quantity aggregate, imposing a unitary income

elasticity and estimating a semi-elasticity of 3.5 with respect to the Divisia M2 user cost.

Interpreting these as long-run elasticities, each of these values is scaled by the factor 0.25 to

fix prior means of 0.25 for    my and 0.875 for  mu in (11), thereby allowing for partial

adjustment for real money demand. For the additional parameters in the monetary system

equation (12), about which less is known, a prior mean of 3 for     ur is set based on the simple



                                                   24
observation that, in the raw data, fluctuations in the Divisia M2 user cost appear to be about

three times as large as those in the federal funds rate. And a prior mean of 0 for     um is

consistent with the simpler specification implied by the theoretical model in Belongia and

Ireland (2014). All the Student t priors for these extra parameters have two degrees of freedom,

but are assigned scale parameters equal to 10 to account for the larger amount of uncertainty

that surrounds their hypothesized values. Priors for the elements of D ,     µ , and B j ,

   j = 1,2,3,4 , meanwhile, are set and calibrated exactly as before for the three-variable New

Keynesian specification, with the lag truncation parameter again set at     q = 4.

         The same procedure is used to generate draws from the posterior, except that a setting

of    = 0.6 for the tuning parameter is now required to target an acceptance rate of 30 percent

for the Metropolis step used to generate draws for the elements of A . And, also as before,

evidence of convergence and adequate mixing of the Markov Chain is found by checking for

consistent results across different randomly selected starting points and by computing the

diagnostic statistics proposed by Geweke (1992). Finally, the success of the Bayesian

estimation method in uncovering mutually uncorrelated structural disturbances can be

assessed by examining the correlations between the fitted values of those shocks. Once again,

median estimates of these correlations are typically smaller than 0.10 and never exceed 0.16 in

absolute value.

         Thus, this empirical exercise is designed to mimic the thought pattern of an observer of

the United States economy who, while satisfied with the description that the benchmark New

Keynesian model provides, stands willing to be persuaded that classical channels of monetary

transmission are operative as well. The extent to which this persuasion occurs now hinges on

the extent to which the posterior distributions shift in their locations away from the New

Keynesian priors. And whatever dispersion may be left in the posterior distributions reflects

uncertainty that remains, even after the data are analyzed carefully.




                                                  25
       Table 3 and the second and third columns of figure 1 help communicate the results of

this thought experiment. Table 3 retains the format of table 1, summarizing posterior

distributions for the ten elements of the expanded matrix A from (8) by reporting medians

together with 16 and 84th percentiles for the full sample period and the same three

subsamples. Figure 1 again focuses on the full sample alone, but provides a more detailed

comparison of the posterior (blue bars) and prior (red lines) densities for each coefficient.

       Focusing first on the aggregate demand relationship, with the introduction of real

balances into the expanded equation (9), the posterior distribution for the interest rate

elasticity parameter again shifts to the left, placing additional weight on smaller values of    yr ,

while the posterior for the new coefficient on real balances shifts to the right, favoring positive

values of    ym . These results are strongest when the model is estimated with data running

back to 1967:1, but even for the post-1984 and post-2000 subsamples, the posterior

distributions place heavy weight on positive values of    ym . These results serve, therefore, as a

first indication that classical channels of monetary transmission, working through changes in

the money stock on aggregate demand, have been and continue to be important, despite their

absence from the New Keynesian model.

       Table 3 and figure 1 show, as well, that the data prefer a more classical version of the

monetary policy rule (10), in which money growth enters with a sizeable median coefficient of

 rm = 1.2 when estimated with the full sample of data and remains important relative to

inflation and output growth across all subsamples. This result is consistent with previous

findings by Ireland (2001) and Qureshi (2017) that point towards a continued role for money in

estimated Taylor Rules, even in samples covering the Great Moderation. Table 4 expands on

these results by reporting the sums of the coefficients on contemporaneous and lagged values

of each of the five variables entering into the policy rule (10). These long-run response

parameters, like those from table 2, suggest that Federal Reserve policy has always been

characterized by a substantial degree of interest rate smoothing. And in table 4, just as in



                                                 26
table 2, the post-1984 period covering the Great Moderation appears as the only episode during

which the funds rate responded more strongly to inflation than to the output gap. In table 4,

however, Divisia money growth enters the policy rule in the full sample and across all

subsamples. Moreover, while the median long-run coefficient on money growth declines,

moving from the pre-1984 to the post-1984 subsamples, it rises again when estimated over the

most recent, post-2000 subsample. Therefore, the results here, like those in Belongia and

Ireland (2018), suggest that movements in money growth help capture some of the effects that

the Fed's unconventional policy actions, especially its large-scale asset purchases, had on the

economy while the federal funds rate was constrained by the zero lower bound.

       For the model's remaining parameters, table 3 and figure 1 show that the Phillips Curve

slope coefficient    py generally appears larger when the VAR is expanded to include the

additional monetary variables. Thus, by providing a more complete description of aggregate

demand and monetary policy, the classical specification also works to link inflation more

closely to the output gap through the aggregate supply relation. Table 3 and figure 1 also

indicate that while all of the posterior distributions tighten considerably around median values

of the expected sign, considerable uncertainty surrounds the coefficients appearing in the

money demand curve (11) and the monetary system equation (12).

       The right-hand column of figure 2, meanwhile, reveals that the incorporation of

monetary variables into the expanded VAR "fixes" the positive response in the output gap that

follows an adverse supply shock shown on the left for the smaller-scale, New Keynesian

specification. Like the larger estimate of the Phillips Curve slope coefficient, this result

suggests that, by helping to isolate disturbances to aggregate demand and monetary policy, the

extra information in Divisia money growth also sharpens the model's inferences about

aggregate supply. Meanwhile, in the second column of figure 3, all impulse responses to the

expanded model's aggregate demand shock take their expected signs, with inflation, the output

gap, and the nominal interest rate rising together after an expansionary disturbance. Real

money balances, meanwhile, decline persistently following the shock, consistent with the



                                                 27
positive coefficients that appear on real balances in the estimated aggregate demand

relationship (9). This persistent decline in real balances is, in fact, the main feature that

distinguishes the effects of aggregate demand disturbances, shown in figure 3, from those of

monetary policy shocks, shown in figure 4. The latter set of graphs implies that an

expansionary monetary policy shock that raises inflation and the output gap works, instead, to

increase the level of real balances.

       Figure 4, in fact, provides the most striking evidence for the presence of distinctive,

classical channels of monetary transmission not suggested by contemporary macroeconomic

models. In the top two panels from the right-hand column, a contractionary monetary policy

shock is followed consistently by persistent declines in both inflation and the output gap; here,

as in Leeper and Roush (2003), the addition of a monetary aggregate to the information set also

fixes the counterintuitive increase in the inflation rate that immediately follows the monetary

shock in the smaller, New Keynesian model that uses interest rates alone. The view provided

by figure 4 is, therefore, quite different from that provided by a real business cycle, or purely

"neoclassical," perspective. On the other hand, as shown vividly the in the figure's third and

fourth rows, a monetary tightening gets signaled in the expanded model as a persistent decline

in the rate of nominal money growth. Although the fall in the nominal interest rate seems easy

to explain. with reference to the Fisher (1930) effect, as a reflection of the declines in money

growth and inflation that also follow this contractionary shock, it works against popular

intuition, based partly on the New Keynesian view, that associates lower nominal interest rates

with a monetary policy easing instead.

       To what extent do these results corroborate Irving Fisher's (1923, 1925) description of

the "so-called business cycle" as a product of the "dance of the dollar?" Figure 5 answers this

question by using the classical specification to break historical movements in each variable

over the full sample period down into components attributable to each of the model's five

structural disturbances, placing posterior 16 and 84th percentile bands around the median

estimates using the same methods outlined by Baumeister and Hamilton (2018). The graphs

in column one show that, according to the estimated model, aggregate supply shocks have


                                                28
contributed most importantly to high-frequency movements in inflation. Those in column two,

meanwhile, assign an important role to aggregate demand disturbances, not only in driving

business cycle fluctuations in output and inflation, but also to movements in interest rates and

money growth as monetary policy has adjusted systematically to these shocks.

       Figure 5 also reveals, however, that monetary policy disturbances have contributed

importantly to historical volatility in inflation and the output gap. The top panel in the figure's

third column indicates that from the late 1970s through the mid 1990s, monetary policy

shocks generated a cumulative reduction in the inflation rate of nearly four percentage points.

The second panel in the same column, meanwhile, attributes to monetary policy shocks

significant declines in output during the Volcker disinflation of the early 1980s and the Great

Recession of 2007-2009.18 Figure 6 compares the five-variable model's implications along

these lines to the corresponding implications of the benchmark, three-variable New Keynesian

specification, to highlight further the consequences of incorporating money into the

information set. The classical estimates show much larger effects of monetary policy shocks in

explaining historical movements, especially in inflation but for the output gap as well. Again,

these results point to the workings of additional channels of monetary transmission, captured

by movements in the money stock above and beyond movements in interest rates.



5. Conclusion

       Though based on New Keynesian priors, the expanded VAR estimated here provides a

posterior view of monetary policy and its effects on the economy that is highly "classical"

instead. Within this estimated model, changes in real money balances play a role, alongside

movements in real interest rates, in transmitting the effects of monetary policy to aggregate

output over the period during which nominal rigidities prevent prices from adjusting fully.

Likewise, changes in nominal money growth signal, much more clearly than changes in

18 Figure 5 also reveals that, according to the estimated classical specification, unusually large

money demand shocks hit the economy during the financial crisis, presumably reflecting flight-
to-quality dynamics. This result reinforces the message from Belongia and Ireland (2018), that
the Fed might have been able to provide additional monetary stimulus during and after the
crisis by targeting even faster growth rates for the monetary aggregates.

                                                29
nominal interest rates, whether monetary policy is expansionary or contractionary. The

estimated model attributes sizable movements in inflation and the output gap to monetary

policy disturbances, particularly during the disinflationary recessions of the early 1980s and

the Great Recession of 2007-2009.

          All of these results appear consistent with ideas expressed long ago by Fisher (1923,

1925, 1926) and Working (1923, 1926), that Quantity Theoretic interactions between money

supply and money demand help shape the effects that Federal Reserve policy has on both

inflation and output. None of these results, however, is easily reconciled with more recent

theories of aggregate fluctuations. Real business cycle models, representing the latest stage in

the evolution of "neoclassical" thought, cannot explain the interactions between nominal and

real variables that appear to be as important today as they were in Fisher's time. New

Keynesian models based on nominal price and wage rigidities do a better job, of course, at

capturing the short-run relationships between output and inflation first noted by Fisher (1926)

and later incorporated into the Phillips Curve.19 On the other hand, the Bayesian priors that

are updated here suggest strongly that, by focusing entirely on interest rates and excluding

measures of money, the strict New Keynesian model provides an overly narrow view of

channels through which monetary policy affects the economy.

          These results call out for a new class of models, or at least substantial extensions of

existing ones, that provide a richer and more realistic description of the monetary business

cycle. They call out, as well, for a reconsideration of the role that measures of money play in

the formation of Federal Reserve policy. Bernanke (2006) discusses the historical and

intellectual trends that caused the Fed to gradually deemphasize the monetary aggregates in

its policymaking process, beginning in the early 1980s. The results presented here and in

Keating, Kelly, Smith, and Valcarcel (2019), however, reveal that valuable information is

contained in Divisia monetary aggregates, both about monetary policy and its effects on the

economy, even in data samples including the 1980s and running through the present.

Perhaps, after a long hiatus, research focusing the classical channels of transmission

19   See Laidler (1978, 1990) and Taylor (2017) for more on this point.

                                                  30
discussed by Fisher and Working can contribute importantly to the design of effective monetary

policy strategies.



References

       Barnett, William A. "The User Cost of Money." Economics Letters 1 (Issue 2, 1978): 145-

149.

       Barnett, William A. "Economic Monetary Aggregates: An Application of Index Number

and Aggregation Theory." Journal of Econometrics 14 (September 1980): 11-48.

       Barnett, William A. Getting It Wrong: How Faulty Monetary Statistics Undermine the Fed,

the Financial System, and the Economy. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2012.

       Barnett, William A., Jia Liu, Ryan Mattson, and Jeff van den Noort. "The New CFS

Divisia Monetary Aggregates: Design, Construction, and Data Sources." Open Economies

Review 24 (February 2013): 101-124.

       Baumeister, Christiane and James D. Hamilton. "Sign Restrictions, Structural Vector

Autoregressions, and Useful Prior Information." Econometrica 83 (September 2015): 1963-1999.

       Baumeister, Christiane and James D. Hamilton. "Inference in Structural Vector

Autoregressions When the Identifying Assumptions are Not Fully Believed: Re-evaluating the

Role of Monetary Policy in Economic Fluctuations." Journal of Monetary Economics 100

(December 2018): 48-65.

       Belongia, Michael T. "Measurement Matters: Recent Results in Monetary Economics

Reexamined." Journal of Political Economy 104 (October 1996): 1065-1083.

       Belongia, Michael T. "The Neglected Price Dual of Monetary Quantity Aggregates." In

Money, Measurement and Computation, Michael T. Belongia and Jane M. Binner, Eds. New

York: Palgrave, 2006, pp.239-253.

       Belongia, Michael T. and Peter N. Ireland. "The Own-Price of Money and the Channels of

Monetary Transmission." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38 (March 2006): 429-445.

       Belongia, Michael T. and Peter N. Ireland. "The Barnett Critique After Three Decades: A

New Keynesian Analysis." Journal of Econometrics 183 (November 2014): 5-21


                                              31
       Belongia, Michael T. and Peter N. Ireland. "A `Working' Solution to the Question of

Nominal GDP Targeting." Macroeconomic Dynamics 19 (April 2015a): 508-534.

       Belongia, Michael T. and Peter N. Ireland. "Interest Rates and Money in the

Measurement of Monetary Policy." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 33 (April 2015b):

255-269.

       Belongia, Michael T. and Peter N. Ireland. "Money and Output: Friedman and Schwartz

Revisited." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 48 (September 2016a): 1223-1266.

       Belongia, Michael T. and Peter N. Ireland. "The Evolution of U.S. Monetary Policy: 2000­

2007." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 73 (December 2016b): 78-93.

       Belongia, Michael T. and Peter N. Ireland. "Circumventing the Zero Lower Bound with

Monetary Policy Rules Based on Money." Journal of Macroeconomics 54 (December 2017): 42-

58.

       Belongia, Michael T. and Peter N. Ireland. "Targeting Constant Money Growth at the

Zero Lower Bound." International Journal of Central Banking 14 (March 2018): 159-204.

       Belongia, Michael T. and Peter N. Ireland. "The Demand for Divisia Money: Theory and

Evidence." Journal of Macroeconomics 61 (Forthcoming, September 2019).

       Bernanke, Ben S. "Monetary Aggregates and Monetary Policy at the Federal Reserve: A

Historical Perspective." Speech given at the Fourth ECB Central Banking Conference.

Frankfurt: 10 November 2006.

       Calvo, Guillermo A. "Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework." Journal of

Monetary Economics 12 (September 1983): 383-398.

       Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler. "Monetary Policy Rules and

Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory." Quarterly Journal of Economics 115

(February 2000): 147-180.

       Cooley, Thomas F. and Gary D. Hansen. "The Inflation Tax in a Real Business Cycle

Model." American Economic Review 79 (September 1989): 733-748.

       Dimand, Robert W. "The Dance of the Dollar: Irving Fisher's Monetary Theory of

Economic Fluctuations." History of Economics Review 20 (Summer 1993): 161-172.


                                              32
       Endres, A.M. and Grant A. Fleming. "The Early Development of Monetary Policy Rules:

The View from Geneva in the 1920s." Journal of Monetary Economics 42 (July 1998): 375-386.

       Fisher, Irving. The Purchasing Power of Money: Its Determination and Relation to Credit,

Interest, and Crises. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1911.

       Fisher, Irving. "`The Equation of Exchange' for 1911, and Forecast." American Economic

Review 2 (June 1912): 302-319.

       Fisher, Irving. "A Compensated Dollar." Quarterly Journal of Economics 27 (February

1913): 213-235.

       Fisher, Irving. Stabilizing the Dollar: A Plan To Stabilize the General Price Level Without

Fixing Individual Prices. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1920.

       Fisher, Irving. "The Business Cycle Largely a `Dance of the Dollar.'" Journal of the

American Statistical Association 18 (December 1923): 1024-1028.

       Fisher, Irving. "Our Unstable Dollar and the So-Called Business Cycle." Journal of the

American Statistical Association 20 (June 1925): 179-202.

       Fisher, Irving. "A Statistical Relation between Unemployment and Price Changes."

International Labour Review 13 (June 1926): 785-792.

       Fisher, Irving. The Theory of Interest: As Determined by Impatience To Spend Income and

Opportunity to Invest It. New York: The MacMillan Company, 1930.

       Fisher, Irving. "Changes in the Wholesale Price Index in Relation To Factory

Employment." Journal of the American Statistical Association 31 (September 1936): 496-502.

       Fisher, Irving. "I Discovered the Phillips Curve." Journal of Political Economy 81

(March/April 1973): 496-502.

       Geweke, John. "Evaluating the Accuracy of Sampling-Based Approaches to the

Calculation of Posterior Moments." In Bayesian Statistics 4: Proceedings of the Fourth Valencia

International Meeting, J.M. Bernardo, J.O. Berger, A.P. Dawid, and A.F.M. Smith, Eds. Oxford:

Clarendon Press, 1992, pp.169-193.




                                                33
       Gust, Christopher, Edward Herbst, David Lopez-Salido, and Matthew E. Smith. "The

Empirical Implications of the Interest-Rate Lower Bound." American Economic Review 107 (July

2017): 1971-2006.

       Hallman, Jeffrey J., Richard D. Porter, and David H. Small. "Is the Price Level Tied to

the M2 Monetary Aggregate in the Long Run?" American Economic Review 81 (September 1991):

841-858.

       Hawtrey, Ralph G. Good and Bad Trade: An Inquiry into the Causes of Trade

Fluctuations. London: Constable and Company, 1913.

       Hendrickson, Joshua R. "Redundancy or Mismeasurement? A Reappraisal of Money."

Macroeconomic Dynamics 18 (October 2014): 1437-1465.

       Humphrey, Thomas M. "Empirical Tests of the Quantity Theory of Money in the United

States, 1900-1930." History of Political Economy 5 (Fall 1973): 285-316.

       Humphrey, Thomas M. "The Choice of a Monetary Policy Framework: Lessons from the

1920s." Cato Journal 21 (Fall 2001): 285-313.

       Ireland, Peter N. "Money's Role in the Monetary Business Cycle." Working Paper 8815.

Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2001.

       Ireland, Peter N. "Money's Role in the Monetary Business Cycle." Journal of Money,

Credit, and Banking 36 (December 2004): 969-983.

       Keating, John W., Logan J. Kelly, Andrew Lee Smith, and Victor J. Valcarcel. "A Model

of Monetary Policy Shocks for Financial Crises and Normal Conditions." Journal of Money,

Credit, and Banking 51 (February 2019): 227-259.

       Laidler, David. "The Influence of Money on Real Income and Inflation: A Simple Model

with Some Empirical Tests for the United States 1953-72." The Manchester School 41

(December 1973): 367-395.

       Laidler, David. "Money and Money Income: An Essay on the `Transmission

Mechanism.'" Journal of Monetary Economics 4 (April 1978): 151-191.

       Laidler, David. "The Legacy of the Monetarist Controversy." Federal Reserve Bank of St.

Louis Review 72 (March/April 1990): 49-64.


                                                34
       Laidler, David. The Golden Age of the Quantity Theory ­ The Development of Neoclassical

Monetary Economics: 1870-1914. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991.

       Laidler, David. "Variations on a Two Interest Rate Theme." In Money, Markets and

Method: Essays in Honour of Robert W. Clower. Peter Howitt, Elizabetta de Antoni, and Axel

Leijonhufvud, Eds. Northampton: Edward Elgar, 1999, pp.121-139.

       Laidler, David. "Professor Fisher and the Quantity Theory: A Significant Encounter."

European Journal of the History of Economic Thought 20 (April 2013): 174-205.

       Leeper, Eric M. and Jennifer E. Roush. "Putting `M' Back in Monetary Policy." Journal of

Money, Credit, and Banking 35 (December 2003): 1217-1256.

       Leeper, Eric M. and Tao Zha. "Modest Policy Interventions." Journal of Monetary

Economics 50 (November 2003): 1673-1700.

       Litterman, Robert B. "Forecasting With Bayesian Vector Autoregressions: Five Years of

Experience." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 4 (January 1986): 25-38.

       Loef, Hans-E. and Hans G. Monissen. "Monetary Policy and Monetary Reform: Irving

Fisher's Contributions to Monetary Macroeconomics." In The Economics of Irving Fisher:

Reviewing the Scientific Work of a Great Economist, Hans-E. Loef and Hans G. Monissen Eds.

Northampton: Edward Elgar, 1999, pp.81-108.

       Lubik, Thomas A. and Frank Schorfheide. "Testing for Indeterminacy: An Application to

U.S. Monetary Policy." American Economic Review 94 (March 2004): 190-217.

       Meltzer, Allan H. "The Transmission Process." In The Monetary Transmission Process:

Recent Developments and Lessons for Europe, Deutsche Bundesbank, Ed. New York: Palgrave,

2001, pp.112-130.

       Neiss, Katherine S. and Edward Nelson. "The Real-Interest-Rate Gap as an Inflation

Indicator." Macroeconomic Dynamics 7 (April 2003): 239-262.

       Nelson, Edward. "Direct Effects of Base Money on Aggregate Demand: Theory and

Evidence." Journal of Monetary Economics 49 (May 2002): 687-708.




                                              35
        Nelson, Edward. "Why Money Growth Determines Inflation in the Long Run: Answering

the Woodford Critique." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 40 (December 2008): 1791-

1814.

        Orphanides, Athanasios and Richard D. Porter. "P* Revisited: Money-Based Inflation

Forecasts with a Changing Equilibrium Velocity." Journal of Economics and Business 52

(January-April 2000): 87-100.

        Qureshi, Irfan. "The Role of Money in Federal Reserve Policy." Manuscript. Coventry:

University of Warwick, February 2017.

        Reifschneider, David. "Gauging the Ability of the FOMC to Respond to Future

Recessions." Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-068. Washington: Federal

Reserve Board, 2016.

        Simons, Henry C. "Rules versus Authorities in Monetary Policy." Journal of Political

Economy 44 (February 1936): 1-30.

        Sims, Chistopher A. "Are Forecasting Models Usable for Policy Analysis?" Federal

Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 10 (Winter 1986): 2-16.

        Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha. "Bayesian Methods for Dynamic Multivariate

Models." International Economic Review 39 (November 1998): 949-968.

        Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha. "Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary

Policy?" American Economic Review 96 (March 2006): 54-81.

        Taylor, John B. "Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice." Carnegie-Rochester

Conference Series on Public Policy 39 (December 1993): 195-214.

        Taylor, John B. "The Staying Power of Staggered Wage and Price Setting Models in

Macroeconomics." In Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 2B, John B. Taylor and Harald

Uhlig, Eds. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2017, pp.2009-2042.

        Tobin, James. "Irving Fisher." In The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, Volume

2, John Eatwell, Murray Milgate, and Peter Newman, Eds. London: Macmillan Press, 1987,

pp.369-376.




                                               36
       Woodford, Michael. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.

Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.

       Working, Holbrook. "Prices and the Quantity of Circulating Medium, 1890-1921."

Quarterly Journal of Economics 37 (February 1923): 228-256.

       Working, Holbrook. "Bank Deposits as a Forecaster of the General Wholesale Price

Level." Review of Economics and Statistics 8 (July 1926): 120-133.

       Wu, Jing Cynthia and Fan Dora Xia. "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of

Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 48

(March/April 2016): 253-291.




                                               37
Table 1. Impact Coefficients: Three-Variable New Keynesian Specification

                                                                          Posterior Percentiles
                                          Full                    Pre-1984                  Post-1984                 Post-2000
           Prior Percentiles         1967:1 ­ 2017:4           1967:1 ­ 1983:4           1984:1 ­ 2007:4           2000:1 ­ 2017:4
           50     16      84         50    16     84           50    16     84          50       16   84           50    16     84
py        0.50 0.10 0.90            0.06 -0.00 0.11           0.17 0.10 0.23           -0.08 -0.19 0.03           0.13 -0.02 0.27
yr        1.00 0.60 1.40            0.50 0.35 0.68            0.77 0.56 0.99           0.47     0.27 0.70         0.39 0.22 0.57
rp        0.38 -0.02 0.77           0.26 0.12 0.38            0.53 0.28 0.83           0.29     0.20 0.38         0.07 -0.02 0.16
ry        0.13 -0.27 0.52           0.85 0.69 1.03            1.22 0.98 1.50           0.43     0.34 0.53         0.30 0.20 0.39

Note: Each impact coefficient has a prior Student t distribution with the indicated median and mean, scale parameter 0.3, and 2
degrees of freedom.


Table 2. Long-Run Monetary Policy Response Coefficients: Three-Variable New Keynesian Specification

                                                               Posterior Percentiles
                       Full                          Pre-1984                        Post-1984                       Post-2000
                  1967:1 ­ 2017:4                 1967:1 ­ 1983:4                1984:1 ­ 2007:4                  2000:1 ­ 2017:4
                 50     16      84               50     16      84              50      16      84               50     16      84
  p             0.14   0.09    0.18             0.22   0.10    0.35            0.14    0.08    0.20             0.02 -0.06 0.10
  y             0.23   0.18    0.27             0.41   0.29    0.53            0.12    0.08    0.16             0.08   0.05    0.12
  r             0.94   0.92    0.97             1.10   1.02    1.19            0.93    0.90    0.95             0.92   0.90    0.95

Note: The long-run coefficient for each variable corresponds to the sum of the impact and autoregressive coefficients on that variable
in the estimated monetary policy rule.
Table 3. Impact Coefficients: Five-Variable Classical Specification


                                            Full                  Pre-1984                 Post-1984                  Post-2000
            Prior Percentiles          1967:1 ­ 2017:4         1967:1 ­ 1983:4          1984:1 ­ 2007:4            2000:1 ­ 2017:4
          50       16       84         50    16    84          50    16     84          50    16     84           50     16      84
py       0.50     0.10     0.90       0.25 0.18 0.33          0.27 0.18 0.36           0.17 0.05 0.30            0.29   0.16    0.42
yr       1.00     0.60     1.40       0.24 0.11 0.39          0.22 -0.04 0.57          0.51 0.27 0.79            0.43   0.23    0.66
ym       0.00    -0.40     0.40       0.40 0.24 0.59          0.87 0.27 1.41           0.36 0.21 0.56            0.19   0.06    0.36
rp       0.38    -0.02     0.77       0.83 0.55 1.22          0.62 0.28 1.14           0.56 0.40 0.76            0.28   0.13    0.46
ry       0.13    -0.27     0.52       1.32 0.95 1.71          1.49 1.03 1.96           0.80 0.59 1.04            0.66   0.42    0.96
rm       0.00    -0.40     0.40       1.23 0.97 1.57          1.08 0.66 1.73           0.32 0.21 0.47            0.47   0.33    0.68
my       0.25 -12.96 13.46            0.75 0.40 1.13          0.56 -0.58 2.25          0.75 0.11 1.40            0.64 -0.13 1.53
mu       0.88 -12.34 14.09            0.77 0.66 0.91          0.98 0.75 1.37           0.93 0.77 1.14            1.12   0.90    1.47
ur       3.00 -10.21 16.21            4.97 4.64 5.35          3.25 3.09 3.41          10.78 9.37 12.53          16.21 12.91 20.92
um       0.00 -13.21 13.21            0.73 0.49 0.98          0.11 -0.06 0.29          2.35 1.80 3.05            3.31   2.19    4.92

Note: Each impact coefficient in the aggregate supply, aggregate demand, and monetary policy equations has a prior Student t
distribution with the indicated median and mean, scale parameter 0.3, and 2 degrees of freedom. Each impact coefficient in the
money demand and monetary system equations has a prior Student t distribution with the indicated median and mean, scale
parameter 10, and 2 degrees of freedom.


Table 4. Long-Run Monetary Policy Response Coefficients: Five-Variable Classical Specification

                                                                Posterior Percentiles
                       Full                           Pre-1984                        Post-1984                      Post-2000
                  1967:1 ­ 2017:4                  1967:1 ­ 1983:4                1984:1 ­ 2007:4                 2000:1 ­ 2017:4
                 50     16      84                50     16      84              50      16      84              50     16      84
 p              0.12   0.03    0.21              0.12 -0.08 0.31                0.29    0.18    0.42            0.01 -0.14 0.16
 y              0.12   0.02    0.21              0.65   0.47    0.88            0.11    0.01    0.20            0.11   0.04    0.19
 r              0.93   0.85    1.02              1.36   1.10    1.68            0.91    0.86    0.96            0.96   0.88    1.04
 m              0.25   0.15    0.36              0.32   0.10    0.64            0.10    0.05    0.17            0.17   0.09    0.27
 u              0.05   0.02    0.08              0.05 -0.03 0.13                0.00 -0.02 0.02                 0.00 -0.02 0.03

Note: The long-run coefficient for each variable corresponds to the sum of the impact and autoregressive coefficients on that variable
in the estimated monetary policy rule.
Figure 1. Prior and Posterior Densities of Impact Coefficients




Note: Each panel illustrates the prior (red line) and posterior (blue bars) densities of the
indicated parameter from the indicated specification.
Figure 2. Impulse Responses: Aggregate Supply Shock




Note: Each panel shows the median (solid blue line) and the 16th and 84th percentiles (dashed
red lines) of the posterior distribution of the impulse response of the indicated variable to a
one-standard deviation aggregate supply shock.
Figure 3. Impulse Responses: Aggregate Demand Shock




Note: Each panel shows the median (solid blue line) and the 16th and 84th percentiles (dashed
red lines) of the posterior distribution of the impulse response of the indicated variable to a
one-standard deviation aggregate demand shock.
Figure 4. Impulse Responses: Monetary Policy Shock




Note: Each panel shows the median (solid blue line) and the 16th and 84th percentiles (dashed
red lines) of the posterior distribution of the impulse response of the indicated variable to a
one-standard deviation monetary policy shock.
Figure 5. Historical Decomposition: Five-Variable Classical Specification




Note: Each panel shows the median (solid blue line) and the 16th and 84th percentiles (dashed red lines) of the posterior distribution of the
historical effects of aggregate supply (AS), aggregate demand (AD), monetary policy (MP), money demand (MD), and monetary system (MS) shocks.
Figure 6. Historical Contributions of Monetary Policy Shocks to Movements in Inflation and the Output Gap




Note: Each panel shows the median (solid blue line) and the 16th and 84th percentiles (dashed red lines) of the historical effects of
monetary policy shocks, as implied by the three-variable New Keynesian specification (left column) and the five-variable Classical
specification (right column).
