                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE MINIMUM LEGAL DRINKING AGE AND CRIME VICTIMIZATION

                                       Aaron Chalfin
                                      Benjamin Hansen
                                       Rachel Ryley

                                     Working Paper 26051
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26051


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019




We thank Amanda Agan, Lars Lefgren, Jason Lindo, Vikram Maheshri and Emily Weisburst for
helpful comments which greatly improved earlier versions of this manuscript. We are also
grateful to helpful comments from seminar participants at the University of Maryland, College
Park and American University, and conference attendees at the Economics of Risky Behavior
Conference in Bologna, Italy. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Aaron Chalfin, Benjamin Hansen, and Rachel Ryley. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Minimum Legal Drinking Age and Crime Victimization
Aaron Chalfin, Benjamin Hansen, and Rachel Ryley
NBER Working Paper No. 26051
July 2019
JEL No. D8,I1,I12,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

For every crime there is a victim. However nearly all studies in the economics of crime have
focused the causal determinants of criminality. We present novel evidence on the causal
determinants of victimization, focusing on legal access to alcohol. The social costs of alcohol use
and abuse are sizable and well-documented. We find criminal victimization for both violent and
property crimes increases noticeably at age 21. Effects are not present at other birthdays and do
not appear to be driven by a birth-day "celebration effect." The effects are particularly large for
sexual assaults, especially those that occur in public locations. Our results suggest prior research
which has focused on criminality has understated the true social costs associated with increased
access to alcohol.

Aaron Chalfin                                    Rachel Ryley
University of Pennsylvania                       The Wharton School
achalfin@sas.upenn.edu                           The University of Pennsylvania
                                                 rryley@wharton.upenn.edu
Benjamin Hansen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
and NBER
bchansen@uoregon.edu
1     Introduction

For every crime committed there is both an offender and a victim. Yet, economics research

on crime dating back to (Becker, 1968) has primarily focused on policy levers that modify

the behavior of potential offenders (Nagin, 2013; Chalfin and McCrary, 2017). Perhaps this is

natural because the chief policy levers at the disposal of a social planner, namely police (which

change the certainty of punishment) and prisons (which change the severity of punishment),

are intended to influence the actions of the agents committing crimes. Given that by offending

offenders violate society's explicit social norms, this perspective is largely consistent with the

normative views of the general public which does not wish to blame the victim for having

been victimized (Crawford, 1977; Eigenberg and Garland, 2008). We agree with this view --

that victims are, in no way, to blame when a crime occurs -- and note that, since markets

require the voluntary transfer of property rights, there can be neither a market nor a price

for victimization. (Carnis, 2004). At the same time, victim behavior can be an important

input into the cost function of potential offenders and, as such, providing information can be

a critical means through which social planners can empower victims while, at the same time,

potentially reducing the cost of crime control (Ben-Shahar and Harel, 1995). In this paper

we provide some of the first evidence on the causal determinants of victimization, focusing

on abrupt change in legal access to alcohol at age 21 in the United States.

    Empirical evidence suggests that both law enforcement (Sherman and Weisburd, 1995;

Di Tella and Schargrodsky, 2004; Klick and Tabarrok, 2005; Evans and Owens, 2007; Chalfin

and McCrary, 2018; Mello, 2019) and harsher punishments (Helland and Tabarrok, 2007;

Drago et al., 2009; Hansen, 2015; Tahamont and Chalfin, 2016) can reduce offending, at


                                                1
least under some circumstances. However, most research suggests that the effect of police on

crime is, at best, modest and that the effect of incarceration is small and has declined at the

margin as the incarceration rate has risen (Liedka et al., 2006; Cullen et al., 2011; Durlauf

and Nagin, 2011; Johnson and Raphael, 2012; Lofstrom and Raphael, 2016). The picture that

emerges from this research is that traditional policy levers, while effective, are not necessarily

cost-effective, at least at current levels. Beyond the large financial cost to the government,

collateral harms associated with the use of police and incarceration, including direct economic

and social impacts as well as effects on families and communities, fall disproportionately on

low income, racially segregated neighborhoods, further raising the cost of traditional policy

levers (Western et al., 2001; Aizer and Doyle Jr, 2015; Mueller-Smith, 2015).1

       Given that traditional forms of crime control are costly, there are potentially impor-

tant benefits to identifying alternative means of crime control that have lower financial

and collateral costs. Recently, a number of alternatives have emerged, including improving

the quality of labor market market opportunities (Yang, 2017; Schnepel, 2017; Agan and

Makowsky, 2018), cognitive behavioral therapy (Heller et al., 2017), summer job programs

for youth(Heller, 2014; Davis and Heller, 2017), and investments in local capital infrastruc-

ture like street lighting (Doleac and Sanders, 2015; Chalfin et al., 2019) and the quality of

public space (Branas et al., 2011; Kondo et al., 2016; Branas et al., 2018). Though all of these

potential policy levers show promise, there are inevitable concerns regarding the scalability

of local programs as well as external validity (Davis et al., 2017).

       Each of the aforementioned alternatives seeks primarily to modify the behavior of offend-
   1
    We further note that the low clearance rates for most serious crimes make crime reduction through
deterrence particularly challenging. Low clearance rates may also reduce the scope for incapacitation to have
appreciable effects on crime.



                                                     2
ers. However, a factor in nearly every crime is the presence of a victim. To date, the literature

in economics focusing on victimization is sparse and focuses primarily on a small number

of investments that make committing a crime more difficult including auto theft prevention

technology (Ayres and Levitt, 1998), security guards (Maheshri and Mastrobuoni, 2017) and

the introduction of business improvement districts (Cook and MacDonald, 2011). However,

the scope of victim precaution is large. Indeed, private markets supply everything from low

tech security devices like locks, to the increasing presence of private alarms and security

cameras, GPS trackers, and credit monitoring. Victim precaution also includes behavioral

modifications that potentially affect the probability of victimization such as the choice to

leave ones home at night, hailing a taxi vs. walking while in a high-crime area, carrying

valuables on ones person, or the awareness and knowledge of a new environment. As such,

there is a great deal of ground for the empirical literature to cover.

   Identifying the determinants of victimization is both important and promising for sev-

eral reasons. First, recent literature has found that becoming a crime victim has a wide

range of impacts and includes effects as diverse as mental well-being (Cornaglia et al., 2014;

Dustmann and Fasani, 2015), labor market earnings and benefits receipt (Bindler and Ketel,

2019) and health outcomes for newborn infants (Currie et al., 2018). Accordingly, the costs

of victimization are likely to be large and especially concentrated among the most vulnerable

members of society. Second, for many crimes, especially those that have low clearance rates,

abating crime through deterrence-based strategies is costly. As such, victimization-oriented

strategies might reduce crime at lower cost. While the normative implications of this hy-

pothesis are potentially controversial, given the high collateral costs of the criminal justice

system, this policy option may be worth further exploration. Third, victims often have rela-

                                               3
tively little information about their probability of being victimized as well as the effectiveness

of private investments in crime control. Indeed, given that the academic literature has yet

to offer evidence on the causal effect of actions or policies on victimization, we might ex-

pect that individuals will have difficulty accurately forecasting on their own. Accordingly,

it stands to reason that victims might not optimally invest in precaution in wide variety of

situations.2 Finally, while programmatic interventions typically have high variable costs, we

note that informational interventions often have low marginal costs and, as such, are easier

to scale. As such, we note that there may be considerable promise in providing information

to victims -- as well as law enforcement.

    Studying the determinants of victimization has proven elusive for at least two reasons.

First, it is difficult to identify policies which affect the probability of victimization without

also affecting the supply side of the market. Second, victimization research is hampered

by the extremely limited availability of microdata, especially U.S. microdata at the sub-

national level. While a large research literature in criminology identifies some demographic

and situational correlates of victimization (Gottfredson, 1986), finding exogenous variation

upon which a causal claim may be made about an actionable policy lever has proven elusive.

    In this paper, we study one prominent policy lever could plausibly affect outsize influ-

ence on victimization: legal access to alcohol. A large body of research has found evidence of

significant social costs associated with legal access to alcohol (Carpenter, 2005, 2007; Car-

penter and Dobkin, 2009, 2011; Heaton, 2012; Kilmer et al., 2013; Carpenter and Dobkin,

2015; Anderson et al., 2017). These papers have used a variety of approaches, utilizing both
  2
    We further note that individual choices may result in externalities to others as investments in precaution
may change the relative returns of crime to potential offenders.




                                                      4
age-based discontinuities in access to alcohol and geographic variation in state or local pol-

icy. Their consensus suggests that legal access to alcohol is associated with increased traffic

fatalities, suicides, violent behavior and injuries. Despite the substantial body of evidence

documenting the negative public health impacts of alcohol use and abuse, these impacts

might be even larger if alcohol use also increases the risk of of becoming a victim of a crime,

which none of the previous studies have been able to address. In particular, one of the most

intriguing possibilities is that legal access to alcohol might be an important driver of sexual

assaults, a relationship that has received wide speculation in the literature in criminology

and public health (Kantor and Straus, 1989; Dembo et al., 1992; Miller et al., 1993; Abbey

et al., 2001; Abbey, 2002; Champion et al., 2004; Felson and Burchfield, 2004). These studies,

while suggestive, are largely correlational and lack credible research designs, though recent

research has intriguingly linked sexual assaults to local culture of drinking and alcohol abuse

or "college party culture." (Lindo et al., 2018).

   The primary empirical challenge involved in identifying a causal impact of alcohol use

on crime is that using alcohol, particularly to excess, is an endogenous choice. As a result,

there are many reasons why a correlation between alcohol use and victimization might exist

either among individuals or, for a given individual, over time. We study a related research

question -- and one which pairs naturally with a potential policy lever -- and estimate the

extent to which legal access to alcohol causes a discrete change in victimization.

   In order to identify a causal effect of legal access to alcohol on victimization, we utilize

the fact that legal access to alcohol in the United States changes discretely at age 21 and,

using a sharp regression discontinuity design, estimate the likelihood that an individual is

victimized just after her 21st birthday relative to the period before her 21st birthday. In order

                                               5
to estimate the model, we build a unique administrative dataset that contains the exact date

of birth for all crime victims known to law enforcement in eight major U.S. cities and find

strong evidence that certain types of victimization -- sexual assault and burglary for women,

assault and robbery for men and larceny for both genders -- increase considerably at age

21. This effect is found only at age 21 (and not on prior or subsequent birthdays) and is

unlikely to be driven by celebrating one's 21st birthday itself.3

       On the whole, our estimates suggest that legal access to alcohol changes the landscape

of victimization considerably and that a sizable share of serious crime could be abated by

policies that change legal access to alcohol or modify the parameters of public intoxication.

Our findings also provide additional insights into the complex and controversial relationship

between alcohol and sexual assault (Lindo et al., 2018). In particular, while both Carpenter

and Dobkin (2015) and Hansen and Waddell (2018) fail to find evidence that arrests or

criminal charges for rape increase at age 21, we find sexual assault victimization at age 21

increases by nearly 25 percent in our preferred specifications. Taken together, these findings

are more consistent with a model of crime in which perpetrators of sexual assault seek out

vulnerable populations than with a model where sexual assault perpetrators lose control due

to increased alcohol use.

       The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 provides a brief institutional

history of the minimum legal drinking age and its effects on alcohol consumption. Section

3 provides detail on the unique administrative dataset collected for this study; Section 4

provides an overview of the econometric models; Section 5 presents results and Section 6
   3
    We explicitly study the role of birthday effects. Victimization is consistently great deal higher on one's
birthday, even into one's thirties.




                                                      6
concludes.




2     Background

2.1    Private Actions and Victimization

There are potentially many ways through which potential victims can reduce their likelihood

of becoming the victim of a crime. With respect to property crimes, these include invest-

ments in traditional target-hardening strategies (e.g., locks and deadbolts) and technology

(e.g., surveillance cameras and security systems) as well as labor inputs such as private secu-

rity services. In the case of violent crimes which drive an outsize share of the social costs of

offending (Chalfin, 2015), private precautions are, to a greater extent, driven by behavioral

modifications by potential victims -- modifications that are perceived to change an indi-

vidual's probability of victimization. Such behavioral modifications might include avoiding

leaving one's home at night, hailing a taxi instead of walking while in a high-crime area,

carrying fewer valuables on one's person or maintaining a generally higher level of vigilance

or situational awareness. Each of these actions has the potential to make crime less profitable

to a potential offender.

    While investments in private precaution are costly with often unknown benefits potential

victims, they are potentially attractive to a social planner for a number of reasons. First,

an individual victim may have more information about how to successfully abate his or her

risk of being victimized than law enforcement which must devise crime control strategies

on the basis of typical patterns of victim and offender behavior and which cannot easily



                                               7
tailor these strategies to a given individual's needs (Ben-Shahar and Harel, 1995; Felson and

Clarke, 1995). Second, in most cities in the United States, there is approximately one sworn

police officer for every 250 residents and so there are natural limits to the ability of law

enforcement to deter offending. Finally, investments in private precaution may raise search

costs for offenders, thus making crime less attractive overall (Shavell, 1991). Thus, private

precautions, even when observable to potential offenders, may generate positive spillovers to

society.

       Taken as a whole, the theory suggests that it may be possible for potential victims to

abate crime more efficiently than can the government ­ at least at the margin. Consider, for

instance, crimes such as larceny or burglary which often involve belongings left unattended

or homes that were unlocked at the time of the crime, both of which are extremely common

and which could be abated through low-cost changes in behavior among potential victims.

These crimes are only marginally responsive to police manpower (Chalfin and McCrary,

2018). Yet, for a variety of reasons -- because individuals do not fully internalize the cost of

victimization (Clotfelter, 1978; Ayres and Levitt, 1998), because public spending on crime

control may be treated as a subsidy (Guha and Guha, 2012) or because individuals are

myopic or misinformed -- victims may under-invest in precaution, relative to what is socially

optimal.4 This raises the possibility that there may yet be a number of low hanging fruits to

pick with respect to addressing crime through private victim action.
   4
    Some of the earliest thinking about the role of private precaution in the crime production function can
be found in the seminal work of (Erhlich, 1973; Ehrlich, 1981) who conceives of the "derived demand" for
crime as the willingness of market participants to invest in private precautions.




                                                    8
2.2    Alcohol Use and Victimization

Literature outside of economics has linked alcohol abuse and victimization, either as a cor-

relate of victimization risk (Champion et al., 2004; Felson and Burchfield, 2004) or as a

predictor of subsequent victimization (Kantor and Straus, 1989; Widom, 2001), particularly

in the context of domestic violence and sexual assault (Abbey, 2002). However, none of these

studies utilizes exogenous variation to identify a causal effect of substance use.

   While the evidence is predominantly correlational, there are a number of reasons why

alcohol use and crime victimization might be causally related. First, there is evidence that

the use and, particularly, the abuse of alcohol causes individuals to exhibit fewer inhibitions

(Mulvihill et al., 1997; Easdon and Vogel-Sprott, 2000; Fillmore and Vogel-Sprott, 2000)

which may lead them to take on risks that they otherwise would not have taken (Ryb et al.,

2006). Thus victimization might rise with alcohol abuse due to a change in the risk tolerance

of potential victims. Second, intoxication may affect an individual's situational awareness

and therefore increase the ease with which a victim can be identified and approached by

a motivated offender. For instance, an intoxicated victim might be less likely to notice a

risky situation (Parks and Miller, 1997) or take actions to mitigate that risk. Third, a large

literature establishes that intoxication increases aggression (Giancola and Zeichner, 1995;

Graham et al., 2006), which itself is a predictor of victimization, especially for assaults.

We note, for example, that the difference between an assault victim and the perpetrator of

an assault can simply be which party strikes the first blow (Chalfin et al., 2018). Finally,

intoxicated victims may be less able to defend themselves effectively, thus reducing the cost

to a potential offender.



                                               9
2.3       The MLDA and Alcohol Consumption

In the United States, the minimum legal drinking age -- the age at which individuals are

legally allowed to purchase alcohol ­ has historically oscillated between 18 and 21 years of

age. Many states initially lowered their minimum legal drinking ages only to raise them again

later in the 1980s. Now, essentially every state implements a minimum legal drinking age of

21.5

       While the law does not prevent minors from securing access to alcohol (Freisthler et al.,

2003), there is ample evidence that legal access to alcohol nevertheless increases drinking

and, in particular, problematic drinking. For example, recent research uses information from

National Health Interview Survey to show that drinking increases at both the extensive and

intensive margins when individuals turn 21, based on local regression discontinuity based

estimates (Carpenter and Dobkin, 2009). Other evidence shows that it is precisely the most

problematic types of drinking that increase at age 21 -- for example, binge drinking -- as

opposed to moderate levels of drinking (Carpenter et al., 2016). This research, and other

related studies on youth zero tolerance laws (Carpenter, 2007), suggest that alcohol use,

including consumption patterns consistent with alcohol abuse, increases with legal access to

alcohol.

       Is the same relationship true in our sample? In this research, we rely on the sharp dis-

continuity in legal access to alcohol at age 21 to identify a causal effect of legal access to

alcohol on victimization. Since data that contain the exact date of victimization for the

entire United States are not available, we focus on city-level administrative records of vic-
   5
    There are a few very limited exceptions. For instance, some states permit alcohol use with one's parents
at restaurants (in Wisconsin for instance).



                                                    10
timizations with the exact date of birth and exact date of victimization for all crime victims

in eight large cities in the United States. Our data cover the following jurisdictions: Char-

lotte, NC (Charlotte-Mecklenburg), Dallas, TX, Denver, CO, Houston, TX, Kansas City,

MO, Milwaukee, WI, San Diego, CA and St. Louis, MO.

       While this gives us a large number of victimizations upon which to draw inferences, this

subsample of the United States is small enough we would ill-powered to do a subsample

analysis of the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). To verify alcohol abuse increases

at age 21 for our subsample, we focus on a public health outcome shown to be correlated with

alcohol use: drunk driving. Indeed, prior research on the MLDA using both both differences-

in-differences designs (Carpenter and Dobkin, 2011) and regression discontinuity designs

(Carpenter and Dobkin, 2009) suggests that traffic fatalities increase with legal access to

alcohol due to the MLDA. Moreover, both (Carpenter and Dobkin, 2015) and (Hansen

and Waddell, 2018) find that drunk driving increases by 40 percent at the MLDA for two

completely independent states.6

       This motivates our proxy for alcohol use and abuse: the fraction of fatal accidents involv-

ing alcohol from the Fatal Analysis and Reporting System (FARS), a census of every fatal

car crash in the United States. We focus on the fraction of fatal car crashes and its evolution

over the age distribution. The FARS collects age instead of exact date of birth. As shown in

Figure 1, the fraction of accidents involving alcohol increases monotonically with age among

teenagers before exhibiting a discrete jump at age 21, after which it declines monotonically.

A similar pattern emerges for the subset of cities that provided victimization reports. This
   6
    These estimated increases are essentially equal in magnitude to the estimated increase in alcohol con-
sumption found in the NHIS by Carpenter and Dobkin (2009). As such, it may be reasonable to infer that
alcohol consumption and drunk driving increase at similar percentages with legal access to alcohol.



                                                   11
suggests that there are similar "first stage" effects of alcohol access on alcohol use and abuse

for our subset of cities and the nation as a whole.




3       Data

This research considers whether individuals who have legal access to alcohol are more likely

to become crime victims. As national microdata on crime victims are unavailable, we con-

struct a unique dataset on crime victimization, using administrative data obtained from

eight municipal police departments in the United States. The eight police departments are

the municipal law enforcement agencies for the following cities: Charlotte, NC (Charlotte-

Mecklenburg), Dallas, TX, Denver, CO, Houston, TX, Kansas City, MO, Milwaukee, WI,

San Diego, CA and St. Louis, MO.7 These departments cover a population of approximately

8 million residents, represent a number of different U.S. regions and include three of the

ten largest cities in the United States -- Houston, Dallas and San Diego.8 Table 1 explores

the extent to which the cities in our analytic sample differ from other U.S. cities and the

population as a whole with respect to their crime rates. The cities in our sample have higher

than average crime rates, approximately 50 percent higher than other large cities, depending

on the crime type. St. Louis, in particular, has an extremely high crime rate and had the

highest homicide rate in the United States in 2016.
    7
     Note that not every crime has a person-victim -- for example, crimes against businesses. We focus on
crimes with a person-victim.
   8
     In total, we reached out to twenty-two police departments. We received no reply from municipal law
enforcement agencies in the following cities: Cincinnati, OH Cleveland, OH, Detroit, MI Memphis,TN,
Nashville,TN, Washington DC, Atlanta, GA, Sacramento, CA, Tuscon, AZ, Cambridge MA, Baton Rouge,
LA, Seattle, WA and Las Vegas, NV. The following departments declined or request for data: Baltimore,
MD, Miami, FL, Orlando, FL, Philadelphia, PA, Boston, MA, Columbus, OH, Portland, OR, Phoenix, AZ
and Newark NJ.




                                                   12
       In each city, the data contains information on the type of crime, the date of victimiza-

tion and the victim's exact date of birth and gender. We focus on crimes that, with a few

exceptions, largely correspond to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's list of "index crimes"

which are collected annually and reported in the FBI's Uniform Crime Reports. Specifically,

we focus on the following crimes: assault,9 burglary, homicide, larceny, motor vehicle theft,

robbery and sex-related crimes which are an aggregate of rape and other sexually-related

offenses, in cities for which they are available.10 Overall, data cover the years 2007 through

2018 though exact years of data availability vary by department.11 In all subsequent analy-

ses, we aggregate the data from our eight cities in order to produce a national estimate of

the effect of legal exposure to alcohol on crime.

       We supplement our main analyses of administrative data using microdata from the U.S.

National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), a survey of a random sample of between

49,000 and 77,000 U.S. residents, collected by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) since

1977. Residents are asked to indicate whether they have been the victim of a crime during the

past six months; they are also asked whether they reported that crime to law enforcement.

We use the NCVS to explore whether crime reporting changes at the age of 21 which might

be true if intoxicated victims who are under the minimum legal drinking age are less likely to

report a crime to law enforcement. If true, this would lead us to conclude that victimization

increases at age 21 even though this effect might merely be an artifact of differential crime

reporting. We report the results of this analysis in Section 5.2 and conclude that there is
   9
     This includes both aggravated and simple assaults, but not sexual assaults.
  10
     While specific offense types vary by city, we include the following offenses in our sexual assault aggregate:
fondling, rape, sexual assault or battery and sodomy. See Appendix B for the universe of sex offenses by
police department.
  11
     See Appendix C for department-specific date ranges.



                                                       13
little evidence of differential reporting.




4     Methods

We estimate the causal effect of legal access to alcohol on victimization using a regression

discontinuity design in which the effect of alcohol access is attributed to the discrete change

in victimization that occurs at the age of 21. The identifying assumption is that individuals

who are just below age 21 and individuals who are just above age 21 are exchangeable --

that is, they do not differ, on average, with respect to both observable and unobservable

characteristics.

    Because all individuals are subject to the treatment age age 21, without exception, we

estimate treatment effects using a "sharp" RD design. In keeping with standard empirical

practice, we estimate treatment effects using the following general specification:



                       Yi =  +  Di +  (Xi - c) +  (Xi - c)Di + i                                (1)



In (1), Yi is the count of victimizations occurring on relative age i, (Xi -c) is the number of days

relative to a given crime victim's birth date and Di is an indicator variable for whether or not

the criminal incident occurred prior to or after the victim's 21st birthday. The coefficient on

Di ,  identifies the causal effect of legal alcohol access. Because the evolution of victimization

over the life cycle may be nonlinear in age relative to 21, in practice, we specify a model

that also includes (Xi - c)j and the product of this term and Di for polynomials of order

j =2 and 3. These non-linearities could pick up numerous different factors which can affect



                                                14
victimization, such as criminality which is known to vary over the life course (Loeber and

Farrington, 2014), an age gradient to alcohol consumption or likelihood that an individual

lives alone. Given that all of these factors shift as individuals age, we focus on on identifying

the causal effect of alcohol access at age 21. As other factors directly related to victimization

are unlikely to discretely change at 21, this offers a reasonable approach to estimating the

causal effect of alcohol use on victimization.

   Equation (1) is estimated for a given bandwidth, h so that the regression is estimated

for those observations within c - h  Xi  c + h. All models are estimated using robust

standard errors which accommodate the possibility that there is heteroskedasticity among

the individual error terms within age bins. In Section 5.4, we describe a number of robustness

checks which test the sensitivity of the results to alternative modeling strategies.

   In addition to estimating a standard RD effect of the impact of the minimum legal

drinking age, we also estimate a "birthday effect" -- that is, the change in victimization risk

on a victim's birthday itself or on the following weekend when an individual might celebrate

his or her birthday. Estimating this effect is important for two reasons. First, it helps to

ensure that our estimates of the causal effect of alcohol access are not merely due to birthday

celebration effects. Second, birthday celebration effects are interesting in their own right and

serve to bolster our interpretation that legal access to alcohol explains discontinuities in the

probability of victimization that we document in Section 5.1.

   In practice, we estimate (and control for) birthday celebration effects by adding a dummy

variable to (1) that indicates whether date i was the victim's birthday or on the subsequent

weekend. We show that the risk of victimization increases dramatically on a victim's 21st

birthday as well as on other birthdays. This finding further bolsters our confidence that

                                                 15
legal access to alcohol, and the corresponding increase in alcohol consumption previously

documented at age 21, is a predominant mechanism driving these large effects.




5        Results

5.1       Main Results

We study the effect of the reaching the legal drinking age separately for violent crimes

(murder, robbery, sexual assault and other assaults) and property crimes (burglary, larceny

and motor vehicle theft). We also estimate models separately by gender. Tables 2 and 3

present Poisson regression estimates of the effect of legal access to alcohol on victimization

for males and female, respectively.12

       In each cell, we report the incidence rate ratio (IRR) from the Poisson regression model

and the robust standard error around the estimate. The first column reports coefficient esti-

mates for the regression outlined in equation (1) using an order 1 polynomial in age. Columns

(2) and (3) include second order polynomials (column 2) and third order polynomials (col-

umn 3) in age, fully interacted with an indicator variable for whether the victim's age was

greater than or equal to 21. In column (4), we focus on the order 2 polynomial specification

and add a dummy variable for whether an individual is victimized on his or her birthday.

Recognizing that birthdays are not always celebrated on an individual's exact birthday, in

column (5), we include the birth date itself and the three following days. In column (6), we

include the entire week around the individual's birthday.
  12
    To address the concern that results may be sensitive to our choice of a Poisson link function, we present
corresponding log-linear estimates of the RD treatment effect in Appendix Tables A1 and A2. Results are
substantively very similar to the Poisson regression estimates reported in Tables 2 and 3.



                                                     16
       For males, legal access to alcohol causally increases each of violent and property victim-

izations by roughly 7 percent. Effects are especially large for sex offenses (12-120 percent)

though these are not precisely estimated as sexual assaults with male victims are uncommon.

Effects are also meaningful and significant at conventional levels for robbery (5-8 percent),

non-sexual assault (6-7 percent) and larceny (3-10 percent). Effects for motor vehicle theft

and burglary are positive in most specifications but are imprecisely estimated. For females,

legal access to alcohol does not, in general, increase the likelihood of a violent victimization.

However, sex assaults increase considerably, by approximately 25 percent. Property crimes

likewise increase -- by approximately 10 percent for burglary and larceny. The estimated

effects are, for the most part, not sensitive to our choice of polynomial and persist regardless

of how we estimate birthday effects.

       The estimated effects can be seen graphically in Figure 2 which presents Poisson estimates

of the age profile of victimizations with average victimization counts in fourteen-day bins for

violent and property crimes, respectively.13 Both panels in this figure provide visual evidence

consistent with the results in Tables 2 and 3. As is evident from Tables 2 and 3, there are

noticeable increases in sex assault and larceny victimizations for both men and women as

well as non-sexual assault victimizations for men.14



5.2       Robustness to Differential Reporting Behavior

A natural concern in ascribing a causal interpretation to the results reported in Section

5.1 is that these estimates could be an artifact of differential reporting behavior among
  13
    Figure 2 is produced using the specification from column (2) in Tables 2 and 3
  14
    Using data from San Diego, Denver, St. Louis and Dallas -- the cities for which we have time stamps
-- we explore the extent to which effects are driven by weekday versus weekend victimizations in Appendix
Table 5.

                                                   17
individuals who have reached the age of drinking majority. This might be the case, for

instance, if underage victims are less inclined to report a crime to law enforcement due to

concerns about being arrested or detained as a result of their own illegal use of alcohol. Such

a story is especially worrisome insofar as it could rationalize our principal finding -- that

victimization increases at age 21.

       This differential reporting story is not possible to rule out using our administrative data

as these data include only crimes that are known to law enforcement. In order to investigate

the plausibility of differential reporting, we use 18 to 35 year old respondents from the 2006-

2016 waves of the National Crime Victimization Survey and provide visual evidence that

shows that changes in reporting behavior at 21 are unlikely to be contributing to our results.

Leveraging the fact that the NCVS captures whether an individual was victimized as well as

whether or not he reported a given crime to law enforcement, we observe the extent to which

reporting rates change discretely at age 21. Figure 3 shows average reporting rates for crime

victimization for males and females, respectively. While the estimates are noisy,15 there is

no evidence of a discrete change in reporting behavior at 21 for any of our crime types. This

supports our claim that the changes in victimization at the MLDA are being driven by legal

access to alcohol and not by differential reporting patterns of crime victims.



5.3       Other Robustness Checks

Columns (1) and (3) through (5) of Tables 2 and 3 show that our estimates of the effect of

the MLDA on criminal victimization are relatively stable with respect to the polynomial in
  15
    The NCVS records age at the time of survey, not victimization. As a result, there are likely many
instances where the victim's age is mislabeled in terms of when the victimization occurred. Figure 3 was
produced assuming that each respondent was the same age at survey and victimization.



                                                  18
age as well as with respect to differing controls for when an individual might celebrate his or

her birthday. We next turn to whether results are sensitive to choice of bandwidth and we

also present evidence from a powerful placebo test in which we re-estimate treatment effects

for birthdays at other ages at which no change in legal access to alcohol is present.

   Figure 4 shows the degree to which our results are sensitive to bandwidth selection. We

estimate models with bandwidths from 180 to 730 days, in 10 day increments. In Panel A

of Figure 4 we see that the RD effect on sex offense victimization attenuates as bandwidth

increases for males and stays quite stable for females. The RD effect on both male robbery

and assault victimizations attenuates slightly as bandwidth increases. In the case of prop-

erty crimes (Panel B of Figure 4), we see that larger bandwidths dampen MLDA effect on

female larceny victimizations whereas the effect on males persists throughout the range of

bandwidths. Overall, the evidence suggests that results are not driven by a strategic choice

of bandwidth.

   Next we show that the increase in victimization that we observe at age 21 is unique

and not present at other ages that are unaffected by the age of drinking majority. Figure 7

presents RD treatment effects graphically for each age between 19 and 35, using an order 2

polynomial. In the figure, age is plotted on the x-axis and the incidence rate ratio from the

sharp RD regression presented in equation (1) is plotted on the y -axis. Graphs are presented

for estimates that were significant at conventional levels in Tables 2 and 3. In each graph, the

treatment effects cluster around an IRR of 1, indicating that there is no average treatment

effect of legal access to alcohol at ages other than 21. This is exactly what we would expect

given that legal alcohol access does not change at any of the other ages. Critically, in all

cases, the treatment effect at age 21 is the largest among all of the ages estimated which

                                              19
indicates that the RD effect at age 21 is unusual and therefore provides key support for the

prior estimates.

   Finally, we conduct a randomization inference exercise in order to provide further support

for the estimates derived from our parametric models. We hold the observation window

fixed at two years on either side of the MLDA cutoff at age 21 and randomly shuffle each

observation's age relative to the cutoff. We then estimate our preferred model which uses an

order 2 polynomial in age fully interacted with an indicator for age greater than or equal to

21 and no birthday effects. This model corresponds to Column (2) of Tables 2 and 3.

   We perform randomization inference using 1,000 replications for each of the crime type

by gender combinations for which we estimate a significant effect of the MLDA on victim-

ization. Figure 6 presents histograms of the distributions of the t-ratios for each estimate

of the RD effect with a dashed gray line indicating the 95th percentile of the distribution

of randomization and a black line indicating the t-ratio for our true model. The ranking of

the true t-ratio in the distribution of placebo estimates yields an implied p-value based on

the simulated sampling distribution. It is evident in Figure 6 that our true t-ratio is well to

the right of the 95th percentile of the distribution of randomization for all sub-plots in each

panel indicating that these results are unlikely to be due to chance.



5.4    Location of Victimization

In order to better understand the mechanisms through which the MLDA affects victim-

ization, we estimate treatment effects separately for crimes that occur in residential versus




                                              20
non-residential locations -- which include both outdoor and commercial locations.16 In Ta-

ble 5, we report effects for residential and non-residential crimes both with (columns 3 and

4) and without (columns 1 and 2) a control variable for the birthday effect. As in previous

analyses, we further disaggregate results by crime type and gender.

       For males, effects on violent victimization are driven by crimes that occur in non-

residential locations. This is especially true for assaults and also, to a lesser extent, for

robberies.17 For females, the large effects for sex offenses are likewise driven by non-residential

locations while effects for larceny are equally large in both location types. Taken as a whole,

the data suggest that increases in victimization are, at least to an extent, driven by the

fact that alcohol use is more likely to occur in non-residential settings after individuals have

reached the legal drinking age.



5.5       Birthday Celebration Effects

A large literature in public health establishes that individuals are more likely to consume

alcohol in both public and private on their birthdays -- especially at age 21 (Neighbors et al.,

2005; Brister et al., 2010). We therefore investigate whether there are "birthday effects,"

that is, an increase in victimization on or around an individual's birthday, independent of

an intercept shift in the incidence of victimization that occurs at age 21 and endures in the

ensuing weeks and months.

       We estimate birthday effects by adding three different sets of birthday-related indicators

to our main RD models -- an indicator for an individual's birthday, an indicator for a date
  16
     Location information was shared by the following 5 police departments in our subsample: Dallas, TX,
Denver, CO, Houston, TX, Milwaukee, WI and St. Louis, MO.
  17
     The same is true for sex offenses though sparse data means that the results are estimated with only
limited precision.

                                                  21
that is within three days of an individual's birthday and an indicator for a date that is within

one week of an individual's birthday.18 Table 4 presents Poisson estimates of the change in

the likelihood of victimization on or around an individual's birthday, an effect we describe

as a birthday celebration effect and as distinct from the broader and more enduring effect of

legal access to alcohol.19

       In Table 4, the first three columns present estimates for males, the next three columns

for females. Each column corresponds to a different definition of the birthday celebration

window. We report incidence rate ratios and robust standard errors in parentheses. Birthday

celebration effects are very large -- overall, men are nearly 30 percent more likely to suffer

a violent victimization and 10 percent more likely to suffer a property victimization. Effects

are similar for women. Both genders are more likely to be assaulted. For women, sexual

assault effects are particularly large with a 60 percent increase in the likelihood of suffering

a sexual assault on one's birthday.

       In order to investigate whether the birthday celebration effect is unique to age 21, we

re-estimate birthday celebration effects (using the exact birthday) for all ages between 19

and 35. These estimates are presented in Figure 8, which plots incidence rate ratios on

the y -axis against the victim's birthday in years on the x-axis. These figures support the

idea that birthday celebration effects are not unique to age 21 and are instead universal,

persisting throughout an individual's life. Indeed, celebration effects at age 21 are not of

unusual magnitude and fall roughly in the middle of the distribution of estimated effects.

This finding provides further support for the idea that alcohol use is a driver of crime
  18
     All birthday effects are estimated with a quadratic polynomial in age interacted with an indicator for
being 21 or older at the time of victimization.
  19
     Appendix Table A3 reports log-linear estimates of the birthday effect.



                                                    22
victimization and that this effect persists beyond age 21.




6     Conclusion

A large body of research has explored the causal determinants of criminality. While victim-

ization is an equally important side of the same coin, due to data constraints, this topic

has received far less attention in the literature. Given that recent media attention and re-

search related to criminal justice highlight the drawbacks to punishments (either through

time incarcerated or fines) and over-policing, there is increasing appeal to understanding

other policies which can affect crime that potentially impose fewer costs.

    In this paper, we study one prominent policy lever that operates through private pre-

caution and which could plausibly have an outsize influence on victimization: legal access

to alcohol. We construct a unique administrative dataset with the exact date of birth and

date of victimization for crime victims in eight large cities in the United States and use a

regression discontinuity design to estimate the change in victimization that occurs at age 21,

the minimum legal drinking age in the United States.

    We find evidence that victimization increases at age 21 for for both males and females,

though in subtly different ways. Males experience a greater number of assaults and robberies;

females experience a large increase in the risk of a sexual assault. Results are robust to

empirical specification, bandwidth selection and controls for birthday celebration effects. The

likely mechanisms behind these increases in victimization are varied and include differences in

the amount of alcohol that is consumed after reaching the legal drinking age and differences

in the environment in which alcohol is consumed. Given that effects are largest in non-


                                              23
residential locations, there is some evidence for the latter of these two mechanisms. Effects

do not appear to be an artifact of increased reporting of crimes at age 21.

   This research provides some of the first causal that alcohol increases crime victimization.

Our findings suggest that prior estimates based on arrests (Carpenter and Dobkin, 2015) or

criminal charges (Hansen and Waddell, 2018) likely underestimate the effect of alcohol on

total crime. Our findings can also potentially reconcile the reason why regression disconti-

nuity based estimates of arrests using the minimum legal drinking age are typically smaller

than recent diffrences-in-difference estimates (Anderson et al., 2017). Finally, these findings

provide additional insights into the complex and controversial relationship between alcohol

and sexual assault (Lindo et al., 2018). In particular, while both Carpenter and Dobkin

(2015) and Hansen and Waddell (2018) fail to find evidence that arrests or criminal charges

for rape increase at age 21, we find sexual assault victimization at age 21 increases by nearly

25 percent in our preferred specifications. Taken together, these findings are more consistent

with a model of crime in which perpetrators of sexual assault seek out vulnerable populations

than with a model where sexual assault perpetrators lose control due to increased alcohol

use.

   More generally, information interventions that educate the public about its increased risk

of victimization and encourage individuals to invest in private precautions to prevent victim-

ization may help mitigate the effects of alcohol access on criminal victimization. Behavioral

changes such as remaining cautious of one's surroundings, avoiding walking home alone or

taking a taxi in lieu of walking, avoiding violence when faced with conflict, locking one's

door immediately after returning home and being particular about the degree to which one

associates with strangers while drinking all have the potential to reduce criminal victim-

                                              24
ization. To be clear, we are not suggesting a campaign of victim-blaming. On the contrary,

information is a means of empowering potential victims to better protect themselves.

    The possibility of raising the drinking age to reduce the social cost of alcohol use is a

possibility that should be taken with caution as it is unclear whether the United States'

unique cultural relationship with alcohol is a by-product of its drinking age being 21.20 As

it stands, our estimates suggest that the increased consumption of alcohol at age 21 is met

with additional costs previously not considered.

    Moreover, the choices and precautions of individuals could carry externalities to others.

As an individual engages in precautions, this has a small effect on the returns and costs to

engaging in crime for potential offenders. Aggregated, this would suggest the private supply

precautions would be under-supplied relative to what is socially optimal, even if we assumed

individuals were privately optimizing. Thus private precautions like locks, private security

cameras, alarms or GPS anti-theft trackers might merit subsidies. Moreover, this is further

justification for taxes on alcohol, which have remained largely unchanged in nominal value

since the 1990s and whose externality offsetting effects have likely been eroded by inflation

(Cook and Durrance, 2013). Future research could investigate whether other alcohol control

policies such as taxes are also effective in reducing victimization.




  20
     If this is the case, a policy that raises the drinking age might have a negative general equilibrium impact
on the binge-drinking culture that is common in the US.


                                                      25
References
Abbey, A. (2002). Alcohol-related sexual assault: A common problem among college students.
 Journal of Studies on Alcohol, supplement (14), 118­128.
Abbey, A., T. Zawacki, P. O. Buck, A. M. Clinton, and P. McAuslan (2001). Alcohol and
 sexual assault. Alcohol research & health: the journal of the National Institute on Alcohol
 Abuse and Alcoholism 25 (1), 43.
Agan, A. Y. and M. D. Makowsky (2018). The minimum wage, eitc, and criminal recidivism.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Aizer, A. and J. J. Doyle Jr (2015). Juvenile incarceration, human capital, and future crime:
  Evidence from randomly assigned judges. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (2),
  759­803.
Anderson, D. M., B. Crost, and D. I. Rees (2017). Wet laws, drinking establishments and
 violent crime. Economic Journal 128 (611), 1333­1366.
Ayres, I. and S. D. Levitt (1998). Measuring positive externalities from unobservable victim
 precaution: an empirical analysis of lojack. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (1),
 43­77.
Becker, G. S. (1968). Crime and punishment: An economic approach. Journal of Political
  Economy 76 (2), 169­217.
Ben-Shahar, O. and A. Harel (1995). Blaming the victim: optimal incentives for private
  precautions against crime. Journal of Law, Economics & Organization 11, 434.
Bindler, A. and N. Ketel (2019). Scaring or scarring? labour market effects of criminal
  victimisation. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP13431 .
Branas, C. C., R. A. Cheney, J. M. MacDonald, V. W. Tam, T. D. Jackson, and T. R.
  Ten Have (2011). A difference-in-differences analysis of health, safety, and greening vacant
  urban space. American Journal of Epidemiology 174 (11), 1296­1306.
Branas, C. C., E. South, M. C. Kondo, B. C. Hohl, P. Bourgois, D. J. Wiebe, and J. M.
  MacDonald (2018). Citywide cluster randomized trial to restore blighted vacant land
  and its effects on violence, crime, and fear. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
  ences 115 (12), 2946­2951.
Brister, H. A., R. R. Wetherill, and K. Fromme (2010). Anticipated versus actual alco-
  hol consumption during 21st birthday celebrations. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and
  Drugs 71 (2), 180­183.
Carnis, L. (2004). Pitfalls of the classical school of crime. Quarterly Journal of Austrian
  Economics 7 (4), 7­17.
Carpenter, C. (2007). Heavy alcohol use and crime: evidence from underage drunk-driving
  laws. The Journal of Law and Economics 50 (3), 539­557.

                                             26
Carpenter, C. and C. Dobkin (2009). The effect of alcohol consumption on mortality: regres-
  sion discontinuity evidence from the minimum drinking age. American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics 1 (1), 164­82.

Carpenter, C. and C. Dobkin (2011). The minimum legal drinking age and public health.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (2), 133­56.

Carpenter, C. and C. Dobkin (2015). The minimum legal drinking age and crime. The
  Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (2), 521­524.

Carpenter, C. S. (2005). Heavy alcohol use and the commission of nuisance crime: Evidence
  from underage drunk driving laws. The American Economic Review 95 (2), 267­272.

Carpenter, C. S., C. Dobkin, and C. Warman (2016). The mechanisms of alcohol control.
  Journal of Human Resources 51 (2), 328­356.

Chalfin, A. (2015). Economic costs of crime. The Encyclopedia of Crime and Punishment ,
 1­12.

Chalfin, A., S. Danagoulian, and M. Deza (2018). More sneezing, less crime? seasonal aller-
 gies, transitory costs and the market for offenses. SSRN Working Paper .

Chalfin, A., B. Hansen, J. Lerner, and L. Parker (2019). Reducing crime through environ-
 mental design: Evidence from a randomized experiment of street lighting in new york city.
 Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chalfin, A. and J. McCrary (2017). Criminal deterrence: A review of the literature. Journal
 of Economic Literature 55 (1), 5­48.

Chalfin, A. and J. McCrary (2018). Are us cities underpoliced? theory and evidence. The
 Review of Economics and Statistics 100 (1), 167­186.

Champion, H. L., K. L. Foley, R. H. Durant, R. Hensberry, D. Altman, and M. Wolfson
 (2004). Adolescent sexual victimization, use of alcohol and other substances, and other
 health risk behaviors. Journal of Adolescent Health 35 (4), 321­328.

Clotfelter, C. T. (1978). Private security and the public safety. Journal of Urban Eco-
  nomics 5 (3), 388­402.

Cook, P. J. and C. P. Durrance (2013). The virtuous tax: lifesaving and crime-prevention
  effects of the 1991 federal alcohol-tax increase. Journal of health economics 32 (1), 261­267.

Cook, P. J. and J. MacDonald (2011). Public safety through private action: an economic
  assessment of bids. Economic Journal 121 (552), 445­462.

Cornaglia, F., N. E. Feldman, and A. Leigh (2014). Crime and mental well-being. Journal
  of Human Resources 49 (1), 110­140.

Crawford, R. (1977). You are dangerous to your health: the ideology and politics of victim
  blaming. International Journal of Health Services 7 (4), 663­680.

                                              27
Cullen, F. T., C. L. Jonson, and D. S. Nagin (2011). Prisons do not reduce recidivism: The
 high cost of ignoring science. The Prison Journal 91 (3 suppl), 48S­65S.

Currie, J., M. Mueller-Smith, and M. Rossin-Slater (2018). Violence while in utero: The
 impact of assaults during pregnancy on birth outcomes. Technical report, National Bureau
 of Economic Research.

Davis, J., J. Guryan, K. Hallberg, and J. Ludwig (2017). The economics of scale-up. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Davis, J. and S. B. Heller (2017). Rethinking the benefits of youth employment programs:
  The heterogeneous effects of summer jobs. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Dembo, R., L. Williams, W. Wothke, J. Schmeidler, and C. H. Brown (1992). The role of fam-
  ily factors, physical abuse, and sexual victimization experiences in high-risk youths alcohol
  and other drug use and delinquency: A longitudinal model. Violence and victims 7 (3),
  245­266.

Di Tella, R. and E. Schargrodsky (2004). Do police reduce crime? estimates using the
  allocation of police forces after a terrorist attack. The American Economic Review 94 (1),
  115­133.

Doleac, J. L. and N. J. Sanders (2015). Under the cover of darkness: How ambient light
 influences criminal activity. Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (5), 1093­1103.

Drago, F., R. Galbiati, and P. Vertova (2009). The deterrent effects of prison: Evidence from
  a natural experiment. Journal of Political Economy 117 (2), 257­280.

Durlauf, S. N. and D. S. Nagin (2011). Imprisonment and crime. Criminology & Public
 Policy 10 (1), 13­54.

Dustmann, C. and F. Fasani (2015). The effect of local area crime on mental health. Eco-
 nomic Journal 126 (593), 978­1017.

Easdon, C. M. and M. Vogel-Sprott (2000). Alcohol and behavioral control: impaired re-
  sponse inhibition and flexibility in social drinkers. Experimental and Clinical Psychophar-
  macology 8 (3), 387.

Ehrlich, I. (1981). On the usefulness of controlling individuals: an economic analysis of
  rehabilitation, incapacitation and deterrence. The American Economic Review 71 (3),
  307­322.

Eigenberg, H. and T. Garland (2008). Victim blaming. In Controversies in Victimology, pp.
  33­48. Routledge.

Erhlich, I. (1973). Participation in illegitimate activities: a theoretical and empirical analysis.
  Journal of Political Economy 81, 521­567.


                                                28
Evans, W. N. and E. G. Owens (2007). Cops and crime. Journal of Public Economics 91 (1-
  2), 181­201.

Felson, M. and R. V. Clarke (1995). Routine precautions, criminology, and crime prevention.
  Crime and Public Policy: Putting Theory to Work , 179­90.

Felson, R. B. and K. B. Burchfield (2004). Alcohol and the risk of physical and sexual assault
  victimization. Criminology 42 (4), 837­860.

Fillmore, M. and M. Vogel-Sprott (2000). Response inhibition under alcohol: effects of
  cognitive and motivational conflict. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 61 (2), 239­246.

Freisthler, B., P. J. Gruenewald, A. J. Treno, and J. Lee (2003). Evaluating alcohol access
  and the alcohol environment in neighborhood areas. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental
  Research 27 (3), 477­484.

Giancola, P. R. and A. Zeichner (1995). Alcohol-related aggression in males and females: Ef-
  fects of blood alcohol concentration, subjective intoxication, personality, and provocation.
  Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 19 (1), 130­134.

Gottfredson, M. R. (1986). Substantive contributions of victimization surveys. Crime and
 Justice 7, 251­287.

Graham, K., D. W. Osgood, S. Wells, and T. Stockwell (2006). To what extent is intox-
  ication associated with aggression in bars? a multilevel analysis. Journal of Studies on
  Alcohol 67 (3), 382­390.

Guha, B. and A. S. Guha (2012). Crime and moral hazard: Does more policing necessarily
 induce private negligence? Economics Letters 115 (3), 455­459.

Hansen, B. (2015). Punishment and deterrence: Evidence from drunk driving. The American
  Economic Review 105 (4), 1581­1617.

Hansen, B. and G. R. Waddell (2018). Legal access to alcohol and criminality. Journal of
  Health Economics 57, 277­289.

Heaton, P. (2012). Sunday liquor laws and crime. Journal of Public Economics 96 (1-2),
  42­52.

Helland, E. and A. Tabarrok (2007). Does three strikes deter? a nonparametric estimation.
  Journal of Human Resources 42 (2), 309­330.

Heller, S. B. (2014). Summer jobs reduce violence among disadvantaged youth.              Sci-
  ence 346 (6214), 1219­1223.

Heller, S. B., A. K. Shah, J. Guryan, J. Ludwig, S. Mullainathan, and H. A. Pollack (2017).
  Thinking, fast and slow? some field experiments to reduce crime and dropout in chicago.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (1), 1­54.



                                             29
Johnson, R. and S. Raphael (2012). How much crime reduction does the marginal prisoner
  buy? The Journal of Law and Economics 55 (2), 275­310.

Kantor, G. K. and M. A. Straus (1989). Substance abuse as a precipitant of wife abuse
 victimizations. The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 15 (2), 173­189.

Kaplan, J. (2019). Uniform crime reporting program data: Offenses known and clearances
 by arrest, 1960-2017. Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [dis-
 tributor], 2019-02-10. http://doi.org/10.3886/E100707V10 .

Kilmer, B., N. Nicosia, P. Heaton, and G. Midgette (2013). Efficacy of frequent monitoring
  with swift, certain, and modest sanctions for violations: Insights from south dakotas 24/7
  sobriety project. American Journal of Public Health 103 (1), e37­e43.

Klick, J. and A. Tabarrok (2005). Using terror alert levels to estimate the effect of police on
  crime. The Journal of Law and Economics 48 (1), 267­279.

Kondo, M., B. Hohl, S. Han, and C. Branas (2016). Effects of greening and community reuse
 of vacant lots on crime. Urban Studies 53 (15), 3279­3295.

Liedka, R. V., A. M. Piehl, and B. Useem (2006). The crime-control effect of incarceration:
  does scale matter? Criminology & Public Policy 5 (2), 245­276.

Lindo, J. M., P. Siminski, and I. D. Swensen (2018). College party culture and sexual assault.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10 (1), 236­65.

Loeber, R. and D. P. Farrington (2014). Age-crime curve. Encyclopedia of Criminology and
  Criminal Justice , 12­18.

Lofstrom, M. and S. Raphael (2016). Incarceration and crime: Evidence from california's
  public safety realignment reform. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and
  Social Science 664 (1), 196­220.

Maheshri, V. and G. Mastrobuoni (2017). Do security investments displace crime? theory
 and evidence from italian banks.

Mello, S. (2019). More cops, less crime. Journal of Public Economics 172, 174­200.

Miller, B. A., W. R. Downs, and M. Testa (1993). Interrelationships between victimization
 experiences and women's alcohol use. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, supplement (11),
 109­117.

Mueller-Smith, M. (2015). The criminal and labor market impacts of incarceration. Working
 Paper 18.

Mulvihill, L., T. Skilling, and M. Vogel-Sprott (1997). Alcohol and the ability to inhibit
 behavior in men and women. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 58 (6), 600­605.

Nagin, D. S. (2013). Deterrence: A review of the evidence by a criminologist for economists.
  Annual Review of Economics 5 (1), 83­105.

                                              30
Neighbors, C., C. J. Spieker, L. Oster-Aaland, M. A. Lewis, and R. L. Bergstrom (2005).
  Celebration intoxication: An evaluation of 21st birthday alcohol consumption. Journal of
  American College Health 54 (2), 76­80.

Parks, K. A. and B. A. Miller (1997). Bar victimization of women. Psychology of Women
  Quarterly 21 (4), 509­525.

Ryb, G. E., P. C. Dischinger, J. A. Kufera, and K. M. Read (2006). Risk perception and
  impulsivity: association with risky behaviors and substance abuse disorders. Accident
  Analysis & Prevention 38 (3), 567­573.

Schnepel, K. T. (2017). Good jobs and recidivism. The Economic Journal 128 (608), 447­
  469.

Shavell, S. (1991). Specific versus general enforcement of law. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 99 (5), 1088­1108.

Sherman, L. W. and D. Weisburd (1995). General deterrent effects of police patrol in crime
  hot spots: A randomized, controlled trial. Justice Quarterly 12 (4), 625­648.

Tahamont, S. and A. Chalfin (2016). The effect of prisons on crime. In The Oxford Handbook
  of Prisons and Imprisonment.

Western, B., J. R. Kling, and D. F. Weiman (2001). The labor market consequences of
 incarceration. Crime & Delinquency 47 (3), 410­427.

Widom, C. S. (2001). Alcohol abuse as risk factor for and consequence of child abuse. Alcohol
 Research 25 (1), 52.

Yang, C. S. (2017). Local labor markets and criminal recidivism. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 147, 16­29.




                                             31
                Table 1: Crime Rates in the Study Sample (2016)


                          Study Sample      Cities > 250K Population       United States

Population                  7,850,000               75,300,000               321,000,000


Violent Crimes
 Murder                         14.6                    9.9                        4.4
 Rape                          62.0                     49.2                       26.6
 Robbery                       356.7                   226.3                      101.3
 Assault                      1213.8                   388.3                      229.2

Property Crimes
 Burglary                      730.7                    542.3                      537.2
 Larceny                      2621.8                   2135.0                     1821.5
 Motor vehicle theft          624.3                    388.9                      215.4
Note: Data were obtained from the compilation of the Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation's Uniform Crime Reports made available on ICPSR by Kaplan (2019).




                                            32
                                Table 2: Poisson Male RD Effects

                            (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)
                          Order 1      Order 2     Order 3     Birthday 1      Birthday 2      Birthday 3
Violent

All                       1.054        1.069       1.098         1.067          1.064            1.068
                          (0.0165)     (0.0251)    (0.0343)      (0.0250)       (0.0241)         (0.0246)

Homicide                    0.998       0.781        0.705        0.782           0.771            0.780
                           (0.121)     (0.148)      (0.165)      (0.148)         (0.145)          (0.147)

Sex Offenses                1.119      1.744        2.204        1.753           1.762            1.742
                           (0.234)     (0.531)      (0.948)      (0.534)         (0.539)          (0.529)

Robbery                    1.048        1.078       1.139         1.079          1.081            1.079
                          (0.0278)     (0.0424)    (0.0585)      (0.0424)       (0.0427)         (0.0425)

Assault                   1.058         1.067       1.083         1.064          1.059            1.066
                          (0.0212)     (0.0325)    (0.0452)      (0.0321)       (0.0309)         (0.0317)

Property

All                        1.023       1.074       1.077         1.072          1.069            1.072
                          (0.0142)     (0.0222)    (0.0302)      (0.0219)       (0.0217)         (0.0215)

Burglary                   1.003        1.047       0.976         1.045          1.046            1.047
                          (0.0307)     (0.0493)    (0.0620)      (0.0492)       (0.0494)         (0.0493)

Larceny                    1.032       1.079       1.108         1.078          1.075            1.077
                          (0.0181)     (0.0280)    (0.0385)      (0.0278)       (0.0276)         (0.0275)

Motor Vehicle Theft        1.007        1.091       1.089         1.087          1.077            1.087
                          (0.0402)     (0.0682)    (0.0914)      (0.0679)       (0.0665)         (0.0662)
This table contains IRR estimates for the RD effect of the minimum legal drinking age on male victimization
rates for each crime type. The regressions in Columns (1) to (3) include first through third order polynomials
in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over 21. The regressions in Columns (4) - (6) contain second
order polynomials in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over 21 and birthday effects 1-3,
respectively. Birthday 1 includes indicator variables for exact birthdays. Birthday 2 includes indicator
variables for exact birthdays and the following three days. Birthday 3 includes indicators for the week
around each birthday. Each observation is the total number of victims in each age (days) relative to the 21st
birthday. Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                   33
                              Table 3: Poisson Female RD Effects

                            (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)             (5)              (6)
                          Order 1     Order 2     Order 3     Birthday 1      Birthday 2       Birthday 3
Violent

All                        1.008       1.017       1.002         1.015          1.013             1.016
                          (0.0122)    (0.0190)    (0.0251)      (0.0189)       (0.0187)         (0.0188)

Homicide                   1.274        1.437       2.007         1.428          1.418            1.429
                          (0.409)      (0.685)     (1.389)       (0.676)        (0.669)          (0.674)

Sex Offenses              1.170       1.249         1.137        1.239          1.232            1.246
                          (0.0649)    (0.108)      (0.137)       (0.106)        (0.103)          (0.106)

Robbery                    1.014       1.034       1.015         1.033          1.034             1.034
                          (0.0360)    (0.0568)    (0.0771)      (0.0570)       (0.0572)         (0.0567)

Assault                     0.998      1.002       0.992         1.001           0.999            1.002
                          (0.0129)    (0.0198)    (0.0258)      (0.0197)       (0.0196)         (0.0198)

Property

All                       1.036       1.108       1.091         1.102          1.098            1.105
                          (0.0135)    (0.0216)    (0.0289)      (0.0205)       (0.0199)         (0.0203)

Burglary                   1.010      1.116        1.068        1.111          1.108            1.113
                          (0.0259)    (0.0424)    (0.0525)      (0.0421)       (0.0421)         (0.0421)

Larceny                   1.049       1.117       1.114         1.111          1.105            1.115
                          (0.0166)    (0.0270)    (0.0371)      (0.0255)       (0.0246)         (0.0253)

Motor Vehicle Theft        0.988       1.022       0.976         1.025          1.022             1.022
                          (0.0413)    (0.0638)    (0.0803)      (0.0639)       (0.0637)         (0.0637)
This table contains IRR estimates for the RD effect of the minimum legal drinking age on female victimization
rates for each crime type. The regressions in Columns (1) to (3) include first through third order polynomials
in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over 21. The regressions in Columns (4) - (6) contain second
order polynomials in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over 21 and birthday effects 1-3,
respectively. Birthday 1 includes indicator variables for exact birthdays. Birthday 2 includes indicator
variables for exact birthdays and the following three days. Birthday 3 includes indicators for the week
around each birthday. Each observation is the total number of victims in each age (days) relative to the 21st
birthday. Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                  34
                                Table 4: Poisson Birthday Effects

                      (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)
                                  Male                                        Female
                  Birthday 1    Birthday 2     Birthday 3     Birthday 1    Birthday 2      Birthday 3
Violent

All                1.148          1.128           1.074        1.167          1.093            1.054
                   (0.0437)       (0.0421)       (0.0341)      (0.0547)       (0.0332)        (0.0246)

Homicide             0.850         1.429          1.243          1.567         1.417           1.439
                    (0.519)       (0.369)        (0.244)        (1.430)       (0.762)         (0.737)

Sex Offenses         0.637         0.777          1.045        1.661          1.377           1.207
                    (0.535)       (0.340)        (0.370)       (0.252)        (0.174)         (0.131)

Robbery              0.945          0.942         0.950          1.075          1.007          1.048
                    (0.132)       (0.0652)       (0.0525)       (0.219)       (0.0899)        (0.0695)

Assault            1.261          1.218          1.131         1.149          1.087            1.045
                   (0.0515)       (0.0522)       (0.0425)      (0.0434)       (0.0342)        (0.0264)

Property

All                 1.133         1.114          1.099         1.368          1.232           1.142
                   (0.0623)       (0.0400)       (0.0278)      (0.0481)       (0.0387)        (0.0331)

Burglary           1.190            1.031         1.042        1.329          1.169           1.135
                   (0.0349)       (0.0731)       (0.0613)      (0.0869)       (0.0659)        (0.0461)

Larceny             1.088          1.099         1.086         1.461          1.279           1.162
                   (0.0951)       (0.0441)       (0.0281)      (0.0585)       (0.0504)        (0.0422)

Motor Vehicle      1.281          1.322          1.253         0.730            1.002          1.005
Theft              (0.0524)       (0.110)        (0.0707)      (0.0581)       (0.0801)        (0.0722)
This table contains IRR estimates for the birthday effect on male and female victimization rates for each
crime type. All regressions include second order polynomials in age fully interacted with an indicator for
age over 21. Birthday 1 includes indicator variables for exact birthdays. Birthday 2 includes indicator
variables for exact birthdays and the following three days. Birthday 3 includes indicators for the week
around each birthday. Each observation is the total number of victims in each age (days) relative to the
21st birthday. Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                   35
                  Table 5: Poisson RD Effects ­ Residential vs. Non-Residential

                                       (1)                     (2)                        (3)                 (4)
                                             No Birthday Control                         Birthday Effect Control
                           Residential              Non-Residential              Residential          Non-Residential

                                                                  Panel A: Males

Violent
All                           0.997                    1.097                        0.989                     1.094
                            (0.0522)                   (0.0349)                   (0.0500)                   (0.00345)
Homicide                      0.857                      0.713                      0.797                       0.717
                             (0.347)                    (0.171)                    (0.299)                     (0.173)
Sex Offenses                  0.425                    4.464                        0.429                     4.603
                             (0.267)                    (1.944)                    (0.271)                     (2.024)
Robbery                       1.070                     1.102                       1.056                     1.109
                             (0.126)                   (0.0567)                    (0.119)                    (0.0573)
Assault                       0.989                     1.094                       0.985                      1.085
                            (0.0545)                   (0.0455)                   (0.0538)                    (0.0444)
Property
All                           1.058                     1.073                       1.058                     1.067
                            (0.0474)                   (0.0305)                   (0.0476)                   (0.0300)
Burglary                      1.070                     1.260                       1.073                     1.260
                            (0.0670)                    (0.152)                   (0.0674)                    (0.152)
Larceny                       1.022                      1.036                      1.017                      1.032
                            (0.0748)                   (0.0367)                   (0.0672)                   (0.0362)
Motor Vehicle Theft           1.110                     1.127                       1.111                     1.124
                             (0.142)                   (0.0622)                    (0.141)                   (0.0614)

                                                                  Panel B: Females

Violent
All                           0.993                      1.040                      0.992                       1.037
                            (0.0287)                   (0.0292)                   (0.0288)                   (0.00289)
Homicide                      1.141                      1.973                      1.134                       1.894
                             (1.121)                    (1.275)                    (1.118)                     (1.214)
Sex Offenses                  1.030                    1.324                        1.015                     1.313
                             (0.149)                    (0.168)                    (0.145)                     (0.164)
Robbery                       0.986                      1.025                      1.000                       1.022
                             (0.131)                   (0.0658)                    (0.133)                    (0.0656)
Assault                       0.992                      1.026                      0.992                       1.024
                            (0.0300)                   (0.0327)                   (0.0301)                    (0.0325)
Property
All                         1.108                      1.113                       1.098                     1.102
                            (0.0419)                   (0.0307)                   (0.0409)                   (0.0293)
Burglary                     1.109                      1.210                      1.099                       1.201
                            (0.0551)                    (0.137)                   (0.0546)                    (0.136)
Larceny                      1.144                     1.131                       1.130                     1.118
                            (0.0687)                   (0.0365)                   (0.0667)                   (0.0343)
Motor Vehicle Theft           0.934                      1.034                      0.931                      1.031
                             (0.134)                   (0.0531)                    (0.134)                   (0.0531)
This table contains IRR estimates for the RD effect of the minimum legal drinking age on male and female victimization
rates for each crime and location type. All regressions include second order polynomials in age fully interacted with an
indicator for age over 21. Columns (3) and (4) include indicator variables for exact birthdays. Each observation is the
total number of victims in each age (days) relative to the 21st birthday. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

                                                            36
         Nationwide                                    Victimization Subsample




Figure 1: This figures shows that the fraction of of fatal accidents involving alcohol both
nationwide, in the figure to the left, and for the subsample of cities which shared victimization
data. Both series of data are based on fatal accidents from 2000 to 2016.




                                               37
Figure 2: This figure contains fitted Poisson estimates and average victimization rates in 14 day bins.
Poisson estimates include a second order polynomial in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over
21 and no birthday controls.
                                                   38
Figure 3: This figure contains average rates of reporting various victimizations to the police for respondents
to the 2006-2016 waves of the NCVS.

                                                     39
Figure 4: This figure contains IRR estimates of the RD effect of the MLDA on victimization. Regressions
include a second order polynomial in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over 21 and no birthday
controls.
                                                    40
Figure 5: This figure contains IRR estimates of the birthday effect of the MLDA on victimization. Re-
gressions include indicators for exact birthdays and a second order polynomial in age fully interacted with
an indicator for age over 21.
                                                    41
Figure 6: This histogram contains t-ratios from 1000 randomization inference replications of the effect of
the MLDA on victimization. The 95th percentile of the distribution is indicated with a dashed gray line and
the t-ratio from the true model is indicated with a black line.


                                                    42
Figure 7: This figure contains IRR estimates for the RD effect of various ages on victimization. Regressions
include a second order polynomial in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over the cutoff age as well
as an indicator for the exact birthday of the cutoff age.


                                                      43
Figure 8: This figure contains IRR estimates for the birthday effect of various ages on victimization.
Regressions include a second order polynomial in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over the
cutoff age as well as an indicator for the exact birthday of the cutoff age.


                                                  44
Appendix A: Supplementary Tables

                             Table A1: Log-Linear Male RD Effects

                             (1)          (2)             (3)         (4)            (5)             (6)
                           Order 1      Order 2         Order 3   Birthday 1     Birthday 2      Birthday 3
Violent

All                       0.0535       0.0699        0.0897        0.0681          0.0657         0.0691
                          (0.0158)     (0.0235)      (0.0310)      (0.0234)        (0.0229)       (0.0232)

Homicide                   -0.00613      -0.0886      -0.125         -0.0880        -0.0939        -0.0896
                           (0.0428)     (0.0647)     (0.0863)       (0.0648)       (0.0646)       (0.0646)

Sex Offenses                0.0154      0.0796        0.105         0.0803         0.0808         0.0795
                           (0.0298)     (0.0445)     (0.0602)       (0.0446)       (0.0447)       (0.0445)

Robbery                    0.0479       0.0764        0.139         0.0771         0.0788         0.0771
                           (0.0282)     (0.0416)     (0.0545)       (0.0416)       (0.0418)       (0.0417)

Assault                   0.0619        0.0735       0.0789         0.0705         0.0664         0.0721
                          (0.0203)      (0.0302)     (0.0407)       (0.0300)       (0.0294)       (0.0298)

Property

All                         0.0180     0.0699        0.0776        0.0682          0.0663         0.0689
                           (0.0142)    (0.0209)      (0.0283)      (0.0207)        (0.0207)       (0.0204)

Burglary                    -0.0104      0.0451       -0.0200        0.0424         0.0454         0.0450
                           (0.0330)     (0.0502)     (0.0676)       (0.0501)       (0.0504)       (0.0503)

Larceny                     0.0263     0.0701        0.103          0.0687         0.0660         0.0690
                           (0.0183)    (0.0269)      (0.0358)       (0.0268)       (0.0266)       (0.0265)

Motor Vehicle Theft        -0.00326      0.0974       0.112          0.0931         0.0900         0.0949
                           (0.0448)     (0.0708)     (0.0974)       (0.0707)       (0.0706)       (0.0698)
This table contains estimates for the RD effect of the minimum legal drinking age on male victimization
rates for each crime type. The regressions in Columns (1) to (3) include first through third order polynomials
in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over 21. The regressions in Columns (4) - (6) contain second
order polynomials in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over 21 and birthday effects 1-3,
respectively. Birthday 1 includes indicator variables for exact birthdays. Birthday 2 includes indicator
variables for exact birthdays and the following three days. Birthday 3 includes indicators for the week
around each birthday. Each observation is the natural log of the total number of victims in each age (days)
relative to the 21st birthday. Adjustment from Chalfin and McCrary (2018) used when necessary. Robust
standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01



                                                   45
                            Table A2: Log-Linear Female RD Effects

                             (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
                           Order 1      Order 2     Order 3      Birthday 1     Birthday 2      Birthday 3
Violent

All                        0.00520      0.0165      0.00191         0.0145         0.0133          0.0159
                           (0.0123)    (0.0187)     (0.0252)       (0.0187)       (0.0185)        (0.0186)

Homicide                    0.0132      0.0186       0.0340         0.0181         0.0176          0.0183
                           (0.0175)    (0.0254)     (0.0348)       (0.0252)       (0.0251)        (0.0252)

Sex Offenses               0.174       0.241          0.156        0.234           0.230          0.239
                           (0.0589)    (0.0909)      (0.125)       (0.0905)       (0.0900)        (0.0906)

Robbery                    0.00111      0.0414      0.000315        0.0408         0.0417          0.0410
                           (0.0387)    (0.0591)     (0.0813)       (0.0593)       (0.0597)        (0.0592)

Assault                    -0.00382    0.00276      -0.00649      0.000896       -0.000319        0.00223
                           (0.0131)    (0.0198)     (0.0262)      (0.0197)        (0.0196)        (0.0197)

Property

All                        0.0326      0.106        0.0821         0.102          0.0988          0.104
                           (0.0132)    (0.0195)     (0.0262)       (0.0189)       (0.0185)        (0.0186)

Burglary                   -0.00183     0.103        0.0567        0.0990         0.0969           0.101
                           (0.0278)    (0.0404)     (0.0528)       (0.0404)       (0.0405)        (0.0403)

Larceny                   0.0466       0.114        0.104          0.110          0.106           0.113
                          (0.0160)     (0.0239)     (0.0326)       (0.0232)       (0.0227)        (0.0229)

Motor Vehicle Theft        -0.00464     0.0464       -0.0222        0.0498         0.0451          0.0463
                           (0.0484)    (0.0734)     (0.0974)       (0.0733)       (0.0734)        (0.0734)
This table contains estimates for the RD effect of the minimum legal drinking age on female victimization
rates for each crime type. The regressions in Columns (1) to (3) include first through third order polynomials
in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over 21. The regressions in Columns (4) - (6) contain second
order polynomials in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over 21 and birthday effects 1-3,
respectively. Birthday 1 includes indicator variables for exact birthdays. Birthday 2 includes indicator
variables for exact birthdays and the following three days. Birthday 3 includes indicators for the week
around each birthday. Each observation is the natural log of the total number of victims in each age (days)
relative to the 21st birthday. Adjustment from Chalfin and McCrary (2018) used when necessary. Robust
standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                   46
                              Table A3: Log-Linear Birthday Effects

                      (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)
                                  Male                                         Female
                  Birthday 1    Birthday 2     Birthday 3     Birthday 1    Birthday 2       Birthday 3
Violent

All                0.146          0.116         0.0671         0.164         0.0891           0.0532
                   (0.0372)       (0.0349)      (0.0315)       (0.0506)      (0.0313)         (0.0232)

Homicide            -0.0465        0.147         0.0880         0.0361         0.0258          0.0263
                    (0.184)       (0.123)       (0.0850)       (0.0906)       (0.0469)        (0.0436)

Sex Offenses        -0.0544        -0.0313      0.00877        0.560          0.300             0.147
                   (0.0825)       (0.0518)      (0.0550)       (0.173)        (0.129)          (0.104)

Robbery             -0.0618        -0.0669       -0.0635        0.0459        -0.0105          0.0298
                    (0.125)       (0.0704)      (0.0580)        (0.224)       (0.115)         (0.0855)

Assault            0.248          0.196         0.122          0.152         0.0844           0.0446
                   (0.0396)       (0.0383)      (0.0363)       (0.0413)      (0.0325)         (0.0260)

Property

All                0.147          0.0993        0.0868         0.299          0.188           0.125
                   (0.0515)       (0.0443)      (0.0307)       (0.0492)       (0.0343)        (0.0274)

Burglary           0.221          -0.00693      0.00644        0.297           0.156          0.140
                   (0.0303)       (0.0983)      (0.0702)       (0.0766)       (0.0669)        (0.0445)

Larceny             0.113         0.111         0.0923         0.368          0.221           0.138
                   (0.0790)       (0.0395)      (0.0277)       (0.0519)       (0.0434)        (0.0347)

Motor Vehicle      0.349           0.202         0.206         -0.283          0.0357         0.00772
Theft              (0.0611)       (0.131)       (0.0818)       (0.0648)       (0.0867)        (0.0790)
This table contains estimates for the birthday effect on male and female victimization rates for each crime
type. All regressions include second order polynomials in age fully interacted with an indicator for age
over 21. Birthday 1 includes indicator variables for exact birthdays. Birthday 2 includes indicator
variables for exact birthdays and the following three days. Birthday 3 includes indicators for the week
around each birthday. Each observation is the natural log of the total number of victims in each age
(days) relative to the 21st birthday. Adjustment from Chalfin and McCrary (2018) used when necessary.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                   47
        Table A4: Poisson Birthday Effects ­ Residential vs. Non-Residential

                             (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)
                                      Male                               Female
                        Residential    Non-Residential     Residential     Non-Residential
Violent

All                        1.248            1.090             1.058              1.141
                           (0.114)         (0.0844)          (0.0547)           (0.0889)

Homicide                    1.278            0.941               ­                  ­
                           (1.125)          (0.833)

Sex Offenses                  ­                ­             1.691                1.377
                                                             (0.353)             (0.336)

Robbery                     1.526            0.846            0.786               1.231
                           (0.508)          (0.156)          (0.456)             (0.190)

Assault                     1.170          1.255              1.044              1.108
                           (0.150)         (0.0983)          (0.0570)           (0.0954)

Property

All                         1.031           1.142            1.343              1.316
                          (0.0772)         (0.0826)          (0.0861)           (0.0567)

Burglary                   1.191             0.751           1.272                1.243
                          (0.0947)          (0.292)          (0.0709)            (0.462)

Larceny                     0.880            1.120           1.476              1.471
                           (0.138)          (0.149)          (0.185)            (0.0710)

Motor Vehicle Theft         0.852          1.281              1.162             0.831
                           (0.182)         (0.0619)          (0.190)            (0.0557)
This table contains IRR estimates for the birthday effect on male and female victimization rates
for each crime and location type. All regressions include second order polynomials in age fully
interacted with an indicator for age over 21 and indicator variables for exact birthdays. Each
observation is the total number of victims in each age (days) relative to the 21st birthday.
Missing estimates are due to sparse outcome data. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                               48
                Table A5: Poisson RD Effects ­ Weekend vs. Weekday

                                  (1)               (2)                        (3)             (4)
                                   No Birthday Control                      Birthday Effect Control
                           Weekday          Weekend                     Weekday            Weekend

                                                           Panel A: Males
Violent
All                           1.088               1.162                    1.091                1.163
                            (0.0582)              (0.0600)               (0.0582)               (0.0601)
Homicide                      0.598                 1.153                  0.597                  1.167
                             (0.258)               (0.444)                (0.258)                (0.450)
Sex Offenses                  2.004                 1.217                  1.968                  1.184
                             (1.037)               (0.703)                (1.020)                (0.686)
Robbery                       1.109                 1.118                  1.116                  1.122
                             (0.111)               (0.120)                (0.111)                (0.120)
Assault                       1.086               1.179                    1.087                1.179
                            (0.0681)              (0.0699)               (0.0682)               (0.0700)
 Property
All                          1.105                  1.087                 1.106                   1.088
                            (0.0463)              (0.0602)               (0.0464)               (0.0604)
Burglary                      1.049                 0.942                  1.049                  0.946
                            (0.0954)               (0.123)               (0.0955)                (0.124)
Larceny                      1.125                 1.138                  1.127                  1.138
                            (0.0653)              (0.0820)               (0.0655)               (0.0823)
Motor Vehicle Theft           1.117                 1.099                  1.116                  1.101
                            (0.0927)               (0.115)               (0.0928)                (0.115)

                                                           Panel B: Females
Violent
All                           1.029                 1.051                  1.026                  1.052
                            (0.0383)              (0.0449)               (0.0382)               (0.0450)
Homicide                      2.163                 2.966                  2.185                  3.023
                             (2.069)               (2.992)                (2.092)                (3.057)
Sex Offenses                  1.075                1.299                   1.072                  1.286
                             (0.171)               (0.205)                (0.171)                (0.204)
Robbery                       0.996                1.260                   0.997                 1.264
                             (0.133)               (0.172)                (0.133)                (0.172)
Assault                       1.028                 1.006                  1.026                  1.008
                            (0.0405)              (0.0470)               (0.0403)               (0.0471)
 Property
All                         1.126                 1.151                  1.127                  1.152
                            (0.0438)              (0.0543)               (0.0439)               (0.0544)
Burglary                     1.086                  1.109                 1.084                   1.105
                            (0.0897)               (0.119)               (0.0897)                (0.119)
Larceny                     1.203                 1.258                  1.203                  1.259
                            (0.0644)              (0.0791)               (0.0645)               (0.0792)
Motor Vehicle Theft           1.003                 0.951                 1.008                   0.956
                            (0.0812)              (0.0957)               (0.0815)               (0.0963)
This table contains IRR estimates for the RD effect of the minimum legal drinking age on male and female
victimization rates for each crime type by weekend versus weekday. All regressions include second order
polynomials in age fully interacted with an indicator for age over 21. Birthday 1 includes indicator variables
for exact birthdays. Weekend victimizations occur from Friday at 8 PM through Monday at 6 AM. Each
observation is the total number of victims in each age (days) relative to the 21st birthday. Robust standard
errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


                                                      49
Appendix B: Sex Offenses, by Police Department
Charlotte-Mecklenburg: forcible rape, forcible fondling, forcible sodomy, sexual assault with
object

Dallas: rape, sex offenses and indecent conduct

Denver: harassment - sexual in nature, sex aslt - fondle adult victim, sex aslt - fondle child,
sex aslt - fondle-child by pot, sex aslt - non-rape, sex aslt - non-rape pot, sex aslt rape, sex
aslt - rape pot, sex aslt w/ object, sex off incest, sexual exploitation of child

Houston: other sex, rape, sex offenses

Kansas city, mo: forcible fondling, forcible rape, forcible sodomy, sexual assault with an object

Milwaukee: ejaculation, forcible fondling, forcible rape, forcible sodomy, sexual assault with
object

San Diego: act in concert to commit rape w/foreign object, aggravated sexual assault of a
minor with a foreign object, aggravated sexual assault:minor under 14 and 10+ yrs younger,
assault w/intent to commit rape/other sex acts, assault with intent to rape, assault with
intent to rape in commission of 459, attempted rape, burglary/unspecified, continuous sex-
ual abuse of child, crime against nature/sodomy not specified, oral cop:victim unconscious
or asleep, oral copulation, oral copulation / victim unconscious of the nature of the act,
oral copulation by force or fear, oral copulation in concert: victim incapable of giving con-
sent, oral copulation w/person under 16, oral copulation w/person under 18 years, oral
copulation: victim intoxicated/etc, oral copulation:minor under 14 10+ years younger, oral
copulation:victim unaware act occurred, oral copulation:victim under 10 years of age, rape,
rape by fear or force, rape by threat of retaliation, rape by threats to use authority of public
official, rape of drugged victim, rape of spouse by force/fear/threat, rape of spouse unable
to resist: under controlled sub/etc, rape of spouse under controlled sub/etc, unable to re-
sist, rape of spouse unable to resist: under controlled sub/etc, rape spouse by force/fear/etc,
rape where victim is incapable of giving consent, rape/etc in concert with, orce/violence,
rape/etc in concert with force/violence:minor 14 yrs or older, rape: force/fear/etc., rape:
spouse unconscious of nature of act, rape: victim believed person is spouse, rape: victim
believes person is spouse, rape: victim drugged, rape: victim incapable of consent, rape:
victim unconscious of nature of act, rape:victim unconscious of the nature of the act, sex
penetration:foreign obj/etc victim unaware:nature of, sex penetration:foreign obj/etc:victim
unconscious/asleep, sex penetration:victim unaware act occurred, sexual battery, sexual bat-
tery as defined in this section, sexual battery involving restrained/institutionalized person,
sexual battery of restrained or incapacitated person (f), sexual battery of restrained or in-
capacitated person (m), sexual battery on institutionalized person, sexual penetration by
threat of retaliation victim/etc, sexual penetration w/ foreign object w/ force, sexual pen-
etration w/force/etc 14 years or older, sexual penetration w/force/etc under 14 years old,
sexual penetration w/foreign object w/victim under 18 yrs, sexual penetration w/foreign ob-

                                               50
ject w/intoxicated victim, sexual penetration w/foreign object w/victim under 16 yrs, sexual
penetration w/foreign object w/victim under 18 yrs, sexual penetration w/foreign object:
vic believes is spouse, sexual penetration w/foreign object:threat by auth to arrest, sexual
penetration w/foreign object; victim incapable confined, sexual penetration w/foreign ob-
ject; victim incapable of consent, sodomy by force or fear, sodomy by force/violence/fear,
sodomy by force/violent/fear victim 14 yrs of age or older (f), sodomy w/person under 18
yrs, sodomy/concert/force, sodomy/victim unconscious of the nature of act, sodomy:minor
under 14 10+ years younger, sodomy:victim under 10 years of age, sodomy:victim under
influence anesthetic/etc/any control s, sodomyw/o consent: drugged victim defendant in
mental fa, touch person intimately against will for sexual arousal/e, unlawful sexual inter-
corse w/minor: 3 yrs old or younger, unlawful sexual intercourse / victim under 18, unlawful
sexual intercourse w / minor 18, unlawful sexual intercourse w/minor: more than 3 years
old, unlawful sexual intercourse w/minor: perp 21+ victim -16

St. Louis: forcible fondling, forcible rape, forcible sodomy, human trafficking - commercial
sex acts, human trafficking, commercial sex acts, sex offenses - forcible fondling, sex offenses
- forcible sodomy, sex offenses incest, sex offenses - statutory rape




                                              51
Appendix C: Sample Period, by Police Department
We obtained data from the following municipal law enforcement agencies for each of the
following time periods:

   · Charlotte-Mecklenburg, NC: 1/1/2008 - 12/31/2017

   · Dallas, TX: 1/1/2007-12/31/2017

   · Denver, CO: 1/1/2008-12/31/2017

   · Houston, TX: 1/1/2007 - 12/31/2015

   · Kansas City, MO: 1/1/2007-4/26/2018

   · Milwaukee, WI: 1/1/2007-12/31/2017

   · San Diego, CA: 1/1/2008-12/31/2017

   · St. Louis, MO: 1/1/2007 - 12/31/2017




                                            52
