                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 CHINA'S OVERSEAS LENDING

                                           Sebastian Horn
                                         Carmen M. Reinhart
                                         Christoph Trebesch

                                        Working Paper 26050
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26050


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2019




We thank Max Tchirikov, Mattis Bös, Martin Wiegand and Nicolas Wuthenow for excellent research
assistance as well as the German Research Foundation (DFG) for financial support (SPP 1859). Sebastian
Horn gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Egon Sohmen Graduate Center at LMU Munich.
We thank Brad Parks, Vincent Reinhart, Robert Subbaraman, Jeromin Zettelmeyer, and seminar participants
at Harvard's Kennedy School and Business School, Paris School of Economics, the Center for Global
Development, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sebastian Horn, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
China's Overseas Lending
Sebastian Horn, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch
NBER Working Paper No. 26050
July 2019, Revised May 2020
JEL No. F21,F34,F42,F6,G15,H63,N25,O10

                                             ABSTRACT

Compared with China's pre-eminent status in world trade, its role in global finance is poorly understood.
This paper studies the size, characteristics, and determinants of China's capital exports building a new
database of 5000 loans and grants to 152 countries, 1949-2017. We find that 50% of China's lending
to developing countries is not reported to the IMF or World Bank. These "hidden debts" distort policy
surveillance, risk pricing, and debt sustainability analyses. Since China's overseas lending is almost
entirely official (state-controlled), the standard "push" and "pull" drivers of private cross-border flows
do not apply in the same way.


Sebastian Horn                                      Christoph Trebesch
University of Munich                                Kiel Institute for the World Economy
and Kiel Institute                                  Research Area on International Finance
sebastian.horn@econ.lmu.de                          Kiellinie 66,
                                                    24105 Kiel,
Carmen M. Reinhart                                  Germany
Kennedy School of Government                        and CEPR and CESifo
Harvard University                                  christoph.trebesch@ifw-kiel.de
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and CEPR
and also NBER
carmen_reinhart@harvard.edu
1. Introduction


While China's dominant footprint in world trade and global output is well known, its expanding
role in international finance is poorly understood. Apart from its massive scale, the most notable
feature of China's capital exports is its opacity. Data is scarce and the process of lending is not
transparent. This helps to explain why relatively little work exists on China's large-scale cross-
border investments. In this paper, we study the surge in China's capital exports to the rest of the
world during the past two decades by building an encompassing new database. We document the
size, destination, and characteristics of China's overseas lending systematically and estimate the
drivers of Chinese cross-border flows using established empirical models. A main insight from the
data is that about half of China's lending to developing countries is not picked up by the "gold
standard" databases of international finance. The "hidden debts" owed to China are consequential
for debt sustainability in recipient countries and pose serious challenges for macroeconomic
surveillance work and the market pricing of sovereign risk.

Unlike other major economies, almost all of China's external lending and portfolio investment is
official, meaning that it is undertaken by the Chinese government, state-owned companies, or the
state-controlled central bank. China does not report on its official international lending and there is
no comprehensive standardized data on Chinese overseas debt stocks and flows. Debt restructuring
agreements between China and debtor countries that would constitute a "credit event" are largely
off the radar screen of the credit rating agencies. Moody's and Standard and Poor's, like other
rating agencies, monitor sovereign borrowing from private creditors (banks, bondholders, or
others); official lending to sovereigns is not a regular part of their menu of activities. The Paris
Club tracks sovereign borrowing from official bilateral creditors (i.e. other sovereigns), which in
principle, should cover most of China's overseas lending. However, China is not a member of the
Paris Club and therefore has not been subject to the standard disclosure requirements. In addition,
China does not divulge data on its official flows with the OECD's Creditor Reporting System, and
it is not part of the OECD Export Credit Group, which provides data on long- and short-term trade
credit flows. As such, documentation of China's international lending has literally fallen through
the cracks.

Adding to the data scarcity, commercial providers such as Bloomberg or Thomson Reuters (which
primarily report on bond offerings) do not keep track of China's official overseas loans, and such
lending is missed even by the most ambitious recent attempts to measure international capital flows
(e.g. Coppola et al. 2019). The People's Bank of China (PBoC) does not publish its asset purchases
or the composition of its portfolio. Similarly, China does not provide details on the direct lending
activities of its "Belt and Road" initiative. With regard to cross-border banking, China recently
joined the list of countries reporting to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), but the data
are not made publicly available on a bilateral basis. Taken together, these data limitations make it
very challenging to trace and quantify China's expanding network of cross-border financial

                                                  2
transactions, let alone analyze empirically China's capital exports and its potential impacts on the
rest of the world.

The entry of China in the international financial system about two decades ago has created a
significant gap in the academic literature on global finance. There is relatively little research on the
consequences of China's "finance shock," that is the natural counterpart to the pioneering work on
China's "trade shock" (see Autor, Dorn, Hanson, Song 2014, for instance). While trade issues have
been the subject of a flourishing body of research (see the survey of Autor, Dorn, and Hanson,
2016), there is no comparable body of work on China in international finance.

The literature on a "global financial cycle," for example, is concerned with the measurement of
international financial spillovers from the United States (Obstfeld 2015, Rey 2015, Miranda-
Aggripino and Rey 2015, Jordá, Schularick, and Taylor 2018, Kalemli-Ozcan 2019). Few, if any
papers, study the potential for financial spillovers from China. Relatedly, the broader literature on
international capital flows emphasizes US financial conditions and a related set of well-known
"push" and "pull" factors (Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart 1993, Forbes and Warnock 2012,
Fratzscher 2012, Bruno and Shin 2014).2

As we show in this paper, the empirical approach in this literature is not well suited to describe
China's massive official capital outflows. Models of private investors' portfolio decisions are of
limited use for understanding official capital flows, such as China's state-driven lending overseas.
In a historical context, for example, few would assert, that the vast post-WWII Marshall Plan
lending by the US government was driven by the search for yield. As shown in the 200-year study
by Horn, Reinhart, and Trebesch (forthcoming), rising economic powers have recurrently used
government loans to tap into new markets abroad, to secure commodity imports, and to further
their global ambitions. Our analysis on China's capital exports is an attempt to consider factors
usually excluded from the empirical literature on capital flow drivers. We find that variables linked
to Chinese domestic activity do best in explaining the time-variation in China's state-led
investments abroad. Further work that incorporates geopolitical objectives of the Chinese
government would seem a clear next step.

Another obstacle to understanding China's role in international finance today is that various strands
of relevant research have remained largely disconnected. Some papers have studied "uphill" capital
flows from emerging markets to advanced countries (e.g. Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti 2011,
Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan and Volosovych 2014, Gourinchas and Jeanne 2013). In that work, China's
central bank features prominently as a buyer of advanced country bonds, but this particular type of
capital exports is not studied in tandem with China's other forms of investing overseas ("south-to-

2
 See also the literature on global imbalances (Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas 2008, Mendoza, Quadrini and
Ríos-Rull 2009, Gourinchas and Rey 2014).

                                                    3
south" lending). There are papers that have explored Chinese FDI and equity investments in
advanced countries (e.g. Fuest, Hugger Sultan, and Xing 2019), or China's capital flows to
developing countries, in particular via aid, grants and loans (see e.g. Brautigam 2009, Dreher and
Fuchs 2016, Dreher, Fuchs, Parks, Strange, and Tierney 2018, Hurley, Morris and Portelance
2018). 3 Yet another line of work is interested in the role of China's currency in the international
monetary system, but without a connection to the role of capital flows (Prasad 2016, Farhi and
Maggiori 2019, Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff 2019). While these studies provide valuable insights
on various aspects of China's official capital outflow surge, they do not present an encompassing
picture of the country's international capital exports, which range from portfolio investment and
asset purchases (primarily in middle and high income countries) to official loans to the
governments of some of the world's poorest countries.

Here, we take a first step at providing that encompassing picture of China's overseas capital
exports. In light of the acute data shortcomings, our first step is to compile a new "consensus"
database of Chinese loans to the rest of the world and construct corresponding debt flow and stock
estimates. Our new dataset spans more than six decades from 1949, when the People's Republic
was established, until 2017, and covers a total of 1,974 Chinese loans and 2,947 Chinese grants to
152 emerging or developing countries, with total commitments of 520 billion US$. "Consensus"
refers to the approach adopted, which attempts to reconcile what multiple sources record about the
same bilateral lending transaction. The data is granular and was gathered from a variety of sources
including international treaties, debt contracts, policy reports, as well as the work of academics.
Whenever possible, we also gathered loan-level information on the interest rates, currency
denomination, and the repayment terms of Chinese lending and check what part of the debt is
publicly reported and how much is "hidden", in the sense that it is not picked up by official
statistics, in particular by the World Bank or BIS.

We find that the People's Republic has always been an active international lender, even in the
1950s and 1960s, when it lent substantial amounts to Communist brother states. That is, official
Chinese lending has always had a strategic element. What has made China such a dominant global
creditor in the recent 20 years is the drastic increase of China's GDP, combined with China's
"Going Global Strategy" to foster Chinese investment abroad, which was initiated in 1999. Chinese
loans have helped to finance large-scale investments in infrastructure, energy and mining in
developing and emerging market countries, with potentially large positive effects for growth and
prosperity.

At the same time, however, the large lending flows resulted in the build-up of high debt servicing
burdens. For the 50 most indebted recipients of Chinese direct lending, the average stock of debt
owed to China has increased from less than 1% of GDP in 2005 to more than 15% of debtor

3
  There is some research on the growth spillovers from China to other emerging markets, but this work offers
little connection to financial aspects.

                                                     4
country GDP in 2017, at least according to our lower bound estimates. For these countries, debt to
China now accounts to close to 40% of total reported external debt, on average. In addition,
China's state-driven lending abroad typically involves relatively high interest rates and short
maturities, in contrast to the mostly concessional lending terms of other official lenders such as the
World Bank or OECD governments.

More importantly, using unpublished data from the World Banks's Debtor Reporting System, we
find that a substantial portion of China's overseas lending goes unreported and that the volume of
"hidden" lending has grown to more than 200 billion USD as of 2016. The problem of "hidden"
Chinese debts is particularly severe in two dozen developing countries and has important
implications. Debt sustainability analyses are hampered if a country's true debt service burden
remains unknown and if part of the debt is excluded from the published aggregates (Alfaro and
Kanczuk 2019). For private investors, this opacity makes asset pricing difficult. Moreover, it is an
obstacle to crisis resolution, because information on the size and composition of a country's debt is
crucial to assure fair burden sharing and orderly crisis management.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 opens by presenting an overview of
China's external lending and introduces our new "consensus" database; we highlight the key
features that emerge from the data. Section 3 focuses on country exposure to Chinese loans and the
related problem of underreporting and estimates the size of "hidden" debts to China. Section 4
reassesses debt burdens and debt dynamics from the perspective of recipient countries and explores
the consequences for debt sustainability. The next section focuses on China's lending to advanced
countries with particular focus on the scale of portfolio holdings by the Chinese central bank.
Section 6 combines the different types of capital flows and presents an encompassing view of
China's financial role in the global economy. The question of what factors drive China's overseas
lending is taken up in 7, while the last section concludes.


2. Chinese overseas lending: an encompassing database

2.1. Overview

Figure 1 uses aggregate data from China's balance of payments (BoP) statistics. China's direct
loans and trade credits have climbed from almost zero in 1998 to 1.6 trillion USD, or close to 2 %
of world GDP in 2018. 4 These loans mostly go to low- and middle-income countries. In total,
estimates suggest that the Chinese state now accounts for a quarter of total bank lending to
emerging markets. 5 This has transformed China into the largest official creditor, easily surpassing

4
  The numbers include debt claims from China's FDI. FDI debt claims arise if there is inter-company lending
between a direct investor and a non-resident entity, over which the foreign direct investor has significant
control.
5
  This number includes flows via offshore financial centers (Cerutti et al. 2018).

                                                    5
the IMF or the World Bank (the largest overall creditor remains the United States). Beyond that,
however, there is no official data on the destination and characteristics of China's loans. Among
our tasks is to identify these borrowers.

                                 Figure 1. China's overseas lending boom




Note: The figure represent a subset of outstanding Chinese overseas debt claims as reported in China's
BoP Statistics. Trade credit includes short- and long-term trade credits and advances. Portfolio debt is
excluded (see Figure 2). Sources: PBoC and IMF.


In light of the acute data shortcomings, our first step is to compile a new consensus database of
Chinese loans to the rest of the world and construct corresponding debt flow and stock estimates.
Our new dataset covers a total of 1,974 Chinese loans and 2,947 Chinese grants to 152 emerging or
developing countries from 1949 to 2017. We dub our approach "consensus," because it attempts to
reconcile what multiple sources record about the same bilateral lending transaction. 6

Our newly assembled database of Chinese lending abroad spans more than six decades from 1949,
when the People's Republic was established. The data is granular and was gathered from a variety
of sources, including international treaties, debt contracts, policy reports, as well as the work of
academics such as the AidData team at William and Mary (Dreher et al. 2017). Overall, we
collated details on almost 5000 loans and grants extended by the Chinese government and state-
owned creditor agencies to more than 150 countries worldwide, with total commitments of 520
billion US$. Whenever possible, we collected loan-level information on the interest rates, currency


6
  This approach has antecedents in the capital flow literature. Studies quantifying capital flight via trade mis-
invoicing (Chang et al. 1997, for instance) also reconcile multiple data sources. The typical exercise
compared what a country recorded as exports (imports) versus what its trading partners posted on their
books.

                                                        6
denomination, and the repayment terms of Chinese lending and check what part of the debt is
publicly reported and how much is not picked up by official statistics.

We find that the People's Republic has always been an active international lender, even in the
1950s and 1960s, when it lent substantial amounts to other Communist states--it would appear
official Chinese lending has always had a strategic element. What has made China such a dominant
global creditor in the last 20 years is the dramatic increase of China's GDP, combined with China's
"Going Global Strategy", which was initiated in 1999.

Chinese loans have helped to finance large-scale investments in infrastructure, energy, and mining
in more than 100 developing and emerging market countries, with potentially large positive effects
for growth and prosperity. At the same time, the large lending flows have resulted in the build-up
of debt servicing burdens. For the 50 most indebted recipients of Chinese direct lending, the
average stock of debt owed to China has increased from less than 1% of GDP in 2005 to more than
15% of debtor country GDP in 2017, according to our estimates. For these countries, debt to China
now accounts for close to 40% of reported external debt, on average.

An additional concern is that we find that about 50% of China's committed lending is unreported.
We show this by comparing our estimates to unpublished data from the World Banks's Debtor
Reporting System, which is the key building block underlying the International Debt Statistics as
well as related public databases at the IMF. According to our estimates, these "hidden" loans have
grown to around 200 billion USD as of 2016, with important implications for country surveillance,
risk assessment, and debt sustainability in recipient countries. When aggregated, our granular
estimates by country at most account for about 62% of the lending reported in the Chinese balance
of payments statistics, which suggests that the extent of indebtedness may possibly be greater or
more geographically widespread than our calculations indicate.

The underreporting problem is exacerbated by the fact that China usually lends at relatively high
interest rates, at short maturities, and partly with collateral clauses that secure repayment through
commodity export proceeds, in particular from oil. This approach differs from other official lenders
such as the World Bank or OECD creditor governments that typically extend loans to developing
countries at concessionary terms with long maturities and low interest rates. The collateralization of
China's lending helps to establish a comparatively high level of seniority among other international
creditors (see Schlegl et al. 2019). These practices have a historical analogue. Indeed, China's
overseas loans share many features with French, German and British 19th century foreign lending,
which also tended to be market based, partially collateralized by commodity income, and
characterized by a close link of political and commercial interests (Feis 1930, Borchardt 1951).

Another historical analogue of interest is the lending boom of the 1970s, when resource-rich, low-
income countries received large amounts of syndicated bank loans while commodity prices
boomed. The Chinese lending flows during 2008 to 2015 in particular share similarities with the
1970s lending cycle, which did not end well once commodity prices, export revenues, and
                                                  7
economic growth slumped across the countries that had gone on a borrowing spree. After 1982,
dozens of sovereigns went into default, resulting in a "lost decade" in Latin America and
elsewhere. The sharp increase in the incidence of sovereign debt restructurings of Chinese debt
since 2011 suggests a new wave of debt overhangs. We show that debt sustainability concerns are
largest in developing countries that have received the most Chinese loans, several of which had
benefitted from the HIPC debt relief initiative. Debt levels and the debt service burdens in about
two dozen developing countries are much higher than previously thought.

China tailors its overseas lending by recipient. Rather than direct loans, most advanced and higher
middle-income countries receive portfolio investments, usually via sovereign bond purchases of the
People's Bank of China. As a result, many advanced countries are highly indebted to the Chinese
government. Most famously, China's purchases of US Treasury securities (and other US fixed
income assets) soared since the early 2000s and reached a peak in 2011 at 1.6 trillion USD or 10 %
of US GDP. The US Treasury's data on foreign purchases of US assets facilitates tracking that type
of bilateral lending. However, in the past decade the PBoC has also escalated its purchases of other
countries' sovereign bonds, and these asset purchases, as we discuss, are more challenging to track.
Other types of state-driven finance, in particular officially guaranteed trade credits as well as equity
and FDI flows to advanced countries have also grown markedly. China has also built a global
network of central bank swap lines, meaning standing lines of credit with the PBoC and foreign
central banks, including most advanced economies. The total sum of these official swap line
drawing rights exceeds 500 billion USD.

                          Figure 2. Total Chinese debt claims on the rest of the world




Note: Portfolio debt investment summarizes claims on non-residents from PBoC holdings of debt instruments
(reserve assets) and from holdings of non-reserve asset portfolio debt. Trade credits include short- and long-
term credits and advances. Sources: PBoC and IMF World Economic Outlook.



                                                      8
Figure 2 shows that, as of 2018, the government of China holds more than five trillion USD of debt
claims towards the rest of the world (6% of world GDP), up from less than 500 billion in the early
2000s (1% of world GDP). The main difference to Figure 1 is that we now add portfolio debt
holdings (blue area) and combine these with the direct loans and trade credits shown before. If we
also add foreign equity and direct investments (not shown), China's total financial claims abroad
amount to more than 8% of world GDP in 2017. This dramatic increase in Chinese official lending
and investment is almost unprecedented in peacetime history, being only comparable to the rise of
US lending in the wake of WWI and WWII (Horn, Reinhart, and Trebesch, forthcoming).

2.2. Why China's overseas lending is opaque

As noted, a key challenge in quantifying China's official lending is the opacity of the process and
dearth of systematic reporting by the Chinese government.

On the debtor side, the data coverage of loans from China is not much better. One reason is the way
in which the Chinese government lends abroad. The credits are rarely borrowed bilaterally, i.e.
government-to-government. Instead, almost all of China's overseas lending is extended via Chinese
state-owned entities and the recipients also tend to be state-owned enterprises. This type of
company-to-company lending is often not collected by the statistical offices of developing
countries so that international debt statistics suffer from chronic underreporting. According to the
IMF, fewer than one in ten low-income countries report debts of public corporations that are
outside the general government (IMF 2018). As a result, the debtor countries themselves have an
incomplete picture on how much they have borrowed from China and under which conditions.

The financial industry, as discussed, does not monitor China's state-driven cross-border lending
flows. The data provided by the BIS locational banking statistics do not help either. China started
to report to the BIS in 2015, but the government has not agreed to publicly release the bilateral
(country-by-country) claims data, as many other BIS reporting countries do. Only aggregate
Chinese claims are available, and only back to 2015. Nevertheless, in Appendix I.5, we describe a
way to infer the size of Chinese claims from BIS data as of end-2015 and find evidence for
reporting gaps, most apparently with regard to loans extended to high-risk countries.

One potential explanation for some of the reporting gaps, including to the BIS, is that China uses a
"circular" lending strategy that minimizes the risk of default on its loans. For risky debtors, China's
state-owned policy banks often choose not to transfer any money to accounts controlled by the
recipient government. Instead, the loans are disbursed directly to the Chinese contractor firm that
implements the construction project abroad ­ a closed circle. 7 The loans thus remain within the
Chinese financial system, making it harder for recipient countries to misuse the money. Because
this type of overseas loan is not actually transferred abroad, there is no cross-order flow to report,

7
    Bräutigam (2009) calls this strategy the "Eximbank Cycle".

                                                       9
resulting in incomplete data. To be clear, these loans still represent an obligation from the debtor
country to a Chinese official entity.

Appendix Figure A1 summarizes why we know so little about China's overseas lending. In the
remainder of this section we address the lack of transparency, by creating a new consensus
database of Chinese overseas lending and summarize its main characteristics.

2.3. A database of flows and stocks

A key contribution of this paper is to create a new consensus database of Chinese overseas lending
(loans and grants) spanning seven decades (1949-2017) that builds on a broad range of existing
data sources, historical archives and the existing literature. We then use the loan-level data to
compute debt stock and debt servicing profiles for each country, focusing on the period 2000-2017.

Data sources and merging approach: Appendix I describes our approach and the sources in detail.
For the modern period, our main source is AidData's Chinese Official Finance database (Dreher et
al. 2017), which encompasses more than 1,200 loans and 2,300 grants to 140 recipient countries
during 2000-2014 and was coded from hundreds of primary sources. We complement and cross-
check this rich source with various region- and sector-specific databases that have excellent
coverage for subsets of China's foreign lending and which allow us to extend our dataset until
2017. These sources are summarized in Table 1 below and in Appendix I. To go further back in
time, we collected a large number of historical sources, most importantly a set of recently
declassified CIA reports that contain rich transaction-level details on China's international grants
and loans in the post-WWII era. We cross-check and complement the information from this source
with multiple other archival documents and sources on Chinese lending going back to 1949, when
the People's Republic was founded.

To generate a consensus database, (one grounded on time series) we compare each loan or grant
across all sources in case of overlaps, filter out duplicates, identify missing data points and, in case
of conflicting information, consult additional primary sources. Our final, unified dataset covers
1974 loans and 2947 grants by different Chinese official and state-owned creditors to more than
150 countries and spans the entire history of the People's Republic from 1949 to 2017, with total
recorded lending commitments of 520 billion USD.




                                                  10
                      Table 1. Data sources on Chinese foreign lending, 1950 - 2018

                                                                                                                           Total
 Institution             Dataset / source                    Geographic coverage Time coverage           Type           commitment

 AidData at              China's Official Finance Database    Global              2000 - 2014    Loans and grants          279 bn
 William & Mary          China's Public Diplomacy Dataset East Asia & Oceania 2000 - 2016        Loans and grants           38 bn

 Boston University GDPC
China's Global Energy Finance         Global              2000 - 2018    Energy finance            250 bn
 Inter-American Dialogue China - LA Finance Database          Latin America       2005 - 2018    Loans                     136 bn

 Johns Hopkins CARI      Chinese Loans to Africa              Africa              2000 - 2017    Loans                     146 bn

 Lowy Institute          Chinese Aid in the Pacific           Pacific Islands     2002 - 2018    Loans and grants             6 bn

 US Export Import Bank   Competitiveness Reports              Global              2013 - 2017    Export credits             50 bn

 CIA                     Reports on Communist Aid             Global              1950 - 1983    Loans and grants           5.9 bn

 Bartke (1989)           Chinese Aid Projects                 Global              1950 - 1988    Aid projects                 n.a.

 Lin (1993)              Forein Aid of the PRC                Global              1950 - 1992    Loans and grants             n.a.

 Copper (2016)           China's Foreign Aid & Investment     Global              1950 - 2015    Country case studies         n.a.

 Our merged database     Horn, Reinhart, Trebesch (2019)      Global              1950 - 2017    Loans and grants          520 bn

Note: A complete list of sources and the respective references are provided in the appendix. Commitments are in
current USD.




From flows to stocks: To calculate debt stocks from the loan-level (flows) data we estimated
repayment histories for each loan and then aggregate these at the country-year level. This
procedure requires reliable data on the repayment terms of the loans, which is best available for the
period 2000-2017. For about one third of all loans in this period, we know all necessary details
from the existing datasets. For an additional 45 % of loans we can approximate the repayment
terms by making use of the fact that Chinese lending practices are highly standardized, i.e. largely
predetermined by who lends (creditor agency). We first created a typology of creditor-specific
Chinese lending terms by combining qualitative and quantitative information and cross-checking
our results with existing literature (see Appendix I for details). In a nutshell, Chinese foreign loans
fall into three broad categories: (i) interest-free loans, (ii) other concessional loans by the China
Export Import Bank and (iii) commercial loans extended by a variety of state-owned banks and
enterprises. Taken together, this approach gives us detailed lending terms for around 75 % of loans
in our database. For the remaining 25 %, we make the conservative assumption that loans are
extended at concessional (low interest and long maturity) terms. The result is a new annual time
series database of debt stocks owed to China, and the associated interest and amortization
payments. The dataset starts in 2000 and covers 107 recipient countries of Chinese direct lending
that have received loans of at least 1 % of GDP (Table A2 provides the country list).

Appendix I discusses a number of issues that arise in constructing estimates of debt stocks: most
importantly, our methodology on the treatment of late payments ("arrears") and on the mapping of
commitments to disbursements (much of our loan-level data is based on commitment amounts).
                                                             11
Relatedly, Section 2.4. shows robustness checks, focusing on lagged loan disbursement. The
section also compares our estimated debt stocks to official aggregates whenever such data is
available, including at the level of individual Chinese creditor banks (further comparisons are
shown in Appendix I.2).

2.3. China's overseas lending 1950-2017: overview and recipient countries

A first insight from our dataset is that the People's Republic of China has been an active
international lender for much of its history. Figure 3 shows Chinese bilateral commitments in the
form of loans and grants as a share of Chinese GDP since 1949. During the 1950s and 1960s, China
extended sizeable bilateral loans and grants to selected communist allies, even though the country
was going through severe hardship and famines (Meng et al. 2015). Overseas lending was much
lower in the 1980s and 1990s, and starts rising again in the early 2000s in the wake of China's
"going-out" policy. This coincides with China's economic boom and its increasing share of world
GDP, which is illustrated with the black dotted line. Now that China represents more than 15 % of
global GDP on a purchasing power parity basis, the financial ramifications of its overseas lending
are larger than ever before.

Along with the much larger outflow amounts, the geographic scope of China's lending has also
increased notably. The share of countries receiving Chinese official grants or loans has increased to
almost 80% as of 2017 (Figure 4). With almost full global coverage, US official lending is still
further-reaching than Chinese official finance, but the gap is narrowing.

The overseas lending boom has transformed China into one of the major official creditors
worldwide. The footprint of China is particularly large among low-income countries, where
Chinese lending flows have surpassed total capital flows from multilateral creditors such as the
IMF or the World Bank, as well as flows from private creditors (Figure 5). Figure A4 in the
Appendix shows a similar comparison of China versus other creditors, using outstanding debts.




                                                 12
            Figure 3. China has always been an active international lender, 1949 - 2017




Sources: Chinese overseas lending from our database (Appendix I). Chinese share of global GDP on a
purchasing power parity basis from the Penn World Tables.



                     Figure 4. China vs the US ­ global reach of direct lending




Note: Share of developing and emerging countries that have received Chinese or US official funds
during the past five years. The data on US official lending is from the USAID Greenbook.




                                                  13
              Figure 5. Capital flows to low-income developing countries 1990 - 2017




Notes: Country classification from World Economic Outlook 2018. Series exclude loans to private
borrowers. Sources: HRT database (Appendix I) and World Bank's IDS/WDI Database.


The flipside of China's large-scale lending flows is an increasing debt stock and growing annual
debt service obligations in many recipient countries. Figure 6 ranks countries that are most
indebted to China according to our estimates. The debt stock estimates include both loans to public
borrowers (public and publicly guaranteed debt) as well as to private borrowers in recipient
countries. As mentioned earlier, the large bulk of China's state-driven lending goes to public
entities, while loans to private entities account for less than 10% of total (we drop private
borrowing in parts of our analysis below).

More than two dozen countries now owe more than 10% of their GDP to the Chinese government.
On average, for the top 50 most indebted recipients of Chinese direct loans, debt to China has
increased to more than 15% of GDP in 2017. Chinese official lending now also trumps that by
other major official creditor nations. Developing and emerging countries are now much more
indebted to China than to all other major creditor governments combined: According to our
estimates, developing and emerging market sovereigns owe 370 billion USD to China compared to
246 billion USD in debt owed to the group of 22 Paris Club member governments (see also
Appendix I.4).




                                                 14
    Figure 6. External debt to China (estimated debt stock as share of GDP) ­ top 50 recipients




Note: Estimated stock of total external debt from direct loans owed to China as of 2017. Data is shown for
the 50 countries that are most indebted to China. Total debt includes loans to public borrowers (PPG debt) as
well as private borrowers. Chinese portfolio debt holdings and short-term trade debt are excluded from these
estimates. Sources: HRT database (see Appendix I) and World Economic Outlook.




                                                     15
   Figure 7. External debt to China by region and functional groups (as of 2017, share of GDP)

                               Panel A. Debt to China by country group




                                   Panel B. Debt to China by region




Note: Debt estimates are based on loan-level data (see text and Appendix I) and include loans to public
borrowers (PPG debt) as well as to private borrowers. Chinese portfolio debt and short-term trade debt are
excluded. GDP and country classifications from IMF WEO, LIDCs stands for Low Income Developing
Countries. See Appendix I for the list of countries in our sample.

                                                   16
The country group most exposed to China are low income developing countries (LIDCs), many of
whom are commodity exporters and some are former highly-indebted poor countries (HIPCs) who
benefitted from large-scale official debt relief in the 1990s and 2000s. This can be seen in Figure 7
(Panel A), which shows that the average LIDC indebtedness to China was 10.6% of GDP as of
2017. In comparison, emerging market (EME) countries owed 6.4% of GDP in debt to China, on
average, using our sample and database. Another highly exposed group include oil-exporting
countries, such as Angola, Ecuador, Niger, or Venezuela, as well as countries that are commonly
associated with China's "Belt and Road" initiative (listed in World Bank 2018). For the BRI
countries, the median in our data is comparatively low (3.6% debt to GDP), while the average is
more than twice as high (8.8% debt to GDP). This reflects the fact that some BRI countries have
already borrowed heavily from China (pushing up the average), while others have only recently
joined and are not as highly indebted as of 2017, such as countries in Eastern Europe and the
Middle East.

The regions most indebted to China are Far East Asia and Central Asia, including highly exposed,
small economies that are in geographic proximity to China, such as Laos, Cambodia, and the
Kyrgyz Republic (see Panel B of Figure 7). Next come Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America, as
well as some parts of the MENA (Middle East and North Africa) region. The debt flows to Eastern
Europe are smaller, when measured as a share of debtor country GDP, but the amounts of credit to
Europe have been growing substantially over the past five years. Figure 8 shows a world map on
the scale of indebtedness towards China, measured as a share of debtor country GDP. The map
only includes direct loans, but excludes portfolio debt, short-term trade credits, and equity
investments.

           Figure 8. World map of external debt to China (as of 2017, direct loans only)




Note: The debt estimates are based on loan-level data (see text and Appendix I). They exclude Chinese
portfolio debt holdings and short-term trade debt. GDP data is from the IMF World Economic Outlook.



                                                  17
2.4. Sensitivity analysis of debt stock estimates: sluggish disbursements, aggregate
comparisons

In this section we present robustness checks regarding our estimated debt stocks owed to China.
First, we conduct a sensitivity analysis that accounts for sluggish loan disbursement. Second, we
compare our estimated aggregate debt stocks to data made available by Chinese authorities and
banks. Third, we combine the two approaches and benchmark our aggregates to Chinese balance of
payments data over time, differentiating between full and sluggish disbursements. The results
indicate that we are likely to underestimate the true extent of China's lending worldwide.

Commitments vs. disbursements: Potentially our debt stock estimates could be biased upwards if
loan disbursements fall short or are more gradually spaced than commitments. In this section, we
check the relevance of this concern, by assuming delayed disbursements for all loans in our dataset.
Furthermore, we refer to Appendix I.2 for our approach to clean the database of loans that are
committed but not disbursed.

To learn about the time lag between commitment and disbursement of Chinese loans, we evaluated
micro-level data for around 200 Chinese projects. We found that most projects are implemented
within 3 to 4 years and that, by the end of year 5, more than 85% of projects had been completed.
One can thus assume that the average delay between commitment and full loan disbursement is
also between 3 to 4 years. This number is roughly in line with the median grace period of 5 years
on Chinese loans in our dataset.

For the purpose of this sensitivity analysis, we therefore assume that commitment amounts are
disbursed linearly over the course of each loan's grace period. For example, take a loan signed and
committed on January 1st, 2016 with a 5-year grace period. Two years later, in end-December 2017,
we assume that only 2/5th (40%) have been disbursed. Our estimated debt stocks for end-2017
would thus include only 40% of a loan committed in early 2016.

This analysis shows that delayed disbursements yield lower debt stock estimates, but not by much.
In the sample of the top 50 most indebted recipients, the estimated debt disbursed and outstanding
decreases by an average of 20% in comparison to the benchmark estimate in 2017. This
corresponds to an average decrease in the debt to GDP ratio by 3.4 % of GDP. There are only few
countries, for which the introduction of sluggish disbursements makes a significant difference. This
includes small countries such as Djibouti, Papua New Guinea or the Maldives that have received
large Chinese commitments for infrastructure projects recently.

Benchmarking our data to aggregate numbers and bank-level balance sheets: With estimated debt
stocks on hand, a plausible cross-check is to compare out estimates with available aggregate
balance-of-payments data for China and bank-level balance sheets. Our estimates on debt stocks
suggest that, in the full sample, developing countries owe around 400 billion USD to China at the
end of 2017. This number is considerably smaller than the debts reported in China's International
                                                18
Investment Position, which shows a total of 637 billion of outstanding loans. 8 Another piece of
evidence is provided by Cerutti et al. (2018) who, based on confidential data reported to the BIS,
report a stock of 919 billion USD in Chinese bank claims towards emerging market debtors at the
end of 2018. This estimate is more than twice the amount of 400 billion USD we were able to trace
down for developing and emerging markets as of 2017. 9 They further show that two thirds of total
Chinese bank lending to EMEs is channeled through offshore financial centers and foreign
affiliates of Chinese banks. These offshore flows are often hardest to track, as emphasized by
Zucman (2013) or Coppola et al. (2019).

The granular nature of our data also allows to compare our debt stock estimates at the level of
individual creditor banks. For this purpose, we searched for publicly available balance sheet data
and annual reports that show at least partially disaggregated data, focusing on the big Chinese
creditor banks that are most active in the country's overseas lending. This exercise suggests that we
may be underestimating Chinese claims abroad. One example is China Development Bank (CDB),
one of the largest Chinese overseas lenders (see Appendix III). In its annual report of 2015, CDB
reports total outstanding overseas loans of 210 billion USD (only this aggregate number is
available, but no breakdown by destination country). In comparison, our dataset identifies a stock
of 127 billion in outstanding overseas loans of CDB towards developing countries in 2015, about
60 % of the aggregate reported number. Two other examples are Bank of China (BoC) and the
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), two of China's four large state-owned
commercial banks, for which the gap is even larger. In its 2017 annual report, Bank of China
reports to have extended credits totaling 100 billion USD to Belt and Road countries since 2015. In
comparison, we only capture around 9 billion USD in BoC loans as of 2017. Similarly, ICBC
reports to have extended 94.5 billion USD in overseas credit facilities by 2017, of which we
capture only 27 billion USD.

Benchmarking over time: We have mentioned that, in aggregate, the estimated external debt stock
in our dataset decreases by 20% when assuming sluggish disbursement. This amounts to 83 billion
USD when using the main comparison year (2017), as a benchmark. Figure 9 makes a more
systematic comparison, by showing our aggregated estimates on debt to China with and without
sluggish disbursement over time (dark red and light red bars, respectively) as well as PBoC data on
the evolution of Chinese loans outstanding, as reported in the country's International Investment
Position (IIP, blue line). Maybe the most important insight of this graph is the wide gap between
our estimated aggregate debts owed to China and the IIP data on Chinese overseas loan claims.
Importantly, the gap gets even wider once we use the debt estimates with sluggish disbursements.
Indeed, for 2017 that estimate is less than half the IIP number.
8
  The 400 billion USD figure builds on our main sample of 107 developing and emerging countries, but the
full sample figure is almost the same. Nevertheless, part of the discrepancy to the IIP value might be
explained by direct lending to advanced countries, for which no rigorous data collection exists.
9
  The gap to the BIS data might partly be explained by overseas deposits and holdings of portfolio debt that
we do not aim to capture at this point.

                                                    19
Taken together, the comparison of both aggregate and bank-level data suggests that, despite our
best efforts to gather data from as many sources as possible, we capture only about 50-65% of total
Chinese overseas loans. The debt stocks we report can therefore be regarded as a lower bound, at
least in aggregate.

     Figure 9. Aggregate external debt stocks to China with and without sluggish disbursement




Note: This figure compares our estimated aggregate debts stocks per year (red bars, baseline) with
estimates assuming sluggish disbursement (dark red bars, see sensitivity analysis above). The blue bold
line shows total Chinese overseas loans (on non-residents) as published by the PBoC in its International
Investment Position.


2.5. China's loans: are these official or commercial flows?

China's overseas lending has unique characteristics when compared to the post-WWII lending of
other major economies. First and foremost, China's capital outflows are almost exclusively official
lending and thus controlled by the Chinese government. Privately-owned banks play a minor role.

Specifically, two banks have dominated China's overseas lending universe: the Chinese Export-
Import Bank and China Development Bank. Together, they account for more than 75% of all direct
cross-border lending between 2000 and 2017 in our data, while government entities such as the
Ministry of Commerce play only a subordinated role (see also Figure A8 in Appendix III showing
the share of each creditor per year). The two banks are both owned by and subordinated to the
                                                     20
Chinese State council, as shown in the overview chart in Appendix III. Against this backdrop, it is
evident that the Chinese government could add transparency on much of its overseas lending
activities by publishing balance sheet and claims data from just these two banks.

At the same time, the terms and characteristics of China's state-driven overseas loans look in many
ways like commercial lending. Most of China's overseas loans are denominated in US dollars and
lending is at interest rates that reflect a risk premia and contractual characteristics that resemble
private bank loans. In low income countries, China's loans are generally repayable at interest rates
of 2 to 3 %, in contrast to the interest-free loans and grants LIDCs usually receive from most other
bilateral and multilateral creditors. As to emerging markets and middle-income countries, most
loans are extended at market terms, meaning with interest rates that are comparable to those
prevailing in private bond or loan markets. For example, Ecuador in 2010 borrowed 1.7 billion
USD from China Export-Import Bank at 7 % interest over 15 years. Similarly, over a period of 10
years, Angola borrowed a total of $20US billion from Chinese state banks at an average interest
rate of 6 % and with maturities ranging from 12 to 17 years.

Moreover, the loans enjoy a comparatively high degree of seniority, since they are often backed by
collateral and because debt stocks and repayment flows are not public information. Most
importantly, the interest and principal repayments are often secured, either in the form of
commodities (e.g. export proceeds of raw materials and agricultural products) or by giving the
creditor the right to attach the profits of state-owned enterprises. To our knowledge, no other
official lender collateralizes its international loans in this way, at least not this systematically.

The institutional and legal characteristics of China's loans also have commercial rather than official
characteristics. The loans are extended by a variety of creditors, including more than a dozen public
banks and public enterprises that act like private entities. In addition, the lending contracts often
look like commercial loans, with secrecy and arbitration clauses, so that repayment amounts, or any
default or restructuring details are kept outside of the public domain.

All of these features are unusual for official lending as extended by OECD governments and Paris
Club member countries during the post-WWII era. Around 70 % of Paris Club claims on low-
income and emerging countries are in the form of Official Development Assistance as defined by
the OECD, i.e. are concessional in character and have a grant element of at least 25 %. The United
States government, for example, typically extends funds for military and economic cooperation in
the form of grants rather than loans. The same is true for official creditors in Europe, where the
European Stability Mechanism, ESM, lent with maturities of up to 30 years and at almost no risk
premia (Corsetti et al. 2018).

China's official lending overseas is thus not comparable to the lending activities by most other
creditor governments, in particular, those organized in the OECD and Paris Club (see Kraay 2014
or Horn, Reinhart, and Trebesch forthcoming).


                                                 21
To provide more details, Figure 10 shows a compact overview of the characteristics of China's
overseas lending, based on all loans from our consensus database between 2000 and 2017, and
weighted by commitment amounts. More than half of total lending was extended at commercial
terms, compared to 15% at concessionary terms. These shares were rather stable over time, as
shown in Appendix I, which summarizes the lending terms in each year since 2000.

Figure 10 also shows that most of China's overseas loans are denominated in foreign currencies.
Around 85 % of loans in our sample are contracted in US dollars, while Renminbi denominated
loans play a minor role. Furthermore, we depict numbers by Bräutigam and Gallagher (2014), who
estimate that around 50 % of Chinese overseas lending is collateralized.

                         Figure 10. Characteristics of Chinese overseas loans




Note: Loans as commitment-weighted shares in our sample of Chinese loan commitments since 2000.
The share of collateralized loans (*) is taken from estimates of Bräutigam and Gallagher (2014) based
on Chinese loans to South America and Africa.


3. Hidden debts: how large is the underreporting problem?

As noted, there is severe potential underreporting of external debt stocks (primarily public and
publicly-guaranteed). This is especially true in the developing world, which has received the bulk
of China's direct loans. Here, we quantify the degree of "hidden" Chinese debt flows and stocks
with a focus on more than 100 debtor countries. Most importantly, we benchmark our loan-by-loan
data, aggregated on the country and year level, to the debtor-reported aggregates of official
statistics by the World Bank. For this purpose, we follow, as closely as possible, the definition of


                                                    22
public and publicly guaranteed debt used by the World Bank and also focus on loan commitment
amounts, which facilitates a clean comparison of estimated aggregates. 10

To assess the scope of underreporting of Chinese claims in the debt statistics published by the IMF
and World Bank, we use non-public data on debt commitments made by China from the so-called
Debtor Reporting System (DRS), to which developing debtor countries report on a regular basis.
The World Bank publishes the aggregates from the DRS in its International Debt Statistics, but
bilateral (country to country) claims are not publicly released. Here, we use an unpublished,
bilateral data extract on Chinese loan commitments by country and year (loans to public and
publicly guaranteed entities). The DRS data is used as an input to our calculations but not divulged
here or elsewhere, for reasons of confidentiality.

Based on this bilateral data, we can assess the size of missing debt commitments by China. For the
comparison we synchronize our data of Chinese loans to match the exact definition of the DRS
extract. Specifically, our subset of the DRS data aggregates all loans extended by China to public
and publicly guaranteed recipients, including the central government. These claims do not include
loans by China's state-owned but commercial creditor banks, such as the Bank of China or ICBC,
so that we purge these from our data in this comparison exercise. We also drop the (few) Chinese
loans extended to private borrowers abroad.

A large share of these unreported commitments is taken up by state-owned enterprises, government
agencies and public-private partnerships in the energy and infrastructure sector. Due to the
confidential nature of almost all of the underlying agreements, it is difficult to know whether
explicit state guarantees have been granted for the loans and project contracts or not. But even in
the absence of explicit sovereign guarantees, unreported loans to state-owned enterprises and
special purpose vehicles can lead to the build-up of contingent liabilities, which often migrate to
the central government's balance sheet. This problem is aggravated, if the loans are collateralized
by commodity exports, in particular from oil, since such collateralization can reduce future public
sector revenues.

The main insight from this exercise is that 50% of Chinese overseas lending commitments are not
recorded by the World Bank and thus do not enter officially reported debt statistics. As of end-
2016, the amount of "missing" Chinese loans to developing countries has reached more than 200


10
   In Appendix I.6 we also compare our debt stock estimates to data on Chinese debt claims extracted from
the BIS banking statistics. That comparison is complicated by the fact that China, unlike other BIS members,
has not agreed to publicly release a bilateral (country by country) data break-down. We can however exploit
a structural break in the aggregate time series right after China joined the BIS data reporting system. The
result is a "snapshot" of Chinese claims for two quarters, as no time series is possible. There are significant
discrepancies between our estimates and the BIS-implied snapshot and the gaps are especially large for high-
risk countries. Of course, it is well known that the quality of the general economic data is also questionable
for those countries.


                                                      23
billion USD in total. Compared to the early-and mid-2000s, the yearly amounts of missing Chinese
debt outflows have increased substantially in recent years (see Figure 11).

We turn to our estimates of "hidden" public external debt stocks across developing countries. We
focus, in particular, on the top 50 recipient countries most indebted to China (see Figure 6). For this
group, debt stocks owed to China on average soared to more than 15 % of GDP in 2016 (Panel A
of Figure 12). Of these debts, on average, around 6% of GDP is not reported in the official statistics
of debtor countries.

The averages in Figure 12 conceal the large heterogeneity in the hidden debts owed to China.
Figure 13 presents frequency distributions for our sample of the 50 most indebted recipients. The
left panel shows that, for around one half of the sample, hidden debt levels are low. But for the
other half, the hidden liabilities to China exceed 5 % of GDP and for 12 of them exceed 10 % of
GDP. To put these magnitudes in perspective, the right panel of Figure 13 shows hidden liabilities
as a share of total external liabilities. As before, hidden liabilities are modest for about half of the
sample, but for about two dozen countries the underreporting problem is severe. In these countries,
hidden liabilities amount to more than 10 % and in a few countries to even more than 50% of the
total, officially reported external debt stock.

       Figure 11. "Hidden" Chinese loans to the developing world: total non-reported flows




Note: "Hidden" Chinese lending flows connected to public and publicly guaranteed debt (PPG). We compare
aggregated flows from our loan-level dataset to the aggregate commitments in the World Bank's DRS
database.




                                                  24
          Figure 12. Debt to China, total and "hidden" parts, 2001-2016, top 50 recipients




Note: The figures show averages for public and publicly guaranteed debt for the top 50 developing countries
most indebted to China. "Hidden" debt to China by the same country group is based on missing
commitments, (i.e. Chinese loan commitments not reported to the World Bank's DRS). Sources: HRT
database and World Bank.

                        Figure 13. Scale of hidden debts to China - histograms




          Note: Data shown is for the top 50 developing countries that are most indebted to China.




                                                    25
4. Looking ahead: Will China's overseas lending boom end in a debt crisis?

In this section, we focus on the implications of China's overseas lending boom for financial
stability and debt sustainability in debtor countries. For many countries, the economic environment
has decidedly taken a turn for the worse since 2015, when commodity prices crashed and capital
flows from China began to slow. We focus on the implications of the debt cycle for debtor
countries rather than for the global financial system at large. Many of China's debtors, as has been
discussed, figure among the poorest countries in the world. As such, a crisis there (even a severe
and protracted one) may not produce any systemic aftershocks in global capital markets.

We first re-examine the debt dynamics and the debt servicing burden of developing countries after
taking into account the large amounts of "hidden" Chinese debts. We then compare the ongoing
Chinese lending cycle with historical counterparts. In particular, we draw parallels to the 1970s
syndicated loan boom, in which Western banks (led by a handful of US institutions) channeled
large amounts of foreign capital to poor, resource rich countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
That boom ended in a wave of financial crises and economic depressions in the early 1980s and
was associated with a string of sovereign defaults, most of which were resolved only a decade later.

4.1. Reassessing external debt dynamics in the developing world

The hidden Chinese lending calls for a reassessment of external debt trends in the developing
world. To do so, we start with the reported debt/GDP series by the World Bank and then add the
"hidden" liabilities to China using our estimates. Figure 14 shows the evolution of external
sovereign debt (public and publicly guaranteed) to GDP for developing and emerging countries in
four different regions since 2000.

Once we account for "hidden" Chinese debts, the debt dynamics for a few dozen countries change
markedly (red areas). This is particularly true for Asian countries that are in geographic proximity
to China as well as resource-rich African countries. The median debt levels do not change much,
because Chinese lending and its "hidden" parts are heavily concentrated in around two dozen
countries. But for this group of countries, which borrows heavily from China, external debt to GDP
levels have risen much more strongly over the past 15 years than is generally known.

It is notable that many of the main recipients of Chinese loans are low-income countries that not
long ago had been in default since the aforementioned crisis of the 1980s. Indeed, several of the
heavy borrowers from China have benefited from the HIPC and MDRI debt relief initiatives of the
2000s. They have quickly re-leveraged and are on course to reach pre-HIPC era debt levels.




                                                 26
                     Figure 14. External debt trends and "hidden" debt to China




Note: The black line shows median external, public and publicly guaranteed debt to GDP according to the
World Bank's widely used International Debt Statistics. We add hidden debts to China (red areas), focusing
on the most exposed countries (median, upper quartile and upper decile hidden debt level by region).

Turning to "hidden" debt service payments, the picture changes even more. Figure 15 shows the
evolution of debt servicing costs to GDP as published by the World Bank (black line) and adds the
hidden debt service to China. The numbers capture both interest rate and amortization payments on
the country's public and publicly guaranteed, external debt per year. For China, we use the debt
stock and debt servicing estimates constructed from loan-level data (see Section 2.2) to derive both
total and hidden interest and amortization flows. It is evident that the rebound in external debt
levels in Figure 14 above has been accompanied by a more than proportional increase in debt
service payment in Figure 15.




                                                   27
                         Figure 15. "Hidden" debt service payments to China




Notes: The black line shows median external PPG debt service payments to GDP according to the World
Bank's IDS. Estimates of hidden debt service based on loan-level and creditor-level data (see Appendix I).

The main explanation for the marked increase in debt servicing costs is that China tends to lend at
market terms (which can imply a substantial risk premia for most of these countries). These interest
rates are significantly higher than those paid to the other main creditors, in particular the low,
concessionary rates on World Bank loans or on bilateral loans by OECD governments. In addition,
the maturity and grace periods of Chinese loans tend to be shorter than those on the remainder of
the debt, which increases the annual debt service burden (see Section 2.4).

In sum, despite benign global conditions and record-low US and other advanced economy interest
rates, debt service payments by low-income and emerging market countries have been on the rise,
as debt stocks climbed. A subgroup of low-income countries is close to reaching the pre-HIPC
levels, with Chinese lending being one of the main drivers.

4.2. A historical analogue: the developing country lending boom of the 1970s

China's overseas lending boom shares many characteristics with earlier lending booms to periphery
countries. The parallels are particularly striking with regard to the 1970s syndicated bank lending
boom (see Cline 1995 and Rieffel 2003 for a review of this episode). The main borrowers at the
time were developing and resource-rich countries, many of which had not been able to access
international capital markets for decades. From the early 1970s on, however, these countries
quickly started to receive large debt inflows in the form of bank loans, typically from a syndicate of
                                                   28
10 or more Western Banks from the US, Europe and Japan. The lending recipients were the central
government or public companies and the loan's purpose was often to improve the country's
infrastructure, its resource extracting industries, or to finance other potentially growth-enhancing
projects. The bulk of the lending was in US Dollars, maturities were rather short, typically between
three and seven years, and interest rates implied risk premia, mostly between 1-2% above LIBOR
or more. Moreover, much of the lending was not picked up by official statistics so debtor countries
and the IMF and the World Bank also had an incomplete picture on the resulting debt flows and
debt sustainability risks at that time.

Almost all of these characteristics apply to the ongoing Chinese overseas lending boom as well.
Many of the recipients are the very same countries, lending is again bank-based rather than bond-
based, many of the loans are issued in USD at market terms, and a lack of data and oversight is a
major problem. The two lending booms can largely be seen as "twins."

          Figure 16. Two international lending booms: 1970s (blue) vs this century (red)




Note: The bars show average yearly loan commitments by Western commercial banks and by Chinese
official creditors for 58 low-income developing countries. Sources: Boughton (1991), HRT dataset, IMF,
Stallings (1987), and World Bank.

Figure 16 compares the lending booms more systematically, by focusing on debt flows to all 58
low-income countries, a group that received large-scale lending both now and then. The bars
represent the average yearly bank loan inflows in % of debtor country GDP, while the dotted line is
an index for global commodity prices taken from Boughton (1991) and Reinhart, Reinhart, and
Trebesch (2016 and 2018). The loan-level data from the 1970s comes from World Bank reports of


                                                 29
the time, complemented with data from Stallings (1987), while the lending data from China is
based on our loan-level data described above.

The duration and size of the two booms are roughly comparable from a low-income developing
country (LIDCs) perspective. Both now and then, average yearly inflows exceed 1% of debtor GDP
in a spell of about 10 years. Moreover, both booms were accompanied by a large boom-bust cycle
in commodity prices. The more recent commodity-price boom was even more pronounced than the
one of the 1970s (see Reinhart et al. 2018). After 1982, after US interest rates had spiked and with
commodity prices decreasing further, bank lending to the developing world quickly dried up.
Mexico's debt default in August 1982 was only the most visible sign of distress. Today, it is
difficult to say whether the Chinese overseas lending boom has ended or is simply slowing. Total
lending amounts have decreased in 2016 and 2017, but lending to LICs remains relatively high.
Whether or not lending will continue on the same scale or even increase further, will depend
among other factors, on China's GDP growth as we show in Section 7.


    Figure 17. Long-run debt and commodity price trends in developing and emerging countries




Notes: Data for 95 developing and emerging countries. Sources: Boughton (1991), HRT database, IMF,
World Bank. We include all countries in our sample that are in the IDS database, i.e. that report to the World
Bank.


Figure 17 combines the two time spells, the 1970s and the 2010s, into a longer-run picture. The
black line shows median external debt to GDP levels (PPG debt) of 95 developing countries across
five decades. On top, we again add our estimate of hidden debt to China and illustrate the changing
debt dynamics. The main take away from Figure 17 is that today's debt levels in the developing

                                                      30
world look dangerously close to their level in 1981, just before the so called "Third World Debt
Crisis" broke out (even without internalizing hidden debts to China). After this added layer of
external indebtedness, the situation has a decided element of frailty. The countries most exposed to
China saw their debt burdens grow particularly fast, to levels comparable to the early 1980s. These
insights only strengthen the debt sustainability concerns raised by the IMF. 11

4.3. "Missing defaults" on Chinese overseas loans

In their 200-year history of capital flows, Reinhart, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2016 and 2017)
document that the global economy has been subject to a "double bust" since 2012, with a collapse
in commodity prices and stark decline in capital inflows (and in some cases, outflows). Yet, unlike
prior episodes of similar adverse shocks over the long horizon they study, the worldwide incidence
of sovereign defaults has risen only modestly. Compared to prior historical episodes, there should
have been an additional 15 to 20 defaults in the latest post-2012 double bust. These are what they
dub the "missing defaults."

Fully explaining the missing default puzzle is beyond the scope of this paper, but part of the answer
lies in the fact that the international credit rating agencies do not record credit events involving
official creditors. The increasing number of defaults and debt restructurings on Chinese loans is a
part of the missing default puzzle in recent years. As is the case for the lending data, there is no
publicly available dataset of defaults and restructuring operations on Chinese loans. It is, however,
possible to generate an (incomplete) picture using the information on defaults and debt
restructurings from AidData, Hurley et al. (2018) and from a recent report by Kratz et al. (2019).
We can then compare the number of restructurings of Chinese overseas loans to restructurings with
other foreign creditors, in particular commercial loans and bonds. For the latter, we use data on
external sovereign debt restructurings with private creditors (banks and bondholders) from Cruces
and Trebesch (2012) and Meyer et al. (2019). Appendix AI.6 shows a time profile of credit events
(restructurings) on debts owed to China compared to private restructurings.

Our China "credit event database" identifies 140 external debt restructurings and debt write offs
with governments and public entities of developing and emerging countries. In the early 2000s,
many documented cases are linked to the HIPC initiative and involve debt relief on older Chinese
development loans. In contrast, the more recent wave of restructurings (since around 2011) mostly
involve distressed debt exchanges on loans granted since the early 2000s and with sovereign
debtors that faced liquidity or solvency problems. As with the number of loans, it is probable that
our tally still misses some restructuring episodes.

Remarkably, the number of credit events on Chinese international loans has clearly surpassed the
number of restructurings towards foreign bondholders and banks (Appendix Figure A7). This
11
     See Speech by Lagarde "Managing Debt Vulnerabilities in Low-Income Countries", September 13, 2018.

                                                    31
illustrates how important it is to move beyond the traditional approach to measure sovereign default
as credit events on debt to private creditors only, as typically done by credit rating agencies such as
Moody's (for a more detailed discussion see Reinhart and Trebesch 2016, Schlegl et al. 2019, Horn
et al. forthcoming).

        Figure 18. The curious case of the missing defaults ­ adding Chinese restructurings




   Note: Restructuring and default data from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Meyer et al. (2019). Data
   on Chinese credit events since 2011 from AidData (2017), Hurley et al. (2018) and Kratz et al.
   (2019). Double bust events from Reinhart, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2016 and 2017).

Adding the "missing defaults" on official debt to China yields a more complete picture on the
frequency of sovereign default in developing countries and emerging markets over the past decade.
This is evident from Figure 18 which builds on Reinhart, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2016 and 2017)
and shows the share of independent countries that entered default with private creditors over the
past 200 years. The red line adds to this the share of countries that restructured their debt with
China since 2011, but that were not in default on private creditors. Once we account for sovereign
credit events with China, the number of countries in default more than doubles, to more than 10%
globally in 2016.


5. Lending to advanced economies (portfolio investments, trade credit and central
   bank swap lines)

So far, our analysis focused on direct loans, China's main instrument to lend to developing and
emerging market countries. This section moves to advanced countries and takes into account other
types of debt instruments and claims, which account for a large share of China's capital exports.

                                                   32
Figure 2, in the introduction, shows the dominance of official portfolio investments, which are
almost entirely due to asset purchases of foreign sovereign bonds by the People's Bank of China.
By end-2017 PBoC holdings of foreign sovereign bonds amounted to more than 3,000 billion USD
and the large majority of these are advanced country bonds, such as US Treasuries, German Bunds
or UK Gilts. This figure is more than four times larger than the total claims from direct loans (710
billion as of 2018). Put differently, China's claims toward the rest of the world mostly take the
form of sovereign bonds that were acquired on global markets by China's central bank.

                  Figure 19. External debt owed to China through portfolio holdings
                              (incl. sovereign bond holdings of PBoC)




Notes: Chinese holdings of foreign sovereign bonds, in percent of debtor GDP. The approach to estimate
the composition of China's portfolio holdings follows Arslanalp and Tsuda (2012) (see Appendix II for
details).

As mentioned earlier, the PBoC itself does not release data on the composition and characteristics
of its portfolio of assets, in particular its purchases of foreign sovereign bonds. It is nevertheless
possible to get reasonably precise estimates on the PBoC's holdings and, thus, the geography of
China's portfolio debt claims toward the rest of the world. Specifically, we build on the
methodology of Arslanalp and Tsuda (2012) and make use of a large variety of data sources, as
explained in detail in Appendix II. 12 In a nutshell, we start our estimate with data on US portfolio
debt that is published by the US treasury (TIC). 13 As the US is by far the largest recipient of
Chinese portfolio investments, this allows us to identify around half of total Chinese debt holdings.

12
   In addition to debt securities held as foreign exchange reserves, China's International Investment Position
reports portfolio holdings outside of the central bank (194 billion USD in 2017). The bulk of this foreign
portfolio debt is held by state-owned banks such as the Bank of China, the Agricultural Bank of China, the
China Construction Bank and the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China. For recent years the geographic
composition of these investments can be inferred from China's report to the IMF's Coordinated Portfolio
Investment Survey. As of 2017, more than half of these holdings were bonds issued by the US and other
advanced countries, 23 % were issued by offshore financial centers, 15 % by Hong Kong and Macao and 5 %
are debt securities of developing and emerging markets.
13
   See https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/Pages/ticsec2.aspx

                                                     33
For the remaining half, or roughly 1.5 trillion USD of Chinese portfolio investments, we make use
of the IMF's Composition of Foreign Exchange Reserve (COFER) database as well as its
Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS) and assume that China's portfolio allocation
follows global averages. Given that Chinese reserves represent one third of global reserves, this is a
plausible assumption (see Appendix II), at least until recently.

The resulting estimates suggest that China holds at least 1.4 trillion USD of US Treasury, agency
and corporate bonds (equivalent to 7% of US GDP), 370 billion USD of German bonds (10% of
German GDP) as well as 190 billion USD of UK bonds (7% of UK GDP). 14 For the Eurozone as a
whole, China holds 850 billion USD of bonds, an amount equivalent to seven percent of Eurozone
GDP. The large majority of these bonds are likely to be sovereign bonds. When calculated as a
share of total outstanding sovereign bonds, China is estimated to hold around six percent of all US
Treasury bonds, 17% of all German government bonds, and around six percent of all UK sovereign
bonds. Furthermore, China holds approximately 30 billion USD of bonds issued by emerging
markets, in particular by Brazil, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Poland and South Africa. This
amount is a small share of China's total reserves, but it is substantial from the perspective of these
debtor countries.

Another important category of China's lending are short-term trade credits. China's trade credits
are extended by a large variety of state-owned and private corporations, mostly in the form of
advances to foreign importers of Chinese goods. A substantial share of these loans is insured by
China's state-owned export credit agencies, in particular Sinosure. As a result, much of the trade
credits are official debts, with the final claimant being the Chinese government. Specifically,
Sinosure provides short-term coverage for more than 17 % of total Chinese exports, in total
insuring 412 billion USD of credits during 2017. In comparison, short-term export credits insured
by the German government (via Euler-Hermes) or the US government (via the US Export-Import
Bank) amount to less than 5% of what China insures per year. The Chinese state is thus a major
player in the global market for trade credits, with large amounts lent to advanced economies.

Furthermore, advanced countries often receive Chinese credits that are coupled with FDI
investments, as discussed above. In total, Chinese FDI debt claims abroad amounted to 250 billion
USD at the end of 2017, which corresponds to 15 % of total Chinese outward FDI. The geographic
distribution of these FDI debt claims is not reported by China, but most recipient countries do
publish the debt-equity composition of their inward FDI stocks by counterparty in the context of
the IMF's Coordinated Direct Investment Survey. This way we can identify Chinese FDI debt
claims vis-à-vis 102 recipient countries and use an approximation approach for the remainder of
countries.

14
  US TIC data on non-resident holdings of US securities is collected on a custodial basis. Our estimate
therefore does not incorporate Chinese holdings of US securities outside China. Setser (2018), for example,
suggests that China holds 60 billion USD in treasuries through a Belgian custodian.

                                                     34
Arguably, the least-known instrument of China's foreign lending are the large-scale swap lines
arranged between the People's Bank of China and foreign central banks. Swap lines are standing
lines of credit between central banks and thus another form of official finance. Of course, this does
not alter cross border flows unless the line is activated. After the global financial crisis of 2008, the
PBoC has strongly extended its swap line network, first with advanced country central banks and
then moving on to selected emerging and developing countries. In total, as of 2018, China has
signed swap agreements with more than 40 foreign central banks and for drawing rights amounting
to 550 billion USD in total. In terms of geographical reach, this is by far the largest swap network
of any central bank worldwide (Horn et al. forthcoming).

The PBoC does not publish detailed data on the usage of its swap lines, but we do know the
countries and years of the agreements. Figure 20 uses this information to give a geographic
overview of China's swap line network as of 2018. In addition, we can infer outstanding claims of
swap lines by inspecting recipient central banks' balance sheets. This exercise indicates that, since
2013, Pakistan, Argentina, Mongolia, Russia, and Turkey have all made use of their standing lines
with the PBOC to curb market pressures and to address liquidity needs. 15 The most recent data
suggest that, at the end of 2018, China still had outstanding claims towards three of these countries:
In Argentina, swap debt to the PBOC stood at 18.9 billion USD (3 % of GDP). In Pakistan, the
swap line liabilities were 3 billion USD (1 % of GDP), while in Mongolia outstanding swap debt to
the PBOC amounted to 1.75 billion USD (around 15 % of GDP).

           Figure 20. Countries with access to standing credit line at China's central bank
                                 (swap line network of the PBoC)




Note: This figure shows outstanding swap line agreements between China's central bank (PBoC) and
foreign central banks. Dark shaded countries have a standing credit line agreement with the PBoC as of
2017. In total, China has agreements with more than 40 foreign central banks for drawing rights of 550
billion USD. The figure also considers the multilateral swap agreements within the so called Chiang Mai
initiative and within the Contingent Reserve Arrangement of BRICS countries.


15
  Press releases suggest that recipient central banks have exchanged RMB into USD upon drawing on the
swap lines in order to service foreign currency debt and bolster foreign exchange reserves.

                                                   35
6. The big picture: China's tailored approach to overseas lending and investment

This section integrates the preceding analysis of Chinese overseas lending into a bigger picture of
global investment. We explore another type of capital exports: equity investments, in particular
China's outbound FDI flows and Chinese portfolio holdings of foreign equity. Regarding FDI
outflows, the official statistics published by the Ministry of Commerce do not adequately capture
China's large FDI flows through offshore financial centers, in particular via Hong Kong. We
therefore draw on the most complete collection of micro data on this topic, namely the "Chinese
investment dataset" by the American Enterprise Institute and Heritage Foundation (see Appendix II
for details). To this dataset, we add China's portfolio holdings of equity instruments. Specifically,
we infer the geographic distribution of portfolio equity holdings from the IMF's Coordinated
Portfolio Investment Survey.

Figure 21 is the resulting world map, which shows that Chinese equity investments are directed
both to developing and advanced economies. Among the main recipients of Chinese outbound FDI
are the crisis countries of periphery Europe (e.g. Italy, Greece), Scandinavia, Germany, the UK, as
well as a variety of African, Asian and Latin American countries. For the developing world, there
is a high correlation in the direction of FDI flows on the one hand and direct lending flows on the
other. These two types of flows mostly tend to be directed to the same set of countries.

                        Figure 21. China's overseas equity investments, 2017




Note: This figure shows the geographic allocation of Chinese equity investments, consisting of foreign
direct investment and Chinese portfolio holdings of equity instruments issued by non-residents.
Sources: American Enterprise Institute and IMF's Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CIPS).

Figure 22 shows the world map of total Chinese debt and equity claims in percent of recipient
country GDP in 2017. The figure combines the equity flow data presented above with the data on
direct lending, the data on portfolio debt holdings (bond purchases), as well as lending via trade
credits covered in previous sections. It is clear that China's capital exports span the globe and that



                                                    36
the concentration of claims is particularly large in a few dozen countries, which encompass rich
and poor economies alike.

                      Figure 22. Total Chinese claims (total debt plus equity)




    Note: Includes debt claims from direct lending, trade advances, FDI debt instruments and
    portfolio holdings of foreign bonds and equity claims from foreign direct investment and
    portfolio holdings of foreign equity instruments. Sources: Appendices I and II.

             Figure 23. China's tailored approach of exporting capital: country groups




Sources: Data on Chinese claims is based on numerous data sources (see Appendices I and II).
Country classification into income groups follows the IMF World Economic Outlook database.
                                                37
The combined data illustrate how China's capital exports differ across country groups. Figure 23
shows that the outstanding Chinese claims towards advanced economies are dominated by
sovereign bond holdings and equity investments. In contrast, direct lending is the main investment
vehicle towards emerging and low-income countries, followed by FDI and trade credits. The
various tiers of Chinese capital exports are presented in a stylized way in Appendix Table A3.


7. What drives official Chinese capital flows?

This section presents a first pass at assessing the determinants of Chinese official capital outflows
to the rest of the world. We build on the extensive literature on "push" and "pull" factors of
international capital flows. As "push" factors of capital outflows and "search for yield" abroad, we
consider global monetary and financial conditions following an established literature (Calvo,
Leiderman, and Reinhart 1993, Obstfeld 2015, Rey 2015, Miranda-Agrippino and Rey 2015,
Forbes and Warnock 2012, Fratzscher 2012, Bruno and Shin 2015). Like some of these papers, we
focus on the implied volatility of S&P 500 index options ­ the VIX - as a measure of global risk
aversion. We also include US short-term interest rates, building on the widely-used "shadow rate"
of Wu and Xia (2016), which captures both nominal interest rates as well as the Fed's
unconventional monetary policy measures. Both the VIX and US interest rates have been shown to
drive the "global financial cycle," i.e. synchronized risk premia and capital flows to and from
industrialized countries.

To explore the role of China-specific "push" factors, we focus on Chinese real GDP growth and the
PBoC's monetary policy stance as well as an index of China's import commodity prices. A variety
of measurement problems need to be addressed. For Chinese real GDP growth, we use a quarterly
time series from China's National Bureau of Statistics as well as other measures of Chinese real
economic activity that are possibly less prone to mismeasurement. Quantifying China's monetary
policy stance is similarly challenging, given that the tools of Chinese monetary policy have evolved
considerably over the past two decades. Here, we make use of a narrative, composite index on
China's overall monetary policy from Sun (2018) that combines information from PBoC press
releases and monetary policy reports. The index ranks monetary policy stances on a scale from
minus two to plus two, with higher values indicating tighter monetary policy. This measure is
deemed superior to using China's largely invariant short-term benchmark rate or to using the
growth rates of monetary aggregates inked to the PBoC's foreign asset purchases and foreign
exchange interventions. As to the measurement of a price index for Chinese commodity imports,
we build on a dataset from Gruss and Kebhaj (2019) who match prices of 45 global commodities
with country-level data on commodity-level exports and imports. The result is a weighted index
capturing price changes in China's commodity imports.

The starting point is an OLS regression of Chinese gross capital outflows on the array of "push"
factors plus a dummy for the financial crisis year 2008. The dependent variable is gross capital
outflows as reported by the PBoC over 76 quarters from 2000 to 2018 scaled by Chinese GDP
                                               38
(Columns 1-3). The China-specific "push" factors are all significantly correlated with Chinese
capital outflows and jointly explain around 75% of their overall variation (Column 1). In
comparison, US-centered "push" have less explanatory power. The VIX is not statistically
significant and the R2 value in Column 2 is 0.18. This result is supported by the joint model shown
in Column 3. Only the Chinese real GDP growth rate and China's monetary policy stance remain
significant and adding the VIX and US interest rates does little in increasing explanatory power in
comparison to the specification in Column 1 that focuses exclusively on China-specific push
factors. The results are largely replicated when Chinese capital outflows scaled by world GDP as a
dependent variable (columns 4-6). The main takeaway is that Chinese "push" factors are significant
and have greater explanatory power than the global financial factors. Beyond statistical
significance, the coefficients suggest Chinese push factors have sizeable effects from an economic
point of view: In the baseline specification, a one percentage point increase in China's real GDP
growth rate is associated with an increase in capital outflows of 1.7 % of Chinese GDP.

An important limitation of the basic OLS approach is that it does not adequately capture the
dynamic structure of the variables of interest. Furthermore, given China's size, the assumption that
commodity prices are an appropriate regressor is also questionable. To address these concerns we
explored recursive vector autoregressions VARs. We follow an established approach in the capital
flows literature (see e.g. Rey 2015 and Bruno and Shin 2015).

We identify impulse responses of Chinese capital outflows to push factor shocks by imposing
Cholesky restrictions on the contemporaneous responses of our variables (see e.g. Sims 1980 and
Stock and Watson 2001). Specifically, we write our system of vector autoregressions in the
following recursive form:

                                           () = 

where  is a vector of our data series and A(L) is a matrix of polynomial in the lag operator L. We
identify  , the vector of orthogonalized disturbances, through Cholesky restrictions on the matrix
A, which is lower triangular. Cholesky restrictions imply that the variable that enters the system
first cannot respond to shocks in any other variable within the same quarter. The variable that
enters the system second can contemporaneously respond to shocks in the first variable, but only
responds to shocks in other variables with a lag of one quarter. More generally, our recursive set-
up implies that variables can respond to contemporaneous shocks in variables that enter matrix A
above, but not to contemporaneous shocks that enter the matrix below.

Given the limited number of available observations (76 quarters) we opt for a parsimonious VAR
with five variables in the following order: (1) Chinese real GDP growth, (2) the Chinese monetary
policy index, (3) Chinese gross capital outflows in % of Chinese GDP, (4) the growth rate of




                                                39
Chinese commodity import prices and (5) the log of VIX.16 This ordering implies that, fast-moving
variables such as the VIX and commodity prices are allowed to instantaneously respond to shocks
in other variables, whereas relatively inertial variables such as real GDP only respond with a lag to
movements in the other variables. In line with Rey (2015) and Bruno and Shin (2015), capital
outflows, our main variable of interest, is ordered in an intermediate position. In this set-up,
Chinese capital exports can respond immediately to changes in real GDP and the Chinese
monetary policy stance, but only respond to movements in commodity prices and the VIX with a
lag of one quarter.

                     Table 3. Drivers of Chinese gross capital outflows ­ OLS estimates

                                               Dependent Variable: Gross Chinese Capital Outflows

                                        in percent of Chinese GDP                    in percent of World GDP


 Chinese push factors

 Real GDP growth tate             1.71***                       1.78***       0.01***                      0.02***
                                   (0.17)                        (0.20)        (0.00)                       (0.00)
 China MP index                   0.91***                        0.69*         0.02**                           0.01
                                   (0.31)                        (0.38)        (0.01)                          (0.01)
 China commodity TOT               3.80*                          3.94         0.14**                      0.18***
                                   (2.21)                        (2.48)        (0.06)                       (0.06)

 Global / US push factors

 VIX                                              -2.15           -1.89                      -0.06*        -0.06**
                                                 (1.91)          (1.28)                      (0.03)         (0.03)
 US short term interest rate*                   0.92***           -0.01                       -0.00       -0.02***
                                                 (0.25)          (0.13)                      (0.00)         (0.00)

 2008 financial crisis            7.31***         2.57          9.16***       0.12***         0.06         0.20***
                                   (1.09)        (2.19)          (1.59)        (0.03)        (0.04)         (0.04)

 Constant                         -8.03***      12.82**           -3.32         0.02        0.32***             0.11
                                    (1.46)       (5.49)          (3.12)        (0.04)        (0.09)            (0.08)


 Sample                          2000 - 2018   2000 - 2018     2000 - 2018   2000 - 2018   2000 - 2018   2000 - 2018
 Observations                        76            76              76            76            76            76
 R-squared                          0.757         0.184           0.767         0.372         0.035         0.524


      Notes: Heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation robust standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.1, ** p <
      0.05, *** p < 0.01.

The VAR is estimated with two lags. While standard information criteria (Akaike. Schwarz,
Hannan and Quinn) recommend only one lag, a Lagrange multiplier test suggests that one lag is
not sufficient to eliminate the auto-correlation in the residuals of the VAR. The VAR model is
stable in the sense that all eigenvalues lie inside the unit circle. In the results displayed below, we

16
     Our main results are robust to alternative ordering schemes.

                                                          40
further show bootstrapped confidence intervals based on 1000 replications with a small-sample
degrees-of-freedom adjustment for the error variance-covariance matrix (see Kilian 1999).

Figure 24 shows the impulse responses of gross Chinese capital outflows estimated from the VAR.
Gross Chinese capital outflows show a strong and statistically significant response to shocks in
Chinese real GDP growth. Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in China's real GDP
growth rate results in an increase of Chinese capital outflows of around 1.5 % of Chinese GDP
after a year. The effect remains positive and significant for around three years. Chinese import
commodity prices also drive capital outflows, although the effect is short-lived and smaller in size.
In contrast, a one standard deviation shock in the VIX causes a slightly negative, but statistically
insignificant impulse response in Chinese capital exports. Likewise, we find no significant
response to Chinese monetary policy shocks. 17

               Figure 24. Impulse response functions of gross Chinese capital outflows




Notes: The shaded areas represent 90% confidence intervals based on bootstrapped standard errors and
small sample degree-of-freedom adjustments for the error variance-covariance matrix. The full set of
impulse response functions are presented in Appendix IV.

17
  In an additional exercise, we replace the VIX by US short term interest rates and find results that are only
marginally significant for this variable. While not our main focus in this exercise, our expectation that global
commodity prices are endogenous here is borne out by the strong positive impulse response estimate of
Chinese GDP growth on the global commodity price index (Figure A10 in the Appendix).


                                                      41
            Table 4. Forecast error variance decomposition of Chinese capital outflows


                     Chinese real GDP   Chinese monetary    Comodity
                                                                                 VIX
                       growth rate        policy stance     price index

  Forecast horizon
  1 year                   0.46              0.01              0.04              0.01

  3 years                  0.59              0.03              0.03              0.02

  5 years                  0.60              0.03              0.03              0.02


The importance of Chinese real GDP growth as a push factor is further confirmed in a variance
decomposition exercise. Table 4 summarizes the share of the structural variance in Chinese capital
outflows that is explained by the four main explanatory variables of interest at different forecast
horizons. Innovations in the Chinese real GDP growth rate explain around 50 percent of the
forecast error variance in gross Chinese capital outflows. The other variables explain only a small
fraction (less than 5 percent) of the structural variance.

Taken together, these results suggest that the dynamics of Chinese capital outflows differ from
those of other financial centers, where private flows dominate. While further research is warranted,
particularly to capture the possible influence of geopolitical considerations, Chinese official
outflows do not appear to be well explained by the portfolio rebalancing effects and search-for-
yield motives of private investors. In particular, the findings suggest that global financial
conditions play a less important role. A likely explanation is the official character of Chinese
overseas lending: As we describe in detail above and in Appendix III, Chinese capital flows are
mostly extended by state-controlled entities. The largest part of gross Chinese capital outflows are
the portfolio investments of China's central bank. These are directly linked to China's fixed
exchange rate regime. The remaining investments, in particular loans and trade advances, as well as
FDI flows are mostly administered by state-owned enterprises and public banks. These entities
differ from the representative investors in Bruno and Shin (2014), where capital flows are driven by
private, international banks that seek profits abroad and manage their balance sheet accordingly.


8. Conclusion

Over the past two decades, China has become a dominant player in the international financial
system. We document the size, nature, and direction of China's capital exports to the rest of the
world. Our estimates suggest that about one half of China's lending to developing countries is not
recorded in the main international databases used by researchers and practitioners alike. These
"hidden" debts pose serious challenges for country risk analysis and bond pricing for the affected
countries. Furthermore, the mismeasurement of external debt has potentially significant
                                                42
consequences for those developing countries that borrowed heavily from China since the early
2000s. Private investors may also not appreciate the extent to which they are junior to the Chinese
government.

We find that the standard push factors identified in the academic capital flow literature have limited
explanatory power for the size and time-variation of Chinese gross capital exports. China-specific
push factors, in particular China's economic growth, emerge as the most important drivers. Against
this backdrop, the future of China's overseas lending and international capital flows are likely to
depend on China's growth performance. An implication of our analysis is that the unfolding slow-
down in China's growth rate would, other things equal, translate into a decrease in its overseas
loans. In the extreme, for developing countries with high debt-service obligations to China, a slow-
down in Chinese lending might evolve into a sudden stop with potentially adverse ramifications for
debt sustainability and growth.

More generally, this paper has provided evidence that the global financial landscape has changed
markedly in the past two decades, as China has emerged as a global economic power. In the
Bretton Woods era, global capital flows were largely dominated by official flows from the United
States, as capital controls kept a tight lid on private financial cross border activity. The dismantling
of capital account restrictions in advanced economies following the breakdown of Bretton Woods
gave rise to a new era of private capital flows in international finance; the 1970s and 1980s was
importantly shaped by international syndicated bank lending, until portfolio bond and equity flows
displaced bank loans from the 1990s until today. The academic literature that emerged during these
past decades has almost entirely focused on understanding the drivers, nature and economic effects
of private cross-border flows.

Our work suggests that the surge of official Chinese overseas lending has swung the pendulum
back, albeit partially. To develop an informed understanding of global capital flows and external
indebtedness it is now necessary to supplement the analysis of private sector flows in Western
capital markets to incorporate a relatively new but systemically important creditor - China. The
drivers and consequences of this shift in international finance offer fertile ground for academic and
policy research.




                                                  43
References

Alfaro, Laura, and Fabio Kanczuk, 2019. Undisclosed Debt Sustainability. NBER Working Paper
26347.

Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych. 2014. Sovereigns, Upstream
Capital Flows, and Global Imbalances. Journal of the European Economic Association, 12 (5),
1240-84.

Arslanalp, Serkan, and Takahiro Tsuda. 2012. Tracking Global Demand for Advanced Country
Sovereign Debt. IMF Working Paper No. 12/284.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Jae Song. 2014. Trade Adjustment: Worker-level
evidence. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4), 1799-1860.

Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson. 2016. The China Shock: Learning from Labor
Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade. Annual Review of Economics, 8, 205-240.

Bandiera, Luca, and Vasileios Tsiropoulos. 2019. A Framework to Assess Debt Sustainability and
Fiscal Risks under the Belt and Road Initiative. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.
8891.

Borchard, Edwin. 1951. State Insolvency and Foreign Bondholders, Yale University Press.

Boughton, James. 1991. Commodity and Manufactures Prices in the Long Run. IMF Working
Paper No. 91/47.

Bräutigam, Deborah. 2009. The Dragon's Gift. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bräutigam, Deborah, and Kevin P. Gallagher. 2014. Bartering Globalization: China's Commodity-
Backed Finance in Africa and Latin America. Global Policy, 5(3), 346-352.

Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2014. Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity. Review
of Economic Studies, 82 (2), 535-64.

Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2015. Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking Channel of
Monetary Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 71 (C), 119-32.

Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2008. An Equilibrium
Model of `Global Imbalances' and Low Interest Rates. American Economic Review, 98 (1), 358-93.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1993. Capital Inflows and Real
Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors. IMF Staff Papers,
40(1), 108-151.

Cerutti, Eugenio, Catherine Koch, and Swapan-Kumar Pradhan. 2018. The growing footprint of
EME banks in the international banking system. BIS Quarterly Review, December 2018.



                                              44
Chang, Kevin P. H., Stijn Claessens, and Robert E. Cumby. 1997. Conceptual and Methodological
Issues in the Measurement of Capital Flight. International Journal of Finance & Economics, 2(2),
101-119.

Chazan, Yigal. 2018. Angola's Debt Reliance on China May Leave It Short-Changed. Financial
Times. https://www.ft.com/content/fb9f8528-6f03-11e8-92d3-6c13e5c92914 (accessed June 28,
2019).

Cline, William R. 1995. International Debt Reexamined. Washington D.C.: Institute for
International Economics.

Coppola, Antonio, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger. 2019. Redrawing the Map
of Global Capital Flows: The Role of Cross-Border Financing and Tax Havens. Mimeo.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Aitor Erce, and Timothy Uy. 2018. Debt Sustainability and the Terms of
Official Support. CEPR Discussion Paper DP13292.

Cruces, Juan J., and Christoph Trebesch. 2013. Sovereign Defaults: The Price of Haircuts.
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(3), 85­117.

Dreher, Axel, and Andreas Fuchs. 2016. Rogue aid? An empirical analysis of China's aid
allocation. Canadian Journal of Economics, 48(3), 988-1023.

Dreher, Axel, Andreas Fuchs, Bradley Parks, Austin M. Strange, and Michael J. Tierney. 2017.
Aid, China, and Growth: Evidence from a New Global Development Finance Dataset. AidData
Working Paper 46.

Dreher, Axel, Andreas Fuchs, Bradley Parks, Austin M. Strange, and Michael J. Tierney. 2018.
Apples and Dragon Fruits: The Determinants of Aid and Other Forms of State Financing from
China to Africa. International Studies Quarterly, 62(1), 182 ­ 194.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Matteo Maggiori. 2019. China versus the United States: IMS meets IPS.
American Economic Review, 109 (May), 476-481.

Feis, Herbert. 1930. Europe: the World's Banker, 1870-1914: An Account of European Foreign
Investment and the Connection of World Finance with Diplomacy before the War. New Haven:
Yale University Press.

Forbes, Kristin J., and Francis E. Warnock. 2012. Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and
Retrenchment. Journal of International Economics, 88 (2), 235-51.

Fratzscher, Marcel. 2012. Capital Flows, Push versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis.
Journal of International Economics, 88 (2), 341-56.

Fuest, Clemens, Felix Hugger, Samina Sultan, and Jing Xing. 2019. Chinese acquisitions abroad:
are they different? CESifo Working Paper 7585.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne. 2013. Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The
Allocation Puzzle. The Review of Economic Studies, 80(4), 1484-1515.


                                                45
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Hélène Rey. 2014. External Adjustment, Global Imbalances,
Valuation Effects. In Handbook of International Economics, 4, 585-645. Elsevier.

Gruss, Bertrand, and Suhaib Kebhaj. 2019. Commodity Terms of Trade: A New Database. IMF
Working Paper No. 19/21.

Horn, Sebastian, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch (forthcoming). The Forgotten
History of Official Debt.

Hurley, John, Scott Morris, and Gailyn Portelance. 2018. Examining the Debt Sustainability
Implications of the Belt and Road Initiative from a Policy Perspective. CGD Policy Paper 121.

Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2019. Exchange Arrangements Entering
the 21st Century: Which Anchor Will Hold? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(2), 599-646.

International Monetary Fund. 2018. Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects in Low-Income
Developing Countries. IMF Policy Paper.

International Monetary Fund. 2015. Coordinated Direct Investment Survey ­ Guide. Washington
D.C.: IMF Statistics Department.

International Monetary Fund. 2017. Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey Guide ­ 3rd edition.
Washington D.C.: IMF Statistics Department.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, Alan M. Taylor, and Felix Ward. 2018. Global Financial Cycles
and Risk Premiums. NBER Working Paper No. 24677.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem. 2019. U.S. Monetary Policy and International Risk Spillovers.
Proceedings of the Jackson Hole Symposium, forthcoming.

Kraay, Aart. 2014. Government Spending Multipliers in Developing Countries: Evidence from
Lending by Official Creditors. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6 (4), 170-208.

Kilian, Lutz. 1999. Finite-Sample Properties of Percentile and Percentile-t Bootstrap Confidence
Intervals for Impulse Responses. Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(4), 652-660.

Kratz, Agatha, Allen Feng, and Logan Wright. 2019. New Data on the `Debt Trap' Question.
Rhodium Group.

Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull. 2009. Financial Integration,
Financial Development, and Global Imbalances. Journal of Political Economy, 117 (3), 371-416.

Meng, Xin, Nancy Qian, and Pierre Yared. 2015. The Institutional Causes of China's Great
Famine, 1959­1961. Review of Economic Studies, 82 (4), 1568-1611.

Meyer, Josefin, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. 2019. Sovereign Bonds since
Waterloo. NBER Working Paper No. 25543.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Hélène Rey. 2015. US Monetary Policy and the Global Financial
Cycle. NBER Working Paper No. 21722.
                                                46
Obstfeld, Maurice. 2015. Trilemmas and Tradeoffs: Living with Financial Globalization. In Global
Liquidity, Spillovers to Emerging Markets and Policy Responses, edited by Claudio Raddatz, Diego
Saravia, and Jaume Ventura, 13-78. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile.

OECD. 2015. Chinese Export Credit Policies and Programs. Paris: Working Party on Export
Credits and Credit Guarantees.

Prasad, Eswar S. 2016. Gaining Currency: The Rise of the Renminbi. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Christoph Trebesch. 2016. The International Monetary Fund: 70 Years
of Reinvention. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(1), 3-28.

Reinhart, Carmen, Vincent Reinhart and Christoph Trebesch. Global Cycles: Capital Flows,
Commodities, and Sovereign Defaults, 1815-2015, American Economic Review, 106(5), May 2016,
574-580.

Reinhart, Carmen M., Vincent Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. 2018. Capital Flow Cycles ­ A
Long, Global View. Mimeo.

Rey, Hélène. 2015. Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
Independence. NBER Working Paper No. 21162.

Rieffel, Lex. 2003. Restructuring Sovereign Debt: The Case for Ad Hoc Machinery. Washington
D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Schlegl, Matthias, Christoph Trebesch and Mark L. J. Wright. 2019. The Seniority Structure of
Sovereign Debt. NBER Working Paper No. 25793.

Setser, Brad. 2018. A few words on China's holdings of US bonds. https://www.cfr.org/blog/few-
words-chinas-holdings-us-bonds

Sims, Christopher A. 1980. Macroeconomics and Reality. Econometrica, 48(1), 1-48.

Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2011. Growing Like China. American
Economic Review, 101 (1), 196-233.

Stallings, Barbara. 1987. Banker to the Third World: US Portfolio Investment in Latin America,
1900-1986. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2001. Vector Autoregressions. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 15(4), 101-115.

Sun, Rongrong. 2018. A Narrative Indicator of Monetary Conditions in China. International
Journal of Central Banking, 14 (4), 1-42.



                                               47
Wu, Cynthia J., and Fan D. Xia. 2016. Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy
at the Zero Lower Bound. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 48 (2-3), 253-291.

Zucman, Gabriel. 2013. The Missing Wealth of Nations: Are Europe and the U.S. Net Debtors or
Net Creditors? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (3), 1321




                                              48
Appendix I ­ Dataset on Chinese overseas lending: sources and methods

In this appendix section, we explain the sources and methods used to build a dataset on Chinese
overseas lending through direct loans and grants. As a starting point, Figure A1 summarizes why
we know so little about Chinese overseas lending from official sources.

                Figure A1. Why we know so little about Chinese overseas lending




AI.1 Compiling the dataset on Chinese overseas loans, 1950-2017

We obtain a comprehensive, micro-level dataset of Chinese overseas lending since 1950 by
drawing on dozens of primary and secondary data sources.

Sources for 2000-2017: The starting point of our data collection is AidData's Chinese Official
Finance database, the most comprehensive, publicly available source on Chinese foreign official
finance (Dreher et al. 2017). It is based on hundreds of primary sources such as creditor and debtor
annual reports, embassy press releases, news sources, debtor aid management systems and the
academic literature to identify Chinese foreign loans and grants to 140 recipient countries between
2000 and 2014. Transactions only enter the final dataset after an extensive data triangulation. This




                                                49
way AidData identifies 1200 Chinese loans and more than 2300 grants amounting to a total of 280
billion USD in Chinese official commitments.18

One draw-back of this database is that it ends in 2014 and thus misses much of the lending flows
associated with the Belt and Road Initiative, which was unveiled in end-2013. 19 Moreover, there is
no data prior to 2000, which makes it difficult to study China's evolution as an international
creditor. Moreover, the coverage is incomplete for a few countries and sectors, in particular
regarding loans from China's state-owned commercial creditors.

We therefore expand on AidData by combining it with a number of region- and sector-specific
databases that have excellent coverage for subsets of China's foreign lending and that therefore
allow us to fill gaps and carefully cross-check with AidData. We also identify a variety of old and
new sources that allow us to expand the time coverage on Chinese overseas lending for the years
pre-2000 and post-2014.

The China-Latin America Finance Database by Gallagher and Myers (2019) from the Inter-
American Dialogue provides loan-level data on 141 billion USD in Chinese loans to 15 Latin
American and Caribbean sovereigns and their state-owned enterprises between 2005 and 2018. The
China-Africa Research Initiative at John Hopkins University (SAIS-CARI) provides data on 143
billion USD in Chinese official loans to 55 African countries since 2000. For Oceania, the Lowy
Institute released the Chinese Aid in the Pacific Database as well as the Pacific Aid Map, which
together traces 6 billion USD in Chinese official financial flows to 14 countries since 2002.

In addition to these region-specific data sources, we make use of the China Global Energy Finance
Database at Boston University (Gallagher 2019), which tracks 238 projects in the fossil fuel,
nuclear power and renewable energy sector around the world and since 2000, with total financing
amounts of 250 billion USD, extended by either the China Export-Import Bank or the China
Development Bank. We also draw on the China Export Credit Agency Project database that is
regularly updated by the US Export-Import Bank and which covers medium and long-term export
loans extended by China's Export-Import Bank since 2013.

Whenever available, we additionally make use of debtor-specific resources such as national debt
management systems. As we explained in Section 3, the coverage of debtor country statistics
regarding Chinese lending is often imperfect, to say the least. Nevertheless, national debt
management systems are useful to cross-check amounts and lending terms from other sources and
to expand the coverage for more recent years and selected countries, especially when no other loan-
level data is available.


18
   We exclude from our dataset all transactions linked to technical assistance, debt relief, scholarships, or
training.
19
   For the countries of Far East Asia and Oceania an AidData update is available that includes years 2015 and
2016 (see Custer et al. 2018 and the associated dataset).

                                                     50
Historical sources: To obtain a long-run perspective on Chinese foreign lending, we go back all the
way to the foundation of the People's Republic of China in 1949. For this purpose, we again build
on a broad array of different sources. An excellent overview of early Chinese lending is provided
by historic CIA reports that were compiled from the end of World War II until the late 1980s. The
confidential reports were recently declassified and contain rich transaction-level details on China's
international grants and loans. We cross-check the information from this source with the work of
political scientists and historians, such as a collection of international Chinese treaties by Bartke
(1992) and early work on Chinese foreign aid by Eckstein (1966), Law (1984) and Lin (1993). We
again reconcile conflicting information and supplement the coverage of the CIA reports in cases of
incomplete documentation.

The 1990s are a more challenging period to identify Chinese overseas lending. No CIA reports
have been made public and the modern databases described above only start tracing Chinese flows
in the early 2000s. Our data collection for this period builds on the three-volume work of John
Copper (2016), which documents Chinese economic and military aid to dozens of developing
countries in the form of country case studies. We carefully examine these case studies and code
Chinese foreign loans and grant commitments amounting to a total of 13 billion USD from 1990 to
1999.

List of Academic Sources:
    ·   Bartke, Wolfgang. 1989. The economic aid of the PR China to developing and socialist
        countries. Göttingen: K.G. Saur Verlag.
    ·   Bartke, Wolfgang. 1992. The agreements of the People's Republic of China with foreign
        countries. Göttingen: K.G. Saur Verlag.
    ·   Brant, Philippa. 2018. Chinese Aid in the Pacific. Lowy Institute.
    ·   Bräutigam, Deborah, and Jyhjong Wang. 2016. Eastern Promises: New Data on Chinese
        Loans in Africa, 2000 to 2014. John Hopkins China-Africa Research Initiative Working
        Paper 4, April 2016.
    ·   Castro Salgado, Diana. 2019. Unpacking Chinese Financing in Ecuador. In E. Dussel
        Peters (Ed.) China's Financing in Latin America and the Caribbean.
    ·   Central Intelligence Agency. Multiple Years. Review of Communist Aid.
    ·   China Africa Research Initiative. 2019. Chinese Loans to Africa. John Hopkins University.
    ·   Copper, John. 2016. China's Foreign Aid and Investment Diplomacy. New York: Palgrave
        MacMillan.
    ·   Custer, Samantha, Brooke Russell, Matthew DiLorenzo, Mengfan Cheng, Siddhartha
        Ghose, Jacob Sims, Jennifer Turner, Harsh Desai. 2018. Ties That Bind: Quantifying
        China's public diplomacy and its "good neighbor" effect .Williamsburg, VA: AidData at
        William & Mary.
    ·   Dreher, Axel, Andreas Fuchs, Bradley Parks, Austin M. Strange, and Michael J. Tierney.
        2017. Aid, China, and Growth: Evidence from a New Global Development Finance
        Dataset. AidData Working Paper, 46.
    ·   Eckstein, A. 1966. Communist China's economic growth and foreign trade: implications
        for U.S. policy. New York: McGraw-Hill.
    ·   Gallagher, Kevin P. 2019. China's Global Energy Finance. Global Economic Governance
        Initiative, Boston University.
                                                 51
    ·   Gallagher, Kevin P. and Margaret Myers. 2019. China-Latin America Finance Database.
        Washington: Inter-American Dialogue.
    ·   Law, Yu-Fai. 1984. Chinese Foreign Aid: A Study of its Nature and Goals. University of
        Bielefeld: Dissertation.
    ·   Minto, Jevon. 2019. Examining the Lending Practices of Chinese Policy Banks in the
        Caribbean (2000 - 2018). In E. Dussel Peters (Ed.), China's Financing in Latin America
        and the Caribbean.
    ·   Lin. 1993. The foreign aid policy of the People's Republic of China: A theoretical analysis.
        University of Michigan: Dissertation.
    ·   Strange, Austin M., Axel Dreher, Andreas Fuchs, Bradley Parks, and Michael J. Tierney.
        2017. Tracking Underreported Financial Flows: China's Development Finance and the
        Aid­Conflict Nexus Revisited. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 61 (5), 935­63.
    ·   US Export-Import Bank. Various Years. Competitiveness Report. Washington D.C.: US
        Ex-Im Bank.

List of National Debtor Sources:
    · Bolivia: Banco Central de Bolivia. Informe de la Deuda Externa Pública of each year.
         Table "Desembolsos de la Deuda Externa Pública por Sector Económico y Proyecto de
         Destino"; (downloadable from https://www.bcb.gob.bo/?q=informes-deuda-externa-
         publica, accessed 21.05.2019)
    · Congo, Rep.: Embassy of France in the Republic of the Congo. Note de Conjoncture
         Économique (http://primature.cg/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/grand-dossier1.pdf, accessed
         31.05.2019)
    · Ecuador: Ministry of Finance and Economy Ecuador. Boletín de Deuda Externa for
         December of each year. Table 11: "Deuda Externa del Sector Público: Préstamos
         Contratados" (downloadable from https://www.finanzas.gob.ec/deuda-publica/, accessed
         24.06.2019)
    · Ethiopia: Ministry of Finance and Economic Development. Public Sector Debt Statistical
         Bulletin
         (http://www.mofed.gov.et/documents/10182/19277/Public+Sector+Debt+Statistical+Bullti
         en+No.+23+(2012+-13++-++2016-17+and+30-09-2017)+(1).pdf/a98283bf-5760-41c2-
         855e-9e5ecd0d4328, accessed 21.05.2019)
    · Guyana: Ministry of Finance Guyana. Public Debt Annual Report 2016. Appendix 18:
         Loans Contracted and Disbursed during the period May 26, 2015 to September 30, 2017
         (https://finance.gov.gy/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Public-Debt-Annual-Report-2016-
         Final.pdf, accessed 24.06.2019)
    · Maldives: Ministry of Finance Maldives. Table "Active External Loans as at end 2018
         (http://www.finance.gov.mv/public/attachments/3DTVQS8jF1l0aIUZiAPYh5a1vaSyI4Pti
         y6HfkOk.pdf, accessed 31.05.2019)
    · Montenegro: Ministry of Finance Montenegro. Report on the Public Debt of Montenegro
         for each year. Tables "Foreign Guarantees" and "Debt stock" (downloadable from
         http://www.mf.gov.me/en/sections/state-debt/, accessed 24.06.2019)
    · Nigeria: Debt Management Office. External debt profile. https://www.dmo.gov.ng/debt-
         profile/external-debts
    · Serbia: Ministry of Finance Serbia. Public Debt Stock and Structure 2016 ­ Monthly
         Report. Table "External Debt Direct Liabilities"
         (http://www.javnidug.gov.rs/upload/Bilteni/Bilten%20engleski/2016/Mesecni%20izvestaj
         %20Uprave%20za%20javni%20dug%20-%20ENG%20decembar%202016.pdf, accessed
         21.05.2019)
    · Uganda: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Report on Public
         Debt (Domestic and External Loans), Guarantees and other Financial Liabilities and Grants
                                                 52
        for each year. Table "New Loans approved by Parliament during FY" and "Status of
        Pipeline loan Projects" (downloadable from https://finance.go.ug/publication/reports-
        public-debt-guarantees-other-financial-liabilities-and-grants-financial-years, accessed
        24.05.2019)


Final database: To bring all these different data sources together, we embark on an extensive
merging and cleaning process. First, we carefully examine the details of more than 5000 loans and
grants and compare the entries across all sources in case of overlaps. We then filter out duplicates
and identify missing data points, e.g. the interest rate or maturity of individual loans. To reconcile
conflicting information between databases, we move beyond the above listed databases whenever
possible and consult the primary sources ourselves. This was particularly important for the data
provided in the annual competitiveness reports of the US Export-Import Bank. Unlike the other
databases, the US Export-Import Bank does not undertake a rigorous verification procedure so that
this source contains both confirmed and unconfirmed Chinese loans. To avoid noise and double
counting we thus only consider those Chinese commitments that are confirmed by official sources
on either the recipient of the creditor side, resulting in a coverage of 90 transactions or a total of 50
billion USD since 2013 from this source.

Our final, unified data source covers 1974 loans and 2947 grants by different Chinese official and
state-owned creditors to more than 150 countries and spans the entire history of the People's
Republic from 1949 to 2017, with total recorded commitments amounting to 520 billion USD.

Terms of Chinese Lending: For about one third of all loans in our dataset, we know all necessary
details on interest rates and repayment terms, in particular grace period and maturity, mainly using
the entries from AidData and the national debt management systems listed above.

For an additional 45 percent of loans we approximate the repayment terms using information on the
Chinese creditor agency and the type of lending instrument. We thus make use of the fact that
Chinese lending practices are standardized and largely predetermined by who lends. In a first step,
we therefore created a typology of creditor-specific lending terms, complementing the quantitative
patterns we see in the data with qualitative information from the websites and annual reports of the
most important Chinese creditor agencies. As shown in Table A1 below, Chinese foreign loans fall
into three broad categories:

(i)    Interest-free, highly concessional loans with zero interest rate and 20-year maturity and 5-
       year grace period, by China's central government, usually represented by the Ministry of
       Commerce that oversees China's foreign aid program. These loans make up a very small
       share of overall Chinese foreign lending (just 0.2 percent of commitments in our database).
(ii)   Concessional loans by the China Export-Import Bank: These loans have concessional terms
       with an interest rate of 2-3%, 20-year maturity and a 5-year grace period. Concessional loans
       by the Export-Import Bank account for about 16% of all commitments.


                                                   53
(iii)   Commercial terms on loans by the China Export-Import Bank, the China Development Bank
        and by a variety of other state-owned banks/enterprises. The exact terms in this bucket of
        commercial lenders vary mainly by creditor agency and debtor country, so knowing these
        gives us sufficient information for our purposes. On average, the interest rate in this category
        is 5% and the maturity is 13 years. Almost 60% of all commitments fall in this group.

We cross-checked and complemented our approximation approach and the lending typologies with
the existing literature, in particular the summary of lending terms and the background information
on Chinese lending strategies in Bräutigam (2009) and Bräutigam and Gallagher (2014). Taken
together, this approach gives us detailed lending terms for around 75 percent of loans in our
database. For the remaining 25 percent, we make the conservative assumption that they are
extended at concessional terms, thus under-estimating debt service payments to China. This allows
us to map the flow data into estimated debt stocks and debt repayments.



                Table A1. Terms of Direct Chinese Loans by Creditor Agency and Type of Loan


   Loan Type     Creditor                      Approximate Terms Other Features                           Sample Share


   Interest-Free Ministry of Commerce          0 % interest rate     Partially tied to Chinese Exports      0.20%
                                               20 year maturity
                                               5 year grace period

   Concessional China Export-Import Bank       2-3 % interest rate   Partially tied to Chinese Exports;     15.80%
                                               20 year maturity      Potentially collateralized by
                                               5 year grace period   commodities or profits

   Commercial    China Export-Import Bank     Libor plus spread      Partially tied to Chinese Exports;     59.60%
                 China Development Bank       13 year maturity       Potentially collateralized by
                 State-Owned Commercial Banks 0 - 5 year grace       commodities or profits
                 State-Owned Enterprises


Note: Sample shares are weighted by commitment amounts. Sources: Bräutigam (2009), Bräutigam
and Gallagher (2012), Chinese State Council (2011), Dreher et al. (2017), Gallagher et al. (2012),
various debtor- and creditor-specific sources, own calculations.




                                                      54
AI.2 From flows to stocks: Estimating debt stocks owed to China, 2000-2017

The above mentioned sources all report Chinese lending flows, but not outstanding debt stocks, for
example as a share of debtor country GDP. The lack of data on debt stocks owed to China is an
important gap in the existing literature. One exception is the work by Hurley et al. (2018) from the
Center for Global Development, who estimate a snapshot on the size of debt stocks for a subsample
of 23 countries participating in the Belt and Road Initiative in the year 2016. Here, we estimate
debt stocks owed to China for 106 developing and emerging countries that have received more than
one percent of GDP in Chinese loans for each year from 2000 until 2017.

Our estimates of outstanding debt stocks build on the loan-level data, in particular the data on
amounts, currency and repayment terms that we have assembled. To transform the flow data into
debt stock and debt servicing burdens by country and year we computed repayment histories for
each loan. We then aggregate the loan-level cash flow streams to estimate total outstanding debt
stocks as well as the interest and amortization payments on a country-year level. Table A2 below
shows the sample of countries, for which we compute debt stock estimates in our database.

Treatment of late payments: One potential source of (downward) bias in our debt stock estimates is
that we do not know whether payments have been made on schedule or not. Specifically, we have
no systematic information on late payments (arrears), even though press reports regularly report
that developing countries delay or miss their debt servicing obligations towards China. Given the
lack of data, we assume that all repayments have been made on schedule when estimating debt
stocks, so we assume zero arrears towards China. This assumption is likely to result in an
underestimation of debt stocks, because arrears that build up over time result in increasing debt
stocks (see Schlegl et al. 2019) and this increase is not reflected in our estimates.

Commitments versus disbursements: Another important challenge for estimating debt stocks is that
much of our loan-level data is based on commitment amounts. This could result in an upward bias
in estimated debt levels in countries where loans are disbursed with delay, or not at all (note that
this concern does not apply in the same way for the benchmarking exercises involving World Bank
data, for which we compare commitments to commitments, see below).

To deal with the lack of disbursement data, we drop a large number of projects from the sample, for
which the full disbursement of committed amounts is unlikely. Specifically, we exclude all loans of
projects that have been canceled or suspended at some point. We further exclude all loans that as of
the end of 2017 remained in an initial "pledge phase", i.e. projects, for which only an initial
Memorandum of Understanding has been signed, but for which there is no evidence that the loan
has been formalized and paid out. Moreover, we drop all umbrella or framework agreements that
represent general credit lines between China and the recipient countries without specifying actual
projects.



                                                55
Table A2. Country sample for debt stock estimation from direct loans




                                56
Despite these adjustments and checks, we might still overestimate debt to China for some countries
or years, in particular when disbursements fall considerably short of promised commitment
amounts and there is no evidence in the data that this was the case. To assess the scope of this
potential bias, we next compare our data to other available data sources and aggregates. The results
are reassuring in that we are likely to underestimate rather than overestimate the true extent of
China's lending worldwide:

Comparison of our data to aggregate numbers and bank-level balance sheets: Our estimates on
debt stocks suggest that, in the full sample, developing countries owe around 400 billion USD to
China at the end of 2017. This number is considerably smaller than the debts reported in China's
International Investment Position, which shows a total of 637 billion of outstanding loans. Another
piece of evidence is provided by Cerutti et al. (2018) who, based on confidential data reported to
the BIS, report a stock of 919 billion USD in Chinese bank claims towards emerging market
debtors at the end of 2018. This estimate is more than twice the amount of 400 billion USD we
were able to trace down for developing and emerging markets as of 2017. They further show that
two thirds of total Chinese bank lending to EMEs is channeled through offshore financial centers
and foreign affiliates of Chinese banks. These offshore flows are often hardest to track, as
emphasized by Zucman (2013) or Coppola et al. (2019).

The granular nature of our data also allows to compare our debt stock estimates at the level of
individual creditor banks. To benchmark our own lending numbers at the creditor-level we
searched for publicly available balance sheet data and annual reports that show at least partially
disaggregated data, focusing on the big Chinese creditor banks that are most active in the country's
overseas lending. This exercise provides further assurance that we are not overestimating Chinese
claims abroad, but quite the contrary. One example is China Development Bank (CDB), the largest
Chinese overseas lender (see Appendix III). In its annual report of 2015, CDB reports total
outstanding overseas loans of 210 billion USD (only this aggregate number is available, but no
breakdown by destination country). In comparison, our dataset identifies a stock of only 127 billion
in outstanding loans of CDB towards developing countries in 2015, about 60 percent of the
officially reported number. Two other examples are Bank of China and the Industrial and
Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), two of China's four large state-owned commercial banks, for
which our coverage is even lower. In its 2017 annual report, Bank of China reports to have
extended credits totaling 100 billion USD to Belt and Road countries since 2015. In comparison,
we only capture around 9 billion USD in loans as of 2017. Similarly, ICBC reports to have
extended 94.5 billion USD in credit facilities by 2017, while we capture only 21 billion USD.

For a comparison of loan flows rather than stocks (aggregate commitments), we can also refer to a
recent World Bank report, which is based on a survey on China's Belt and Road investment
projects (Bandiera and Tsiropoulos, 2019). The report identifies around 500 billion USD in
Chinese investments to 50 developing countries between 2013 and 2018. Of this amount, around
300 billion USD are estimated to have been financed via public and publicly guaranteed debt. For
                                                57
the same 50 BRI countries and a slightly shorter time span (2013 to 2017), we identify only 105
USD billion in Chinese loan commitments. Our data thus covers only a third of their aggregate loan
commitment estimate.




AI.3 Characteristics of Chinese lending: time trends

The data show that the terms and characteristics of Chinese loans have been remarkably stable over
the course of the past two decades. Figure A2 demonstrates this with respect to currency
denomination and Figure A3 with respect to the dominance of commercial loans.

            Figure A2. Currency denomination of Chinese overseas lending 2000 - 2014




Note: This figure shows the currency denomination of Chinese overseas lending in our database. The data on
currency denomination are largely from AidData's Chinese Official Finance database.




                                                   58
                          Figure A3. Terms of Chinese overseas lending 2000 - 2017




Note: This figure shows the evolution of Chinese lending terms over time. All loans with interest rates larger
than 3.5 percent, loans classified as "Other Official Flows" and loans extended by commercial creditors (see
Table 4) are considered commercial loans. Concessional flows include grants and loans with interest rates
lower than 3.5 percent.




                                                     59
AI.4 Debt to China vs. debt owed to other official creditors (IMF, WB, Paris Club)


             Figure A4. Debt owed to China versus debt owed to other official creditors




Note: This figure shows public and publicly guaranteed debt to China (red bars) for the 30 developing
countries most indebted to China as of 2017 (in terms of debtor country GDP). Similarly, the blue bars show
debt levels owed to the 22 governments organized in the Paris Club; the green bars show indebtedness to the
IMF; the brown bars show indebtedness to the World Bank Group (including IDA and IBRD). Data on China
is based on our loan-level estimates (Appendix I), data on Paris Club debt is from the Paris Club website and
data on debt to IMF and World Bank is taken from the World Bank's WDI database. Unlike in Figure 6 in
the main text we only consider PPG debt, to make the stocks comparable to those of the Paris Club, the
World Bank and of the IMF. We thus exclude Chinese overseas loans extended to private borrowers abroad
(these are generally low, but in a few selected countries total debt to China decreases as a result).



AI.5 Comparison of loan-level debt estimates to BIS banking statistics

A secondary approach to benchmark our loan-level debt estimates builds on recently released BIS
data. This approach, however, does not allow for time-series comparisons and only shows a snap-
shot for one year (2016). China (along with Russia) started reporting its cross-border bank claims
to the BIS Locational Banking Statistics in 2016, and these claims are dominated by state-owned
banks that lend overseas. The BIS is not authorized to publish data on bilateral (country to country)
Chinese claims, but we can exploit the structural break in total reported claims after China joined
the locational banking statistics (following the approach of Cerutti and Zhou 2018). Specifically,
we focus on the fourth quarter of 2015 and the first quarter of 2016. In the original BIS time series,

                                                     60
the claims of China or Russia were not included. But in 2016 the series were revised backward to
include total claims to all reporting countries, including the recently joined ones, and the old and
new series are both publicly available. More specifically, we downloaded the new, revised series
(which includes China and Russia) in February 2019 and compare it to the original series (without
claims by China and Russia), which we hand-coded from the BIS Statistical Bulletins for 2015 and
2016.

              Figure A5. Aggregate bank claims towards selected debtor countries (BIS)




Note: This figure shows aggregate bank claims in billions of USD towards various debtor countries (all
currencies, all instruments, all sectors). We compare the BIS time series on total bank claims (dotted blue
line) to a revised series that also contains bank claims by China and Russia (red line). The break in the series
occurred because China and Russia started to report to the BIS in end-2015. The difference between red line
and dotted blue line thus represents claims by China and Russia, i.e. the size of external debt stocks owed to
the banks resident in these two creditor countries.

This procedure yields aggregate claims toward each country with and without China. Subtracting
one series from another gives us an estimate of bilateral Chinese bank claims around the world.
Figure A5 illustrates this procedure for four countries that heavily borrowed from China, namely
Laos, South Africa, Zambia, and Pakistan. In each case, total claims increase substantially and the
dynamics of the time series changes markedly after claims to China (and Russia) are included.

The obvious confounder here is that Russia's bank claims were added to the BIS at the same point
in time. Russia's overseas lending, however, is much smaller and concentrated on a few regions
only. Russia's banks mostly lend to countries of the former Soviet Union, plus a few advanced
countries and to offshore havens. The rest of the world, however, especially countries of Africa,
East Asia and Latin America receive little if any bank loans from Russia (Cerutti and Zhou 2018).
                                                      61
For most countries in the sample, the approach of comparing old and new BIS series will thus
generate a useful proxy of total bank claims by banks resident in mainland China. We then
compare the BIS-based estimates of total Chinese claims to our own debt stock estimates. To make
both estimates comparable, we drop from our estimates all debt to non-bank Chinese creditors.

As expected, the two estimates are highly correlated for the majority of countries and a scatter plot
of the two sources (using end-2015 data) reveals only small deviations for the majority of
countries. We do, however, find a number of anomalies that point towards under-reporting of
Chinese lending in some parts of the world. In particular, our estimates significantly exceed BIS
implied debt stocks for some of the riskiest and most volatile debtor countries worldwide, such as
Angola, Equatorial Guinea, Venezuela or Zimbabwe.

All four countries have received large amounts of Chinese bank loans, but these loans do not show
up in the reported BIS banking claims. Figure A6 (Panel A) shows that the old series (without
China) is very close to the new series (with China) in each case, suggesting that banks in mainland
China have barely any outstanding claims towards these countries. Our loan-level dataset, however,
shows that Chinese banks lent extensively to each country and our numbers are more in line with
those reported in the financial press. 20 The scope of the discrepancies is evident in Panel B of
Figure A6, which compares BIS claims by China to our own debt stock estimates for the four
countries, shown as a share of debtor country GDP. As of end-2015, our bank debt estimate for
Zimbabwe is 2.6 billion USD, compared to no debt in the BIS data. The gap is similarly large for
the other countries, with discrepancies of 1.2 billion USD, 14 billion USD and 33 billion USD in
Equatorial Guinea, Angola and Venezuela, respectively. As a share of output, the underreported
claims range from 9% of GDP in Equatorial Guinea to almost 16% of GDP in Zimbabwe. 21




20
   For example, the Financial Times recently reported that "At the end of 2017, Angola's debt to China
amounted to $21.5bn" (FT, June 13, 2018, "Angola's debt reliance on China may leave it short-changed").
Our own estimate is exactly that: 21.5 billion US Dollar as of 2017, but the BIS implied stock is almost zero.
21
   Note that hidden bank claims in the BIS Locational Banking Statistics (a source based on reporting by
creditor countries) do not necessarily imply that there is also hidden debt in the World Bank's International
Debt Statistics (a source that is based on debtor country reporting).

                                                     62
                     Figure A6. Comparison to BIS data ­ discrepancies in crisis countries

                                        Panel A: BIS reported debt stocks




                            Panel B: BIS implied debt stocks vs. our own estimates




Note: Panel A is analogous to Figure A5 above but for a different set of countries. It compares the BIS time
series on total bank claims (dotted blue line) to a revised series that also contains bank claims by China and
Russia (red line). The grey shaded area between these two series captures claims by China and Russia, i.e. the

                                                     63
size of external debt stocks owed to banks resident in these two creditor countries. Panel B then compares the
BIS-implied estimate of debts owed to China (red bars) to our own debt stock estimates (blue bars), both
shown as percent of debtor country GDP (in 2015).

One potential explanation for the seeming underreporting in crisis countries is that China uses
"circular lending" strategies to minimize the risk of default on its overseas loans, as described
above. With loans directly disbursed to Chinese contractors and special-purpose vehicles, no cross-
border transfers occur and there is no claim to report, possibly resulting in the observed data gaps.
With regard to the BIS data, another potential explanation is that Chinese banks partly lend abroad
through foreign affiliates and off-shore centers (Cerutti et al. 2018). In such a case, banks in
mainland China would not hold direct claims against the foreign country, but their claims might
instead appear elsewhere in the BIS Locational Banking Statistics. However, for high-risk
countries, such as those included in Figure A6, lending through foreign affiliates cannot explain the
observed gaps. Indeed, our estimates of Chinese debts owed by Angola, Equatorial Guinea,
Venezuela and Zimbabwe (and other similar countries) are higher than the total aggregate bank
claims reported in the BIS (i.e. higher than the sum reported by all BIS members combined). 22

AI.6 ­ Time profile of Chinese restructurings and debt write offs

Figure A7 shows the number of "missing defaults" to China by year (red bars), measured as events
of debt cancelation or restructuring with China's government or its state-owned banks and
enterprises. The dark bars represent restructurings towards private external creditors, which are
events typically covered by credit rating agencies and the international press.

     Figure A7. Restructurings and debt write offs: Chinese overseas loans vs. private external debt




22
  In addition, the patterns in Panel B of Figure A6 do not significantly change, when we take into account
lending by banks from Hong Kong, the main off-shore center for Chinese banks.

                                                     64
Note: This figure shows the number of sovereign debt restructurings and debt write-offs with foreign banks
and bondholders (black bars) using data from Cruces and Trebesch (2013) and from Meyer et al. (2019). In
addition, we show restructurings and debt write-offs on outstanding debt with Chinese official creditors (red
bars) using data from AidData (2017), Hurley et al. (2018) and Kratz et al. (2019); data starts in 2000.




Appendix II ­ Data and sources on other types of capital exports
                 (Portfolio investments, trade debt, FDI debt, swap lines)


This appendix section moves beyond direct loans to developing countries and provides the
background and data sources on other types of Chinese capital exports, in particular trade credits,
FDI and PBoC portfolio holdings, which account for the large bulk of Chinese overseas claims. As
a starting point, Table A3 shows a typology of Chinese capital exports by country group.

         Table A3. China's tailored approach of overseas lending and investing: a typology


  Country group              Main instruments                       Special characteristics


  Low-income                 o   Direct loans                       o   Official loans (by the government and
  countries                                                             state-owned companies)
                             o   FDI in commodity
                                 producing industries,              o   High opacity of lending
                                 transport and energy
                                                                    o   Repayments often backed by collateral
                                                                        (e.g. oil, copper, corporate profits)
                                                                    o   "Circular lending" between Chinese
                                                                        banks and Chinese contractors abroad
                                                                        (to avoid loan disbursement to
                                                                        debtor country government)


  Middle-income and          o   Direct loans                       o   Official loans that are extended at
  emerging markets                                                      market interest rates (with risk premia)
                             o   Sovereign bond purchases
                                 of selected EMEs                   o   High opacity of lending
                             o   Swap lines with selected
                                 EMEs                               o   Repayments sometimes backed by
                                                                        collateral (e.g. oil, copper, corporate
                             o   FDI, mainly in energy and              profits)
                                 transport


  Advanced                   o   Large-scale sovereign bond         o   Opacity of central bank holdings
  economies                      purchases (especially of
                                 US, Eurozone, UK, Japan)           o   State-directed FDI

                                                     65
                             o    Central bank swap lines
                                  with most advanced
                                  economies (not the US)

                             o    FDI, in high-tech, finance,
                                  energy and transport


Debt portfolio investments (PBoC asset purchases)

Reserve asset portfolio investment: As Figure 2 in the main text shows, official portfolio
investments, i.e. purchases of foreign, sovereign bonds by the People's Bank of China, account for
the bulk of Chinese overseas lending. These holdings reflect China's accumulation of large foreign
exchange reserves during years of sustained and sizeable current account surpluses. The
composition of foreign reserve assets is confidential and therefore no official Chinese data exists.
We can, however, obtain reasonably precise estimates of Chinese exposure to different countries by
using a large number of different debt sources and international statistics and by following an
approach introduced by Arslanalp and Tsuda (2012).

Our starting point is given by total reserve assets as published by SAFE. We subtract from total
reserves the amount of reserves held in the form of gold, in foreign bank deposits or in the form of
foreign equity securities, and obtain the market value of all debt instruments held as reserve assets
by the Chinese central bank. While we can obtain data on gold holdings and deposits from the
PBOC and from the IMF's International Reserve and Foreign Currency Liquidity Template, no
official data exists on the share of reserves held as equity. Instead, we use an estimate based on the
share of equity securities in total Chinese holdings of US securities as given by the US TIC data.
This estimate suggests that around 10 percent of Chinese holdings were in the form of debt.
Making these adjustments, we arrive at estimated Chinese official holdings of foreign debt
securities of 2.8 trillion USD at the end of 2017.

We decompose this total into security holdings for single issuer countries by following an approach
introduced by Arslanalp and Tsuda (2012). We start by using US TIC data to identify Chinese
holdings of US treasury, agency and corporate debt securities and thereby identify a total of 1.3
trillion USD or close to 50% of total Chinese foreign security holdings. 23 To estimate the country
allocation of the remaining 1.5 trillion USD, we work under the assumption that Chinese reserve
investments are proportional to the average global reserve asset allocation and use the IMF's
Composition of Foreign Exchange Reserves (COFER) database and Table 9 of the IMF's



23
  Given that US TIC data collects information on non-resident holders on a custodial basis, these estimates
are likely to underestimate China's security holdings. Brad Setser (2018), for example, argues that around 60
billion USD of Chinese US treasury holdings are invested through a Belgian custodian.

                                                     66
Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey to assign Chinese debt security holdings to specific
debtor countries (see Arslanalp and Tsuda 2012 for details).

Note that these estimates only give us the total amount of debt securities issued by a specific
country and held by China. In order to additionally identify Chinese holdings of sovereign (central
government) debt, we assume that 85% of debt securities held by China are issued by sovereigns.
This assumption follows from US TIC data that shows that 85% of Chinese holdings of US debt
securities are in the form of US Treasury bonds.



Non-reserve asset debt investment: In addition to debt securities held as reserve assets, China's
International Investment Position reports debt securities not held as part of official reserves of 194
billion USD at the of 2017. This sum likely represents the portfolio holdings of large state-owned
banks such as the Bank of China, the Agricultural Bank of China, the China Construction Bank and
the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China. For recent years the geographic composition of
these investments can be inferred from China's report to the IMF's Coordinated Portfolio
Investment Survey. At the end of 2017, more than half of non-reserve asset portfolio investments
were held in debt securities issued by the US or other advanced country residents, 23 percent were
invested in debt securities issued by offshore financial centers and 15 percent in securities issued
by Hong Kong and Macao. The remaining 5 percent were invested in debt securities of developing
and emerging market countries. These numbers include so called panda bonds, debt securities
denominated in RMB and issued in the Chinese onshore market by non-Chinese residents. Since
2015, panda bonds have gained the interest of foreign sovereigns, with Korea, the Philippines,
Hungary and Poland tapping the market and Italy recently announcing its first panda bond issue.


Portfolio equity investments

China's non-reserve portfolio equity investments amounted to 310 billion USD in the end of 2017.
As in the case of non-reserve portfolio debt investments, China has reported the geographic
allocation of these claims to the IMF's Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS). CPIS data
reveals that the large majority of Chinese portfolio equity is invested in advanced economies and
offshore financial centers. Around 40 % of total portfolio equity claims are held against Hong
Kong residents, followed by 25% of equity claims against US residents.


Foreign direct investment

Total FDI: The statistics on FDI outflows published by China's Ministry do not capture the large
amounts of Chinese outward investment channeled through offshore financial centers such as Hong
Kong. As an alternative, we therefore rely on the widely used data on Chinese FDI that was hand-
collected by the American Enterprise Institute and Heritage Foundation. Their "Chinese investment
dataset" codes publicly known Chinese foreign investment transactions that exceed 100 million
                                                 67
USD since 2005 and with global coverage. We aggregate these investments into stocks of outward
Chinese FDI positions and scale them by GDP.

FDI debt instruments: For China, the international investment position reveals that around 15
percent of outward direct investment is in the form of debt instruments. 24 The overall debt claims
from direct investment therefore amounted to 232 billion USD at the end of 2017. Chinese official
statistics do not reveal the geographic distribution of these claims, but a large number of recipient
countries do publish the debt-equity composition of their inward FDI stocks by counterparty in the
context of the IMF's Coordinated Direct Investment Survey. This way we can identify Chinese FDI
debt claims vis-à-vis a total of 102 recipient countries. To arrive at an estimate for the remaining
countries that do not report to the CDIS, we assume that their FDI debt to China amounts to 15
percent of the total Chinese inward FDI stock, in line with global averages.


Short-term trade debt

A substantial share of Chinese debt claims further exists in the form of trade credit. These advances
to foreign importers of Chinese goods are likely to be short-term in nature and held by a large
variety of Chinese state-owned and private corporations. It is reported that a substantial share of
these claims is insured by China's state-owned export credit agencies (Skarp 2015). Sinosure,
China's leading ECA, is reported to have provided short-term coverage for 17 percent of total
Chinese exports or an equivalent of 413 billion USD in 2017 (US Ex-Im Bank 2018). While
Sinosure shares data on the geographic allocation of these claims within the context of the Berne
Union, no data on bilateral exposures is publicly available. In the absence of better information, we
assume that short-term trade credit insurance is proportional to Chinese exports. From a recipient
country perspective, this implies an outstanding stock of short-term liabilities to Chinese ECAs
amounting to 17 percent of annual imports from China (short-term trade credit has maturities of
one year or less).


PBOC swap lines

A final form of direct Chinese lending is given through bilateral swap lines between the PBOC and
foreign central banks. Over the course of the past 10 years, the PBOC has signed swap agreements
with more than 40 foreign central banks for drawing rights amounting to 550 billion USD. We
collect data on the amount of outstanding drawing rights and on signature and expiration dates
from press releases by the PBOC and recipient central bank balance sheets.




24
  This order of magnitude is similar to the share of debt instruments in the outward foreign direct investment
of most OECD countries.

                                                     68
List of sources on other types of capital flows

    ·   American Enterprise Institute and Heritage Foundation. 2019. China Global Investment
        Tracker (downloadable from https://www.aei.org/china-global-investment-tracker/)
    ·   Arslanalp, Serkan, and Takahiro Tsuda. 2012. Tracking Global Demand for Advanced
        Country Sovereign Debt. IMF Working Paper No 12/284.
    ·   State Administration of Foreign Exchange. 2019. The time series data of Balance of
        Payments                of             China              (downloadable             from
        http://www.safe.gov.cn/en/DataandStatistics/index.html)
    ·   IMF. 2019. Data Template on International Reserves and Foreign Currency Liquidity
        (downloadable           from        http://data.imf.org/?sk=2DFB3380-3603-4D2C-90BE-
        A04D8BBCE237)
    ·   IMF. 2019. Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves (downloadable
        from http://data.imf.org/?sk=E6A5F467-C14B-4AA8-9F6D-5A09EC4E62A4)
    ·   IMF. 2019. Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (downloadable from
        http://data.imf.org/?sk=B981B4E3-4E58-467E-9B90-9DE0C3367363)
    ·   IMF 2019. Coordinated Direct Investment Survey (downloadable from
        http://data.imf.org/?sk=40313609-F037-48C1-84B1-E1F1CE54D6D5)
    ·   IMF and World Bank. 2019. Quarterly External Debt Statistics (downloadable from
        https://datatopics.worldbank.org/debt/qeds)
    ·   Skarp, Lennart (2015). Chinese Export Credit Policies and Programmes. OECD Working
        Party on Export Credits and Credit Guarantees.
    ·   US Treasury International Capital (TIC) System. 2019. Multiple series (downloadable from
        https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/Pages/index.aspx)
    ·   US Export-Import Bank. 2018. Report to the US Congress on Global Export Credit
        Competition. Washington DC: US Ex-Im Bank.




                                                  69
Appendix III ­ Institutional background ­ China's overseas lending agencies

                                                                      Figure A8. The universe of Chinese official creditors


                                                                                                      State Council



                               China
   People's Bank                                                                                                                                                                             Ministry of
                             Investment                                                          Ministry of Finance
     of China                                                                                                                                                                                Commerce
                             Corporation




                                                                            Central Huijin
                                                                             Investment
                                                                                                                                                          State-Owned Policy Banks
                                                                                                                                                   (under direct supervision of State Council)
                                                                                                                                74%




                                                                                                               Industrial and             China             China              China
     State Administration                                                                     Agricultural                                                                                        Department of
     of Foreign Exchange
                            CITIC GROUP             SINOSURE              Bank of China
                                                                                             Bank of China
                                                                                                             Commercial Bank            Construction     Development           Ex-Im               Foreign Aid
                                                                                                                 of China                  Bank
                                                                                                                                                            Bank               Bank




                              China-LAC              UAE-China                                                                                                                                    China-ASEAN
                                                                                                              China-Venezuela                              China-Africa
       Silk Road Fund         Cooperation          Joint Investment                                                                   Sino-French Fund                      China-CEE Fund         Investment
                                                                                                                 Joint Fund                              Development Fund
                            Investment Fund               Fund                                                                                                                                   Cooperation Fund




                             Portfolio Investors                                                              Direct Bank Creditors                                           Special Purpose Funds


     Note: This figure shows a stylized overview of China's main official creditor agencies (distinguishing between direct bank creditors, portfolio investors and
     special purpose funds) and their link to China's political authorities. Black lines reflect ownership. Data is from annual reports and company websites.




                                                                                                        70
Figure A8 gives a stylized overview on the universe of Chinese official creditor agencies. We also show
the links and ownership structures between banks, portfolio investors, special purpose funds, and China's
political authorities.

The two most important overseas creditors, by a large margin, are China's two state-owned policy banks:
China Export-Import Bank and China Development Bank. Both operate under direct ownership and
supervision of the Ministry of Finance and the State Council. Figure A9 below shows that the two banks
have dominated Chinese foreign credit extension over the past decade.

In recent years, China's four main state-owned commercial banks have also started to engage more
actively in overseas lending: the Bank of China, the Agricultural Bank of China, the Industrial and
Commercial Bank of China and the China Construction Bank. They are the world's largest four banks as
measured by total assets and offer a broad variety of traditional financial services. At the same time, these
banks emphasize their role in furthering China's national interest, e.g. by promoting Renminbi
internationalization and by acting as the "financial artery" of the Belt and Road Initiative (see for example
the annual reports of the Bank of China). Over the course of the past decade, their foreign asset holdings
have risen rapidly, largely driven by lending through Hong Kong and other foreign affiliates. The four
banks are likely to hold a substantial part of China's 919 billion USD of bank claims on other emerging
market economies (Cerutti et al. 2018).

China's foreign portfolio investments are primarily carried out by three funds. First, the State
Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE), a subdivision of the People's Bank of China, which is in
charge of managing China's official foreign exchange reserves. Second, CITIC Group and, third, the
China Investment Corporation (CIC), China's official sovereign wealth fund that was established to
diversify China's foreign exchange reserve holdings. Both the CITIC and CIC funds now hold broad and
diversified international portfolios. Through a subsidiary, Central Huijin Investment, CIC also holds
majority stakes in Sinosure, China's main Export Credit Agency, and in China's four largest commercial
banks.

Finally, China Ex-Im Bank and China Development Bank manage a diverse group of special purpose
funds, each with a narrower geographic mandate. Most of these funds were set up in cooperation with
recipient countries and invest in foreign corporations via equity flows. Traditionally, these special funds
focused on developing and middle-income countries, but in the past five years have increasingly been set
up in advanced countries.




                                                     71
    Figure A9. Composition of Chinese overseas lending by creditor agency 2000 - 2017




Notes: This figure classifies China's overseas lending by the type of creditor, i.e. by which state-
owned agencies extended the loans. The data are volume weighted using billions of constant 2015
USD. Loans by "multiple agencies" refer to package deals: these usually include concessional lending
by the Chinese government or policy banks and commercial loans by state-owned enterprises and
banks.




                                                72
Appendix IV - Additional estimation results and robustness checks


In this section, we present additional empirical results from our VAR analysis as well as a robustness
check using an alternative measure of Chinese output growth.

A4.I Full VAR results

Figure A10 presents the full set of impulse response functions derived from the recursive VAR introduced
in the main text above. More precisely, the figure shows the impulse functions of each of the five included
variables in response to one standard deviation shocks in Chinese import commodity prices, in the
Chinese real GDP growth rate, in the Chinese monetary policy index, and in the VIX. Grey shaded areas
represent 90% confidence intervals based on bootstrapped standard errors and small sample degree-of-
freedom adjustments for the error variance-covariance matrix.

It is reassuring that the full set of estimated impulse responses align with standard economic theory and
the empirical findings of other studies. Commodity prices show a strong and positive reaction to a shock
in Chinese real GDP growth. Chinese real GDP growth responds negatively (albeit not significantly) to a
monetary tightening shock and responds negatively and significantly to an increase in global risk aversion,
i.e. a shock in the VIX. China's monetary policy index increases (a tightening of monetary policy) in
response to a positive GDP growth shock and decreases (an expansion of monetary policy) in response to
a shock in the VIX. The VIX displays significant, negative impulse responses (a decrease in global risk
aversion) to shocks in global commodity prices and in Chinese real GDP growth.




                                                    73
                                                 Figure A10. Full set of impulse response functions from recursive VAR

           Response of capital                     Response of                     Response of real GDP                     Reponse of monetary                    Reponse of VIX
               outflows                          commodity prices                        growth                                policy index
       IRF to capital flow shock            IRF to capital flow shock             IRF to capital flow shock             IRF to capital flow shock              IRF to capital flow shock
 3                                    4                                    .6                                    .2                                    .05

                                                                                                                 .1
 2                                    2                                    .4                                                                            0
                                                                                                                  0
 1                                    0                                    .2
                                                                                                                                                       -.05
                                                                                                                 -.1
                                      -2                                    0
 0                                                                                                               -.2                                    -.1


  IRF to commodity price shock         IRF to commodity price shock          IRF to commodity price shock          IRF to commodity price shock           IRF to commodity price shock
                                      10                                   .3                                    .3
 1                                                                                                                                                       0

                                      5                                    .2                                    .2
.5                                                                         .1                                                                          -.05
                                      0                                                                          .1
                                                                            0
 0
                                                                                                                  0                                     -.1
                                      -5                                   -.1


  IRF to real GDP growth shock         IRF to real GDP growth shock          IRF to real GDP growth shock          IRF to real GDP growth shock           IRF to real GDP growth shock
                                                                                                                 .6                                    .05
 2                                    4                                     1

                                                                                                                 .4                                      0
                                      2
 1                                                                         .5
                                                                                                                 .2                                    -.05
                                      0

                                                                                                                  0                                     -.1
 0                                    -2                                    0


      IRF to monetary policy shock         IRF to monetary policy shock          IRF to monetary policy shock          IRF to monetary policy shock           IRF to monetary policy shock
 1                                    4                                    .2                                                                          .05
                                                                                                                 .6
.5
                                      2                                                                          .4                                      0
                                                                            0
 0                                                                                                               .2
                                      0
                                                                           -.2                                                                         -.05
-.5                                                                                                               0
                                      -2
-1                                                                         -.4                                   -.2                                    -.1


           IRF to shock in VIX                  IRF to shock in VIX                   IRF to shock in VIX                   IRF to shock in VIX                    IRF to shock in VIX
.5                                    2                                    .2                                    .1                                     .2

                                                                                                                  0                                    .15
 0                                    1                                     0
                                                                                                                 -.1                                    .1
                                      0
-.5                                                                        -.2              74                   -.2                                   .05
                                      -1
-1                                                                         -.4                                   -.3                                     0

       0     4   8   12   16     20         0    4    8   12   16     20          0    4    8    12   16    20          0     4   8   12   16     20           0    4    8   12   16     20
A4.II Alternative measures for Chinese real GDP growth

A growing academic literature documents statistical short-comings of Chinese official output data (see for
instance Fernald et al. 2015 and Chen et al. 2019). As explained in Chen et al. (2019), Chinese official
output figures are based on data collected by local authorities that face politically prescribed growth
targets and thus have strong incentives to systematically over-report economic activity. A preferable
indicator of growth in real Chinese economic activity might therefore be given by extracting the principal
component of a variety of economic indicators that are less prone to manipulation. We implement this
strategy by following Fernald et al. (2015) and construct a proxy of Chinese real economic output growth
as the first principal component of the growth rates of Chinese electricity production in kilowatt hours,
railway freight traffic in tons, and retail spending in billions of RMB. Figure A11 shows this estimate and
compares it to the official real GDP growth rate published by the National Bureau of Statistics.

                   Figure A11. Principal component estimate of Chinese real GDP growth




Note: This figures compares the official Chinese real GDP growth rate as published by the Chinese National Bureau
of Statistics (red line) to an estimated real GDP growth rate (black line) obtained as the principal component of the
growth rates of Chinese energy supply, retail sales and cargo freight (obtained from CEIC Data).




                                                         75
Figure A12 below shows that the impulse response functions are similar to the benchmark result
presented in the main text when replacing the official GDP growth rate with our principal component
estimate.

   Figure A12. Impulse response of gross Chinese capital flows ­ with alternative GDP measure




Note: This figure presents the impulse response functions of gross Chinese capital outflows in percent of Chinese
GDP to one-standard deviation shocks in the variables shown. In contrast to our benchmark specification, Chinese
real GDP growth is now estimated as the principal component of energy supply, railway freight and retail sales.
Grey shaded areas represent 90% confidence intervals based on bootstrapped standard errors and small sample
degree-of-freedom adjustments for the error variance-covariance matrix.




                                                       76
References (cited in the appendix)

Bandiera, Luca, and Vasileios Tsiropoulos. 2019. A Framework to Assess Debt Sustainability and Fiscal
Risks under the Belt and Road Initiative. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 8891.

Bräutigam, Deborah. 2009. The Dragon's Gift. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Bräutigam, Deborah, and Kevin P. Gallagher. 2014. Bartering Globalization: China's Commodity-backed
Finance in Africa and Latin America. Global Policy, 5(3), 346-352.

Cerutti, Eugenio, Catherine Koch, and Swapan-Kumar Pradhan. 2018. The growing footprint of EME
banks in the international banking system. BIS Quarterly Review, December 2018.

Cerutti, Eugenio, and Haonan Zhou. 2018. The Chinese Banking System: Much more than a Domestic
Giant. VoxEU column.

Chen, Wei, Xilu Chen, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Zheng Song. 2019. A Forensic Examination of China's
National Accounts. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2019, 1-54.

Coppola, Antonio, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger. 2019. Redrawing the Map of
Global Capital Flows: The Role of Cross-Border Financing and Tax Havens. Mimeo.

Cruces, Juan J., and Christoph Trebesch. 2013. Sovereign Defaults: The Price of Haircuts. American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(3), 85­117.

Fernald, John, Eric Hsu, and Mark M. Spiegel. 2015. Is China Fudging its Figures? Evidence from
Trading Partner Data. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2015-12.

Gallagher, Kevin P., Amos Irwin, and Katherine Koleski. 2012. The New Banks in Town: Chinese
Finance in Latin America. Washington D.C.: Inter-American Dialogue.

Hurley, John, Scott Morris, and Gailyn Portelance. 2018. Examining the Debt Sustainability Implications
of the Belt and Road Initiative from a Policy Perspective. CGD Policy Paper 121.

Kratz, Agatha, Allen Feng, and Logan Wright. 2019. New Data on the `Debt Trap' Question. Rhodium
Group.

Meyer, Josefin, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. 2019. Sovereign Bonds since Waterloo.
NBER Working Paper No. 25543.

Schlegl, Matthias, Christoph Trebesch and Mark L. J. Wright. 2019. The Seniority Structure of Sovereign
Debt. NBER Working Paper No. 25793.

Setser, Brad. 2018. A few words on China's holdings of US bonds. https://www.cfr.org/blog/few-words-
chinas-holdings-us-bonds

Zucman, Gabriel. 2013. The Missing Wealth of Nations: Are Europe and the U.S. Net Debtors or Net
Creditors? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (3), 1321-64.

                                                  77
