                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    ARE PRICE-COST MARKUPS RISING IN THE UNITED STATES? A DISCUSSION
                           OF THE EVIDENCE

                                         Susanto Basu

                                      Working Paper 26057
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26057


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




Written for the Journal of Economic Perspectives. I thank the editors for useful suggestions that
have improved the paper, and Jan Eeckhout, John Fernald, Germán Gutiérrez, Robert Hall, Brent
Neiman, Thomas Philippon, Valerie Ramey, Fabio Schiantarelli, Chad Syverson, and J. Christina
Wang for helpful comments and discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Susanto Basu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Are Price-Cost Markups Rising in the United States? A Discussion of the Evidence
Susanto Basu
NBER Working Paper No. 26057
July 2019
JEL No. E23,E32,L11,L16

                                          ABSTRACT

A number of recent papers have argued that US firms exert increasing market power, as measured
by their markups of price over marginal cost. I review three of the main approaches to estimating
economy-wide markups and show that all are based on the hypothesis of firm cost-minimization.
Yet different assumptions and methods of implementation lead to quite different conclusions
regarding the levels and trends of markups. I survey the literature critically, and argue that some
of the startling findings of steeply-rising markups are difficult to reconcile with other evidence
and with aggregate data. Existing methods cannot determine whether markups have been stable
or whether they have risen modestly over the past several decades. Even relatively small
increases in markups are consistent with significant changes in aggregate outcomes, such as the
observed decline in labor's share of national income.


Susanto Basu
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
susanto.basu@bc.edu
        Has the US economy entered a second Gilded Age? A pattern of increasing industrial
concentration combined with rising inequality in income and wealth may seem to indicate as
much. Yet industrial concentration can be interpreted as evidence of either increased market
power or as evidence of greater competition, where more efficient firms are able to gain market
share. Thus, economists have sought to estimate a less ambiguous measure of market power, in
order to see whether firms are able to exert greater control over the market prices of their
outputs. The summary measure that has been the focus of much recent research is the markup of
price over marginal cost.
        Three main methods have been used to estimate markup trends in the US economy. The
first method attempts to estimate economic profits using either aggregate or firm-level data, and
then together with an assumption of constant returns to scale, generates an estimate of the size of
markups. The second approach estimates a production function for various firms or sectors,
based on a variety of inputs. Unlike the first approach, it allows for increasing returns to scale,
and recovers the markup by applying conditions for cost minimization to the estimated
coefficients in the production function. The third method again estimates a production function,
typically using firm-level data, but this time recovers the markup from the optimization condition
for a single input. This approach again allows for increasing returns to scale, but unlike the first
and second methods avoids the need to estimate the rate of economic profit (or assume that it is
zero). This method estimates the markup as the elasticity of output with respect to the single
input, divided by the factor payment to the selected input as a share of the firm's revenue.
        I begin with a conceptual overview of these three approaches, which shows how they are
connected and provides an intuitive sense of how they allow estimation of markups for the
economy as a whole. In the following sections, I examine empirical research that has
implemented each of these approaches. I describe in more detail how the research was done and
characterize some strengths and weaknesses of all three approaches. I show why estimates of
large or steeply rising markups are implausible. However, the evidence is consistent with either
stable or mildly-increasing markups.
        The paper offers some suggestions for future research on markups, and particularly asks
researchers to link microeconomic estimates of markups to aggregate trends in the economy.
The recent interest in market power stems in substantial part from the realization that higher
markups tend to depress the demand for factors of production, and thus the prices (incomes)
those factors receive. For example, higher markups are blamed for both the fall in labor's share
of income and the recent decline in the investment rate. Yet many estimates suggest that the
markup increased far more than would be necessary to explain the decline in labor's share. And
higher markups should also reduce hiring of workers and, ceteris paribus, raise the inflation rate.
Neither prediction is easily verified in recent US data.
Three Methods of Measuring Markups


The markup of price over marginal cost is a basic measure of market power. With perfect
competition in the goods market, a profit-maximizing firm will set price equal to marginal cost,
and the markup will be equal to one. With imperfect competition, the firm produces at the
quantity where marginal revenue equals marginal cost, and price will exceed marginal cost. In
seeking to measure markups, an immediate hurdle is how to measure marginal cost--a variable
that must be estimated or inferred rather than being directly observed in a market transaction like
prices or revenues. Economists specializing in industrial organization have developed ways of
estimating markups for particular firms and industries. But the challenge here is to develop
measures of average markups for the economy as a whole.
This section describes three theoretical approaches that researchers have used. Those who
attempt to estimate markups in a comprehensive manner, for most or all of the US economy,
typically use a version of the cost-minimization framework described here.1 The following three
sections then describe in more detail how each approach has been implemented in recent
empirical research, and discuss some strengths and weaknesses of each approach.
Consider a firm producing output, Y, with a production function, F, that uses capital and labor as
inputs, as well as freely-available technology, Z: Y  F ( K , L, Z ). (Researchers using firm- or
industry-level data typically add intermediate inputs as a factor of production.) Suppose
furthermore that while the firm may have market power in the goods market, it takes the prices
of the two factors, the wage, W, and the required return to capital, R, as set in markets outside its
control. Then, the firm's first-order condition for cost minimizing use of labor requires that it
hire labor until the marginal product of labor equal the markup times the wage2
                                                               PFL   W .

Here FL is the marginal product of labor, P is the price of output, and  is the markup of price
over marginal cost. Perfect competition in the goods market corresponds to   1, which yields
the familiar condition that an optimizing firm must equate the marginal product of labor to the
real wage. However, a firm with market power hires less labor (and thus has a higher marginal
product of labor for a given real wage), since it maximizes profit by producing less than the
competitive level of output. More market power--a larger markup--corresponds to a lower




                                                            
1
   De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) discuss the relationship between this approach and the traditional industrial
organization approach to estimating markups using estimates of demand for individual goods or markets.
2
   The fundamental first-order condition is that the firm equates the marginal product of labor valued at marginal cost
to the wage. The equation in the text follows from observing that marginal cost by definition equals the ratio of the
output price to the markup, which is itself price over marginal cost.

                                                                  2 
 
level of desired output. Naturally, a similar condition applies to the equality between the value
marginal product of capital and its rental rate, R, multiplied by .3 
As we will see, the robust cost-minimization conditions alone allow us to measure the extent of a
firm's market power, even though they do not by themselves answer the interesting question of
why the firm has market power. Thus, the firm optimality condition above holds regardless of
the form of imperfect competition that generates the markup. The firm can be a monopolist or an
oligopolist, and it may follow either static or dynamic pricing policies. The firm's optimal
choice of the markup is determined by its larger profit-maximization problem, of which cost-
minimization is only a part. But since we do not need to take a stand on the rest of the firm
problem, which can be very complicated, we are able to measure the size of the markup with
minimal assumptions.
One conclusion follows from multiplying the condition above by labor input and dividing by
output, to put it into elasticity form:
                                                               FL L  WL
                                                                    
                                                                Y    PY
The left-hand side is the elasticity of output with respect to labor input. The right-hand side is
labor's share in revenue, multiplied by the markup. For a given output elasticity--and certainly
in the Cobb-Douglas case, where the elasticity is constant--an increase in the markup depresses
the share of revenue or national income going to labor.
This implication of higher markups has drawn much interest in recent years, because the labor
share of income in the US has fallen sharply over the decades since 1980. After averaging about
0.64 in pre-1980 data, the most recent observations of labor's share have been around 0.58, a
sharp decline for one of the "great ratios" of economic growth. Elsby et al. (2013) attribute
around a third of the measured decline in the share to incorrect measurement of self-employment
income, which still leaves an actual decline of four percentage points to be explained.
How much would the markup have to rise to explain this decline in labor's share? If the output
elasticity of labor were constant, then the markup would have to increase by a factor of 1.07.
That is, if perfect competition ( =1) prevailed in 1980 we would require  =1.07 now, so price
would now be seven percent higher than marginal cost. As we shall see, this implied increase in
the markup is quite modest relative to many of the estimates in the literature. In order for the
markup to have risen by more, the output elasticity of labor must have risen substantially in
order to be consistent with the observed change in the labor share.4 Of course, this back-of-the-
envelope exercise attributes all of the decline in the labor share to changing market power. Elsby
et al. (2013) attribute much of the change to increased trade competition from globalization,


                                                            
3
   This cost-minimization condition holds even if it is costly for the firm to adjust its capital stock. However, in this
case the rental rate, R, must be redefined to include the marginal adjustment cost of capital and its expected rate of
change. See Basu, Fernald and Shapiro (2001).
4
   This observation is due to Brent Neiman. 

                                                                  3 
 
while Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) attribute it to changes in technology (their explanation
implies that the output elasticity of labor should have fallen instead of rising).
As this quick calculation demonstrates, inferring changes in markups from changes in observed
factor shares requires either an assumption about or, preferably, an estimate of the output
elasticity in question. This is the method followed by De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017), which is
one of the three approaches to markup estimation discussed at greater length below. They
estimate an output elasticity with respect to a chosen input econometrically, and divide it by the
input's observed revenue share. By the equation above, the ratio gives an estimate of the
markup. Repeating this exercise over time, they can also compute a trend in the markup.
The second method I review writes down an equation for efficient use of capital that is parallel to
the condition for labor above, and adds the two equations to yield:

                                         FL L FK K  WL RK   Total Cost
                                                                         1  s  .
                                          Y    Y    PY PY    Revenue

The left-hand side is the sum of the output elasticities of the production function, or the degree of
returns to scale. The right-hand side is the markup times the ratio of total cost (including the
rental cost of capital) to revenue. Since cost equals revenue minus economic profit, the right-
hand side can also be written as the markup times one minus the profit rate s, the ratio of profit
to revenue.5
This equation implies a different method of computing the markup, which is followed by another
major strand of the literature discussed below. Suppose one estimates the degree of returns to
scale in production, or simply assumes that returns to scale are constant (so the left-hand side
equals one). Then one can compute the profit rate, and thereby estimate the markup. As the
equation above shows, the key to computing the profit rate is to impute a required return to
capital, R. Under constant returns and competition, required payments to capital are just total
revenue less payments to labor. But with imperfect competition, required payments to capital
need to be estimated separately. Once capital payments are estimated and returns to scale are
known, one can back out the markup.
This core relationship between markups, economic profit and economies of scale also clarifies
how a firm might have both a markup in excess of one and also a near-zero rate of economic
profit. This outcome is possible if the firm is producing in the area of increasing returns to scale,
where average cost exceeds marginal cost. For example, this would be the case in the classic
Chamberlinian model of monopolistic competition, in which long-run profits are zero due to free
entry, but firms have market power to set price above marginal cost. Conversely, firms operating
with increasing returns to scale--a situation that can arise when marginal costs are low compared
to fixed costs--will find that they need to charge a markup above marginal cost to cover their

                                                            
5
  One can also derive this equation by manipulating the definition of the markup as the ratio of price to marginal
cost. Multiply and divide by average cost, and then recognize that the ratio of average to marginal cost is the degree
of returns to scale for a cost-minimizing firm, while the ratio of price to average cost is also the ratio of revenue to
total cost. 

                                                               4 
 
fixed costs, or else they will make losses and go out of business. Of course, in both situations
there is a welfare loss arising from the markup even with zero profits, as there is from any wedge
(such as a tax) between price and marginal cost. Thus, contrary to suggestions in some papers,
the markup is generally a better measure of market power than the profit rate.
Finally, one can derive a third method of estimating the markup by applying the same condition
for cost minimization in a different context. This method, due to Hall (1988, 1990) begins by
taking a first-order approximation in logs to the production function and taking differences over
time of the resulting expression. Letting a lower-case letter represent the natural log of its upper-
case counterpart (for example, y  ln(Y)) and a  represent a change over time, one gets
                                         FL L   F K
                                   y          l  K  k  z ,
                                          Y      Y
where z has the interpretation of technical change. Applying the conditions for cost-
minimization noted above, this equation becomes:

                                       WL    RK   
                                  y       l     k   z.
                                       PY    PY   
As Hall (1990) emphasized, this approach generalizes Solow's classic (1957) method for
calculating the growth rate of technology. If  = 1, as Solow assumed, then one can obtain a
time series for technical change, z, as a residual by subtracting share-weighted input growth
from output growth. (In Solow's case, required payments to capital are also easily observed as
revenue minus labor payments, since there are no profits.) In the case where  is allowed to
exceed one but is unknown, it must be estimated econometrically, using the equation above as an
estimating equation, with the unobserved z treated as the error term. Since one expects that
changes in input usage, the composite right-hand-side variable, would be correlated with the
change in technology, Hall uses an instrumental variables technique, where valid instruments
must be correlated with input choice (the weighted average of k and l) but uncorrelated with
technical change--loosely speaking, any type of "demand shock." Hall (2018) uses a small
modification of this method to estimate markups using recent data.
All three of these methods begin from the assumption that firms minimize costs taking input
prices as given. This hypothesis is powerful, but it does not cover all important cases. For
example, it assumes that individual firms do not have the power to set wages for their workers.
A Council of Economic Advisers (2016) issue brief discussed evidence suggesting, to the
contrary, that often firms do indeed have some power to set wages. Qualitatively, the
implications of market power discussed above do not change much if firms also have power to
set some factor prices. In most cases, such factor market power would also create a wedge
between marginal products and factor prices, thus reinforcing the conclusions discussed above
for the case of market power in the goods market alone. However, Hall (2018) shows via an
insightful example that the quantitative conclusions drawn from applying cost-minimization to
data to estimate goods-market markups will typically give incorrect results if firms have market
power in factor markets as well. Morlacco (2019) presents conditions under which one can

                                                 5 
 
reinterpret the evidence for goods market power obtained using the method of De Loecker and
Eeckhout (2017) noted above as evidence of market power in the factor market instead.




Markup Estimates Based on Economic Profits and Constant Returns to Scale


As discussed in the previous section, an assumption of cost minimization makes it possible to
derive a relationship between three parameters: returns to scale, the markup, and the rate of
economic profit. If returns to scale are assumed to be constant, then calculations of economic
profit will allow an estimate of markups. Barkai (2016) applies this method to US national
accounts data and obtains an estimate of the aggregate profit rate, which implies an average
economy-wide markup. However, since aggregate time-series data are sparse and explanations
for their behavior are typically abundant, Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017a, 2017b) study cross-
sectional data at the firm level from Compustat, which provides balance-sheet data on publicly
listed US firms. In either case, because the profit rate is typically calculated period-by-period,
this method produces a time series for the implied markup.
Perhaps the main advantage of this approach to markup estimation is that it avoids the need for
econometric estimation of production functions, with the attendant difficulties of identification,
which are used in the methods that follow. Conversely, the main problem with this approach is
that economic profits are notoriously hard to calculate. A typical assumption in this approach is
that profits are only paid to owners of capital. This assumption simplifies the computation, since
observed payments to labor (and for intermediate inputs in firm- or industry-level data) can be
treated as true factor costs, without any profit component. But one still faces the daunting
challenge of separating required payments to capital (what the capital would earn on a
competitive market) from economic profits, which are really a return to ownership of the firm
but are bundled in the data with the implicit rental payments to capital. Efforts to separate the
two require the researcher to impute a required return to capital, which when multiplied by the
value of the capital stock yields the implicit rental payments.
The required rate of return includes the risk-free real rate, which can be observed from market
interest rates on government debt: since 1997, inflation-indexed US government bond yields are
available; prior to that, one needs to use nominal yields and subtract an expected inflation rate. It
also includes the expected risk premium in excess of the safe rate, which typically must be
imputed using an asset-pricing model. Barkai (2016) uses the AAA bond yield as the required
return, which includes some compensation for risk. Gutiérrez (2017) explicitly imputes a risk
premium, which he adds to a risk-free rate.
Another important component of the rental rate is the economic depreciation rate of the capital
stock. Depreciation rates vary widely by type of capital, and thus required returns do as well.
For example, the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (1997, at
https://apps.bea.gov/scb/account_articles/national/0797fr/table3.htm) reports annual depreciation

                                                 6 
 
rates of 2-3 percent for business structures, 10-20 percent for most types of business machinery,
and 31 percent for office computers. The rate of economic depreciation includes the loss to the
owner of capital from physical depreciation--the capital wearing out--as well as the expected
capital gain or loss from the change in the resale price of the capital good relative to its purchase
price. Most of the large depreciation rate for computers, for example, comes from the decline in
the price of a computer over time due to technological progress in the manufacture of new
computers, and not from the machine wearing out with use.
The rental cost of capital is then calculated as the sum of the required interest rate and the
depreciation rate, multiplied by the market value of the capital stock for each type of capital,
summed over all capital types.
While disaggregated stocks of capital are tracked at the level of large industries and the economy
as a whole, they are not typically not available at a firm level, where firm balance sheets
typically report only the book (not market) value of the total capital stock. Furthermore, the
national income accounts seek to estimate the rate of economic depreciation, while firm
statements report only accounting depreciation. Thus, somewhat counterintuitively, the profit
rate might be calculated with less error at an aggregate level, as in Barkai (2016), than at the firm
level, as in Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017a,b).
Barkai (2016) calculates the profit rate on value added over the period 1984-2014 with US
national accounts data. He finds a much lower profit rate at the start of his sample, 2.2 percent in
1984, than at the end, when it rises to 15.7 percent in 2014. The implied markup ratio  thus
rises from 1.02 to 1.19 over this period.
Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017b) calculate two measures of the profit rate. The first, which they
term the net operating margin, does not subtract the full required return to capital: their implicit
rental payment includes depreciation, but not an interest rate. They also compute another
markup estimate, based on a full user-cost measure subtracting the required interest payment to
capital as well as depreciation. This measure rises by 0.05-0.10 over the period 1980-2015.
Interestingly, it is relatively flat until about 2000 and then rises, which matches the timing of the
change in labor's share, which is also fairly flat from 1980-2000 before declining sharply. Their
estimated markup by the end of the sample is about 1.1.
While this estimate appears smaller than Barkai's, it is important to keep in mind that Gutiérrez
and Philippon (2017b) are reporting a markup on firm sales, which is roughly equal to firm-level
gross output, while Barkai reports a markup on value added, which summed over firms or
industries equals GDP. This important distinction will be discussed further in the next section.
For now, it suffices to note that on a common value-added basis the two end-of-sample estimates
are almost identical.
Note that the rise in both markup estimates is noticeably larger than what is implied by the
decline in labor's share, as discussed in the previous section. If the markup did indeed rise to
about 1.2, then to be consistent with the decline in labor share corrected for mismeasurement the
output elasticity of labor would have to have risen by about 10 percent over the same period of
time. It is not clear what could have caused such an increase.

                                                  7 
 
A number of refinements to such calculations may be required to calculate the rental cost of
capital, and therefore markups, with greater accuracy. Three refinements are worth particular
mention. First and most straightforward is to correct the required return for taxes, following the
classic method of Hall and Jorgenson (1967).
Second, and much more difficult, is to correct for adjustment costs of capital. This refinement
could make use of Hayashi's (1982) neoclassical interpretation of Tobin's (1969) q ratio, the
value of installed capital relative to the purchase price of new investment goods. Both the
valuation of the existing capital stock and its expected rate of change should be done using the
shadow value of installed capital, marginal q, which can differ from the observed purchase price
of capital due to adjustment costs. However, these marginal adjustment costs cannot be observed
directly and must be estimated econometrically.6
Third, the measure of capital could be expanded to include "intangible capital," which seems to
be growing in importance in the US economy (for discussion, see Corrado, Hulten and Sichel
2009). While some forms of intangible capital, primarily software and research and
development, are included in the US national accounts, most are not. It is possible that the
imputed rentals to capital are too low, because tangible capital is substantially smaller than the
true quantity of tangible-plus-intangible capital. It should be noted that Gutiérrez and Philippon
(2017a,b) do incorporate intangible capital into their analysis, using methods in the literature
following Corrado, Hulten and Sichel (2009). However, it is possible that intangible investments
grew even faster than the traditional measurements imply, as suggested by McGrattan and
Prescott (2010).
In a closely-related approach, Karabarbounis and Neiman (2018) also emphasize that the efforts
to measure the rental rate of capital may require significant adjustments. They focus on the gap
between revenue and imputed total costs, which at the national level is the sum of labor
payments and imputed capital rents. They term this gap factorless income, because it cannot be
attributed easily to either labor or capital, and examine its time-series behavior in aggregate US
data from 1960-2016. (The method of measuring the markup discussed in this section assumes
that "factorless income" represents economic profit resulting from market power, and is indeed a
return to firm ownership, rather than a required payment to either factor of production.)
It turns out that the share of factorless income is quite high in the 1960s and early 1970s, then
declines, and is high again since the 1990s. If interpreted as profits, then markups must also
have been high before 1980. But most of the hypotheses advanced to explain high market
power--such as the rise of "superstar firms" (Autor et al. 2017) and a high industrial
concentration ratio--fit the recent period, but not the pre-1980 period. Similarly, while growth
of intangible capital appears able to help explain high levels of factorless income in recent years
(if it is interpreted as a return to unmeasured intangibles rather than economic profits), estimates
                                                            
6
  In principle, the value of q can be inferred from market prices of a firm's debt and equity. This method has two
drawbacks. First, it applies only to publicly-listed firms. Second, it requires the researcher to assume that asset
market valuations reflect only fundamentals at all points in time, a "no-bubble" assumption that may be difficult to
justify after the asset market run-ups and crashes observed around the world historically and in the last three
decades.

                                                               8 
 
of the quantity of intangible capital typically find that it has been rising steadily over time, and
was not large before 1970.
Somewhat by default, Karabarbounis and Neiman (2018) suggest that researchers are failing to
measure the required rate of return to capital properly. Yet, they do not demonstrate that
including one or more of the variables typically omitted from the construction of the rental rate
can actually account for a substantial share of the mysterious factorless income. Thus,
Karabarbounis and Neiman's (2018) main contribution is to show that plausible changes in
market power alone are unlikely to explain the full postwar time series of imputed
profits/factorless income in aggregate U.S. data.



Estimates Based on Econometric Estimation Using All Inputs


The methods discussed in this section and the next drop the assumption of constant returns to
scale. Instead, they rely on estimates of production functions. These production functions may
be estimated while imposing the cost-minimization conditions, as in Hall's approach, to give a
one-step estimate of the markup. Or the estimated output elasticity for one of the inputs can be
compared to that input's revenue share to obtain a two-step estimate, as in the approach of De
Loecker and Eeckhout. Both applications also use firm- or industry-level data, where the output
concept is gross output and intermediate inputs are an additional factor of production. These
changes make no difference to the theory sketched above, but do change the interpretation of the
resulting estimates in an important way.
As noted in the Methods section above, the approach pioneered by Hall (1988, 1990) and used
recently by Hall (2018)--as well as a large intervening literature!--naturally estimates the
markup as a single parameter over the entire sample period. By itself, this method would not
provide an estimate of the change in the markup over time, which is the primary focus of the
recent literature. Hall (2018) parameterizes each industry-level markup as the sum of a constant
and a time trend, and reports estimates for the weighted average markup at the beginning and end
of his sample period, 1988-2015. (As noted in the first section, the method is based on a first-
order approximation to the production function, which implies that the output elasticities should
be constant over time. To be consistent with the method while allowing a smooth rise in the
markup, each input's share should be trending downward at the rate the markup is increasing--
an implication that could be checked against the data.)
Hall uses an instrumental variables technique to address the concern that the error term is
endogenous. Specifically, Hall uses four categories of military expenditures and the price of
west Texas intermediate crude oil as instrumental variables that are arguably uncorrelated with
technical change. Hall (2018) applies this technique to US data for 60 industries. Most of these
industries are at the NAICS two- or three-digit level of aggregation: large industries in the data
set include Retail Trade, Wholesale Trade, and Construction.

                                                  9 
 
A significant advantage of Hall's (2018) method is that it does not constrain returns to scale to be
constant. The disadvantage is that it requires strictly more information, as well as econometric
estimation with instrumental variables.
Notice that Hall's (2018) method still requires its user to compute the quantity of profits, because
in his one-step production-function approach, the shares are the cost of each input divided by
revenue. The typical assumption is that profits are received only by capital, so one needs to
impute the rental rate of capital, as in the papers discussed in the previous section. Hall
acknowledges this issue. But in practice, he follows the construction of the KLEMS data set
from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, which offers sectoral data on output, as well as inputs
and shares of capital (K), labor (L), energy (E), materials (M), and purchased business services
(S). The shares are constructed assuming that total cost equals total revenue, which of course is
correct only if economic profits are zero. If profit rates are zero, then the estimates that Hall
presents as markups are also estimates of the degree of returns to scale, as shown above.
Hall (2018) estimates that the weighted average industry markup is about 1.3 in 2015, and that
industry markups fall in the range of 1.0-1.8. (Some 30 percent of the point estimates are below
1, but are constrained to equal one on economic grounds, since firms would never systematically
price output below marginal production cost.) The time trend is estimated to be positive,
implying that markups have been rising over time, although the estimate is not statistically larger
than zero at conventional levels of significance.
It may appear that Hall's estimated average markup is only slightly larger than Barkai's (2016)
estimate. This conclusion would be incorrect. Hall is using industry data and estimating a
markup on gross output, while Barkai is estimating a markup on value added. A markup on
gross output leads to a larger markup on value added when one takes into account the fact that
firms use intermediate goods in production (Rotemberg and Woodford 1995; Basu and Fernald
2002). The intuition is that there is a "double-marginalization" phenomenon--firms sell some of
their output for use as intermediate goods, which are bought by other firms that levy an
additional markup on top of the markup they paid for their intermediates, and so on. Assuming
an intermediate input share of 0.50, approximately the average value for the US economy over a
long period of time, a markup of 1.3 on gross production translates to a markup on value added
of 1.9, far larger than Barkai's estimate.7
One way to interpret this estimate, consistent with Hall's implicit assumption of zero economic
profit, is that the production function for GDP using just capital and labor inputs must have
returns to scale equal in size to the value-added markup, namely 1.9. To understand the
implications of such a large degree of increasing returns in the aggregate production function,
consider aggregate US data for 2015 as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2019). The
BLS reports that private non-farm business sector value-added output grew 3.5 percent in 2015,
while the weighted average of capital and labor input in that sector grew 2.7 percent in the same
                                                            
                                                                  (1  s )
                                                                     G   M
7
     The relationship between the two markup concepts is                 , where  is the markup on value added, G
                                                              1  s
                                                                   G M


is the markup on gross output, and sM is the intermediate input share of revenue.

                                                               10 
 
year. For this growth in output and inputs to be consistent with returns to scale of 1.9 requires
that true technological progress must have been negative 1.6 percent! Such a high rate of
technological regress for the US economy as a whole seems quite implausible, casting doubt on
the high returns to scale implied by Hall's estimate of the average markup in 2015.
Why might Hall be estimating markups/returns to scale that are too large? The key concerns
regarding his procedure are those that arise whenever one attempts to estimate production
functions in differences--that is, looking at change in output and changes in inputs--which is
the core of Hall's method. First, consistent estimation of scale economies requires that we
measure the real quantities of all the inputs correctly, as opposed to just their nominal payments
which is all that is required when computing profit rates. (Strictly speaking, the estimation is
consistent if any measurement error in the inputs is uncorrelated with the instruments.) Second,
when variables are measured in growth rates, the resulting correlation tends to emphasize high-
frequency variation in output and inputs. A substantial macro literature has emphasized that
actual capital and labor inputs vary at high frequencies in ways that are not recorded in the
conventional production data that Hall uses (see, Bils and Cho 1994; Burnside, Eichenbaum and
Rebelo 1996; or Basu, Fernald and Kimball 2006). For example, firms may vary the workweek
of capital by changing the number of shifts used to produce output, thus changing the true capital
service input but without a change in the observed capital stock. Firms appear to vary capital's
workweek and labor effort as they change their rate of production, in response to both demand
and technology shocks. This unmeasured variation in utilization will probably lead to an upward
bias in the estimated markup, and using demand instruments will not solve this problem.
As an example of how such considerations can affect the results, Basu, Fernald and Kimball
(2006) also use annual industry-level production data and a procedure similar to Hall's, but with
an additional control for variations in the intensity of factor usage. Their data cover the period
1949-1996, so they do not examine the last two decades (although the sample does cover the
early post-World War II period, when there is also evidence of high profit rates/markups).
Controlling for variable factor utilization, Basu et al. find few industry markup estimates that are
greater than 1 at conventional levels of statistical significance. The clearest evidence of positive
markups is in durables manufacturing, but even there the median industry markup is just 1.07 (on
gross output).8 Outside of durables manufacturing, only one industry (Chemicals) is estimated to
have a markup significantly larger than 1. On the other hand, the estimated controls for
utilization are positive and highly significant for both durables and non-durables manufacturing
industries, and large although statistically insignificant outside manufacturing.
Thus, future research using Hall's method might proceed in several ways. First, when using this
approach it might be useful to apply similar utilization controls to see if, by reducing the effect of
short-term variations in unmeasured inputs, it also reduces the markup estimates obtained.
Second, it would be useful to investigate further the interpretation of the  variable, and the
extent to which is capturing economies of scale, economic profits, or some mixture of the two.

                                                            
8
  Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006) present their results as estimates of returns to scale, but since they operate under
the same zero-profit assumption as Hall, their estimates can be interpreted equally well as markups.

                                                               11 
 
Finally, because this approach requires a calculation of profit, all of the questions raised in the
previous section about measuring the rental cost of capital apply here as well.




Econometric Estimation Using a Single Input


The theory presented in the first main section of this paper established a framework in which the
markup must be the same for each input (because marginal cost must be the same along every
margin). Thus, it should be possible to compute the markup based only on a single input to
production, not many inputs. Moreover, if one chooses an input that does not receive pure
profits, then the issues of measuring required returns to capital and the profit rate do not arise.
The single-input method would be an ideal one to apply to data on intermediate inputs, which
probably do not share in pure profits and are measured with the least error due to utilization.9
De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) take this single-input approach using balance-sheet data on
publicly-listed firms from Compustat. A later version of this paper, De Loecker and Eeckhout
with Unger (2018), also uses firm-level data from the US Census, which is both a better source
for production data and also provides information on firms that are privately held. As of this
writing, their results using these data had not been cleared for disclosure by the Census Bureau,
and hence the discussion in this paper is based on the results using only Compustat data.
These authors use firms' expenditures in their accounting reports on a composite input termed
Cost of Goods Sold (COGS), which consists of most intermediate goods and a subset of labor
input. They take COGS and the fixed capital stock, K, as their two inputs to production at the
firm level. By hypothesis no profits are paid to COGS, so they can construct the share of this
factor's cost to total revenue simply from reported data. Like many authors in the industrial
organization literature, they use a variant of the technique introduced by Olley and Pakes (1996)
to estimate a Cobb-Douglas production function without imposing constant returns to scale, and
obtain the relevant coefficient estimate. Then, they can divide the estimated output elasticity of
COGS by its observed revenue share to calculate the markup. Using the cross-section dimension
of their data, they are able to estimate a different output elasticity for each factor for all years,
and thus a time series for the markup. (Note that while the output elasticity is constrained to be
equal across firms at a point in time, the revenue share and hence the markup estimate varies
across firms and over time.)

                                                            
9
  Indeed, Dobbelaere and Mairesse (2013) apply a similar idea to firm-level data from France to allow for the
possibility that both labor and capital bargain over the profits generated by markups. They estimate the markup
from the intermediate input margin only, and estimate the bargaining power of capital and labor from the other
margins. Their technique also suggests a possible method to allow for monopsony and monopoly power in the same
estimation framework. Unfortunately, the Compustat data do not allow for this attractive approach, because most
firms do not report separate expenditures on labor and intermediate inputs.  


                                                               12 
 
In their headline estimates, De Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger (2018) report that the weighted
average of the markup ratio at the firm level rises from 1.21 in 1980 to 1.61 in 2016, with most
of the increase taking place in the 1980s and 1990s.10 (Note that the timing of the estimated
markup change does not match particularly well the timing of the decline in labor's share of
national income, which drops sharply starting in the 2000s but is fairly stable earlier.) The
authors emphasize that the trend in the average markup is being driven by increased
heterogeneity at the firm level. They plot the distribution of their estimated markups across
firms in 1980 and 2016. Both distributions have a mode that is very similar, about 1.3, but the
distribution in 2016 has a higher standard deviation and a thicker right tail. This increase in
density in the right tail leads to the much higher estimate of the average markup by the end of
their sample.
Markups as large as those reported by De Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger (2018) by the end of
their sample have some implausible implications. For example, because they report that average
returns to scale are about 1.05 in 2016, but the average markup is 1.61, then the relationship
given earlier between markups, returns to scale and economic profits suggests that the average
economic profit rate must be extremely high, on the order of 35 percent of firm sales. Since
sales on average are about twice as large as value added, this calculation suggests that about 70
percent of GDP is pure economic profit! Profit rates of this size are too large to be credible.
Also, since labor receives slightly less than 60 percent of GDP as compensation, and the authors
assume that none of that payment is profit, economic profits of this size would mean that there is
not enough output to pay both labor and profit, let alone any required return to capital.
Another implausible implication arises because, in keeping with the rest of the recent literature,
De Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger assume that profits are paid only to owners of capital. On
average across US industries, firms spend about 50 percent of their revenues on intermediate
goods and 30 percent on labor. With these shares and a markup of 1.61, the output elasticity of
labor and intermediates must sum to about 1.3. But since they estimate average returns to scale
of only 1.05, the implied output elasticity of capital must be on the order of -0.25.11 It seems
very unlikely that firms spend billions of dollars on investment to accumulate capital that will
reduce their output. Furthermore, the implied negative capital elasticity is inconsistent with De
Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger's own production-function estimate of the output elasticity of
capital, which averages approximately 0.2. This inconsistency between the implied and the
directly-estimated capital elasticities is an indication that the estimation is producing problematic
results.

                                                            
10
   These are the results from what De Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger (2018) term the "traditional" production
function, which they denote PF1. They also report results for an alternative specification, PF2, in which markups
rise from about 1 in 1980 to 1.32 in 2016. However, the paper stresses the results from PF1, which are the only ones
mentioned in the abstract and are presented first in the introduction. Thus, the discussion here focuses on the PF1
results, while noting the PF2 estimates when they differ significantly.
11
   On their face, the finding by De Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger (2018) that returns to scale have not risen over
time do not support one common hypothesis for explaining the rise of markups. A standard implication of a
"knowledge economy" is that production is characterized by large fixed or sunk costs but low marginal cost. The
classic example is software, which can take huge resources to develop but then can be replicated at essentially zero
cost.

                                                               13 
 
Finally, note that if the average markup of 1.61 is put on a value-added basis as before, the
implied markup on GDP is in excess of 4, enormously higher than standard estimates in the
macro literature, which typically estimates values between 1.1 and 1.4 (for example, Basu and
Fernald 1997; Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans 2005).
The preceding calculations have taken the average markup reported by De Loecker, Eeckhout,
and Unger and examined its implications as if it were the markup of the representative firm in
the economy. But given their finding of extreme heterogeneity in markups, these calculations
should be performed at the firm level. The authors can easily perform the first two calculations,
of profit rates and the implied output elasticity of capital, at the firm level using their existing
estimates, with the results reported as distributions. The third calculation, of the value-added
markup, is also easily done, but the data may not be available for every firm. The reason is that
many firms in Compustat do not report the data necessary to construct an intermediate input
share at the firm level, which is required for the conversion. Given the great interest that this
paper has generated, many economists would be keen to see these additional results.
The method used by De Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger (2018) seems excellent in principle, so
why is it leading to implausible estimates of markup levels and trends? As a matter of
accounting, the sharp rise in the markup the authors estimate could be driven by either a rising
output elasticity of their key input measure, COGS, or a decline in its share over time. In fact,
the output elasticity is estimated to be nearly constant over the sample period, so the rise in the
estimated markup is being driven completely by the decline in the share.
This fact should motivate us to think harder about this measure of inputs. COGS is an
accounting concept used to value changes in inventory holdings for firms that produce to stock.
But such industries, Agriculture, Mining and Manufacturing, produce only about 16 percent of
private-sector output in the US economy (for data from 2016, see Table 5 in
https://www.bea.gov/system/files/2018-07/gdpind118_3.pdf). The concept is much less
meaningful when applied to the service industries that produce twice as large a share of US
GDP, such as Finance and Insurance, Health Care, Education, and Professional and Business
Services.12 For some intuition behind this issue, one might try to describe how the reported cost-
of-goods sold for a few large, publicly listed service companies (like Facebook, Goldman Sachs,
or a for-profit hospital chain such as HCA Healthcare) is meaningful in an economic sense.
In Compustat, firms actually report two measures of operating (non-capital) expenses. One is
COGS, the other is Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (SGA). If an increasingly
larger share of the inputs that used to be classified as COGS is now recorded as being part of
SGA, then such mismeasurement could explain why the COGS share of firm revenue is falling
over time, and consequently why markups are estimated as rising over time. Traina (2018)
redoes the procedure of De Loecker and Eeckhout using the sum of COGS and SGA as the
measure of non-capital input, and finds no evidence that markups have increased over time.
Some of the controversy following Traina's paper has focused on the extent to which COGS is a
variable cost and SGA is a fixed cost. (Here the word "fixed" is used to mean overhead inputs,
                                                            
12
     In service industries, COGS is often renamed "Cost of Revenue," but the two are conceptually similar.

                                                               14 
 
ones that do not vary with the amount of output produced, at least locally, as opposed to inputs
that are quasi-fixed, meaning costly to adjust.) The controversy is misplaced, because the
underlying theory does not require that all of the input on the margin being examined be
variable. It requires only that there be some variable inputs in the input bundle under
consideration, and that the bundle be defined consistently over time. If overhead inputs are a
higher share of total inputs, the estimated output elasticity of that input bundle will be larger--
appropriately so, since overhead inputs are one important source of increasing returns to scale.
Given that there is no harm in deriving the markup using an input aggregate that includes some
overhead inputs, it is safer to use a more comprehensive input measure. For example, by
convention payments to salaried workers are classified as SGA, while variable (hourly and
commission) labor payments are in COGS. If there has been a general change in compensation
practices for workers fulfilling the same function, shifting them from being classified as part of
COGS to being included in SGA, then COGS could not be used to compute the trend in the
markup, but the sum of COGS and SGA could be used for this purpose.13
This single-input approach to estimating markups would be best executed using a single, distinct
measure of physical input, such as production-worker labor hours or purchased energy.
However, such data are not available for a large fraction of firms in the Compustat data set. The
next-best choice would be to use a comprehensive measure of composite inputs that includes
most or all variable inputs and some overhead inputs, but where the measure of inputs is
sufficiently comprehensive that we can be confident it is defined consistently over time.




Estimation with Aggregate Data


Cost minimization applies, even as an hypothesis, only at the level of a single firm. Thus,
deriving estimating equations based on cost-minimization and applying them to economy-wide
or industry-level data, as in Hall (1990, 2018) or Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006), is
problematic. Basu and Fernald (1997) discuss some of the aggregation issues that arise, and
show that they are significant. On the other hand, as we have seen, firm-level datasets may not
provide the information needed to implement the tests that economic theory suggest. In this
section, I ask under what conditions one can recover an average of firm-level markups using
aggregate data, and what this exercise shows for the US.
Suppose one were to estimate markups from a single margin, as discussed above, with that
margin being the one for purchased intermediate inputs, which are the least likely to share in
economic profits. Suppose furthermore that one were to estimate a single output elasticity for

                                                            
13
  Outsourcing work would reduce the labor component of COGS but increase the intermediate input component,
and should not change the total appreciably. This hypothesis is consistent with the findings of Mexell, Kenyon and
Westfall (2014).

                                                               15 
 
intermediate inputs by estimating a Cobb-Douglas production function using data pooled across
firms and over time. Let this elasticity be M.14 Following the discussion in the first section, this
constant elasticity equals the product of the firm-level markup, it , with that firm's intermediate
input share at each point in time, sit
                                    M
                                       , where i indexes firms and t indexes time. The object of
interest is the weighted average of firm-level markups at each date, with the weights being the
relative nominal output of each firm, wit. Then it follows that, at each time t,

                                                               w  s
                                                               i
                                                                   it
                                                                            M
                                                                        it it     M  wit .
                                                                                      i


Since the weights sum to one, the right-hand side is constant regardless of the year.15 The left-
hand side is the expectation of the product of two random variables, the firm-level markup and
the intermediate input share. The expectation of the product is the product of the expectations,
plus the covariance. Under the assumption that the covariance between i and siM is constant
over time, the equation becomes

                                                               t st M   M  constant,

where t is the average firm-level markup in a given period and st M is the aggregate
intermediate input share. (Note that the weighted average of the firm-level intermediate shares
aggregates exactly to the aggregate intermediate share, defined as the total expenditure on
intermediates by all firms divided by their total nominal output.)
Under these admittedly strong assumptions, one can calculate the ratio of the average firm-level
markup over an interval of time from the change in the aggregate intermediate input share over
that same interval. EU-KLEMS (http://www.euklems.net) provides data on intermediate input
shares for the US market economy; Jäger (2018) describes the data. These shares fluctuate from
year to year. To avoid noise from these fluctuations, I average over a few years leading up to
1980 and to 2015. The average intermediate input share from 1975-1980 was 0.51. The average
intermediate input share from 2010-2015 was 0.48. Under the assumptions made, if the markup
in 1980 were 1, indicating perfect competition, then it would have risen to 1.06 in 2015. This is
a gross-output figure; on a value-added basis, the markup would have risen from 1 in 1980 to
1.12 in 2015.
This calculation is only suggestive since it requires maintaining two strong assumptions, a
constant covariance and a constant average output elasticity of intermediate inputs. But it shows
that well-measured aggregate data are difficult to reconcile with large increases in average
markups. Furthermore, an average markup change of this magnitude is broadly consistent with
the correctly-measured decline in the US labor share, although an increase in the value-added
                                                            
14
    For this thought experiment, it's not necessary to actually estimate this elasticity. De Loecker, Eeckhout, and
Unger's (2018) finding that returns to scale are stable over time suggests that estimating a constant elasticity for
each input may not do too much violence to the data. 
15
    The assumption that the materials output elasticity is the same for all firms in all periods is sufficient but not
necessary for the calculation that follows. The necessary condition is that the weighted average output elasticity
across firms be constant over time.

                                                                                16 
 
markup of 12 percent is still a bit too large. Eggertsson, Robbins and Wold (2018) find that an
increase in the value-added markup of about the same magnitude, from 1.1 to 1.22 in their
calibrated model, combined with a drop in the natural rate of interest for demographic reasons,
can explain five important puzzles in recent US data. Thus, the modest increase in the average
of firm-level markups implied by the changing intermediate input share is broadly consistent
with the set of facts that motivated economists to estimate economy-wide markup trends.




Directions for Future Research: Reconciling Micro Estimates and Macro Facts


Two of the three approaches to markup estimation reviewed above yield end-of-sample estimates
of the average value-added markup that are too large to be credible. By cost minimization, high
markups must be matched either by equally high returns to scale or large rates of pure economic
profit. Yet returns to scale of the magnitude required imply large rates of technological regress
for the US economy, while the implied rates of economic profit would displace all of the
required payments to capital, as well as some of the observed payments to labor. In both cases,
the increases in the markup greatly overshoot what is required to explain the decline in labor's
share: the true puzzle becomes why labor's share has not fallen far more! Only the approach
based on constant returns and computed profit rates leads to estimates of the level and change in
the markup that might be consistent with the observed decline in labor's share, and even these
estimates are on the high side.
It is worth reviewing the other macro implications of higher markups to contrast them in an
informal way with recent data for the US economy. According to standard models, higher
markups should reduce the demand for inputs of labor and capital, leading for example to weak
jobs and wage growth, and should raise inflation relative to a welfare-theoretic measure of slack
in the economy, since markups act as "cost-push" shocks to the Phillips curve. In classic
endogenous-growth models, higher markups should also spur innovation, as firms compete more
fiercely to displace incumbents from profitable markets, leading to higher rates of productivity
growth.16
With one partial exception, none of these predictions is borne out in recent US data. The labor
market is extremely tight, inflation is subdued, and productivity growth has been weak. (The
second fact is particularly striking in light of the first and third.) Even wage growth has been
stronger than one would conclude from standard data: Daly and Pedtke (2018) find that median
weekly earnings adjusted for labor-force composition have grown 1.5 to 2 percentage points
faster per year over the period 2013-2017 than the unadjusted data suggest. An adjustment of
this magnitude nearly doubles the growth rate of median weekly earnings. Since markups should
                                                            
16
   This prediction is more nuanced in recent models. Aghion and Griffith (2005) show that the relationship between
productivity growth and the markup may have an inverted-U shape, with high markups reducing growth. Aghion et
al. (2019) suggest that high markups may lead to first higher and then lower rates of TFP growth. 

                                                               17 
 
depress labor demand, it is difficult to reconcile the hypothesis of rising markups with strong
growth in both the quantity and the price of labor input over the last several years.
One piece of macro evidence that does go in the direction that the markup hypothesis predicts is
low business investment. Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017a,b) argue that total investment in both
tangible and intangible capital has been weak in recent years, particularly when conditioned on
Tobin's q ratio, a common measure of fundamentals. Higher markups leading to a positive profit
rate can indeed make average (asset-market) q high, while making marginal q, which determines
investment, low. (Markups by themselves are neither sufficient nor necessary to break the link
between average and marginal q; a positive economic profit rate is the key wedge.)
Another piece of evidence that may be consistent with a rising markup is a low natural rate of
interest. Yet the link between the two is that a higher markup is supposed to create expectations
of declining consumption growth due to low demand for capital and labor, which in turn should
pull down the interest rate. With the two factor markets moving in opposite directions, it is not
obvious that the markup channel is at work. Carvalho, Ferrero and Nechio (2016) and Gagnon,
Johansen and Lopez-Salido (2016) show that demographic forces are likely to explain much of
the decline in long-term real rates.
Thus, future research needs to address two puzzles. The first is why most markup estimates
based on micro data are implausibly large and grow too fast in relation to the macro facts to be
explained. The second is why most macro data appear to indicate that markups are low and
stable, but the investment rate is sending a different signal. A full understanding of markup
trends and their economic effects requires an explanation of these two issues.




                                                18 
 
                                       REFERENCES


Aghion, Philippe, and Rachel Griffith. 2005. Competition and Growth: Reconciling Theory and
Evidence. MIT Press: Cambridge.
Aghion, Philippe, Antonin Bergeaud, Timo Boppart, Peter J. Klenow and Huiyu Li. 2019. "A
Theory of Falling Growth and Rising Rents." Unpublished.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson and John Van Reenen. "The
Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms." NBER Working Paper No. 23396.
Barkai, Simcha. 2016. "Declining Labor and Capital Shares" University of Chicago New
Working Paper Series No. 2.
Basu, Susanto, and John G. Fernald. 1997. "Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and
Implications." Journal of Political Economy 105(2): 249-283.
Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2001. "Productivity growth in the
1990s: technology, utilization, or adjustment?" Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy. 55(1): 117-165.
Basu, Susanto, and John G. Fernald. 2002. "Aggregate productivity and aggregate technology."
European Economic Review 46(6): 963-991.
Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, and Miles S. Kimball. 2006. "Are Technology Improvements
Contractionary?" American Economic Review 96(5): 1418-1448.
Bils, Mark, and Jang-Ok Cho. 1994. "Cyclical Factor Utilization." Journal of Monetary
Economics 33(2): 319-354.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2019. "Private Business and Private Nonfarm Business Multifactor
Productivity Tables." Released March 20, 2019. Available at
https://www.bls.gov/mfp/special_requests/mfptable.xlsx
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 1996. "Capital Utilization and Returns
to Scale." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1995 10: 67-124.
Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero and Fernanda Nechio. 2016. "Demographics and real interest
rates: Inspecting the mechanism." European Economic Review 88 (September): 208-226.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005. "Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy." Journal of Political Economy 113(1):
1-45.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, 2009. "Intangible Capital And U.S.
Economic Growth." Review of Income and Wealth 55(3): 661-685.




                                              19 
 
Council of Economic Advisers. 2016. "Labor Market Monopsony: Trends, Consequences and
Policy Responses." Issue Brief, October.
Daly, Mary C., and Joseph H. Pedtke. 2018. "Revisiting Wage Growth." FRBSF Economic
Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. "The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic
Implications." NBER Working Paper 23687.
De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout with Gabriel Unger. 2018. "The Rise of Market Power and
the Macroeconomic Implications." Unpublished, September 14.
Dobbelaere, Sabien, and Jacques Mairesse. 2013. "Panel data estimates of the production
function and product and labor market imperfections." Journal of Applied Econometrics 28(1):
1-46.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Jacob A. Robbins, and Ella Getz Wold. 2018. "Kaldor and Piketty's Facts:
The Rise of Monopoly Power in the United States." NBER Working Paper 24287.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn and Ayegül ahin. 2013. "The Decline of the U.S. Labor
Share." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Fall): 1-52.
Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido. 2016. "Understanding the
New Normal: The Role of Demographics," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.080.
Gutiérrez, Germán. 2017. "Investigating Global Labor and Profit Shares." Unpublished,
October, 2017.
Gutiérrez, Germán, and Thomas Philippon. 2017a. "Investmentless Growth: An Empirical
Investigation." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 48(2): 89-190.
Gutiérrez, Germán, and Thomas Philippon, 2017b. "Declining Competition and Investment in
the US." NBER Working Paper 23583.
Hayashi, Fumio. 1982. "Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation."
Econometrica 50(1): 213-224.
Hall, Robert E. 1988. "The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry." Journal
of Political Economy 96(5): 921­947.
Hall, Robert E. 1990. "Invariance Properties of Solow's Productivity Residual," in Peter
Diamond (ed.), Growth/Productivity/Unemployment: Essays to Celebrate Bob Solow's Birthday,
MIT Press: 71-112.
Hall, Robert E. 2018. "New Evidence on Market Power, Profit, Concentration, and the Role of
Mega-Firms in the US Economy." Unpublished, September 23.



                                              20 
 
Hall, Robert E., and Dale Jorgenson. 1967. "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior." American
Economic Review 57(3): 391-414.
Jäger, Kirsten. 2018. "EU KLEMS Growth and Productivity Accounts 2017 Release, Statistical
Module." Unpublished, The Conference Board.
Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2014. "The Global Decline of the Labor Share"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129(1), p.61-103.
Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2018. "Accounting for Factorless Income." NBER
Working Papers 24404, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
McGrattan , Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott. 2010. "Unmeasured Investment and the Puzzling
U.S. Boom in the 1990s." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(4): 88­123.
Meixell, Mary, George N. Kenyon, and Peter H. Westfall. 2014. "The Effects of Production
Outsourcing on Factory Cost Performance: An Empirical Study." Journal of Manufacturing
Technology Management 25(6).
Morlacco, Monica. 2019. "Market Power in Input Markets: Theory and Evidence from French
Manufacturing." Unpublished.
Olley, G. Steven, and Ariel Pakes. 1996. " The Dynamics of Productivity in the
Telecommunications Equipment Industry." Econometrica 64(6): 1263-1297.
Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1995. "Dynamic general equilibrium models with
imperfectly competitive product markets," in Thomas F. Cooley (ed.), Frontiers of Business
Cycle Research, Princeton University Press: 243-293.
Solow, Robert M. 1957. "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function." The
Review of Economics and Statistics 39(3): 312­320.
Tobin, James. 1969. "A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory." Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 1(1): 15-29.
Traina, James. 2018. "Is Aggregate Market Power Increasing? Production Trends Using
Financial Statements." Stigler Center New Working Paper Series, No. 17, February 2018.




                                              21 
 
