                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               YOUTH DRAIN, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND INNOVATION

                                       Massimo Anelli
                                       Gaetano Basso
                                      Giuseppe Ippedico
                                        Giovanni Peri

                                     Working Paper 26055
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26055


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019




We are grateful to Emanuele Ciani, Federico Cingano, Xavier Jaravel, Salvatore Lo Bello,
Francesca Lotti, Sauro Mocetti, Paolo Sestito, Eliana Viviano and Josef Zweimueller for helpful
comments and to seminars participants at Bank of Italy, Copenhagen Business School, CESifo
Area Conference on Employment and Social Protection, 2018 ESPE conference, ifo Institute,
Univeristat de Barcelona, Free University of Bozen, Paris School of Economics, UC Davis
Migration Research Cluster, 2018 Workshop on Migration in Edinburgh and 2018 Brucchi
Luchino workshop. We thank Rosario Ballatore (Bank of Italy), Desideria Toscano and
Annamaria Grispo (Italian Ministry of Interior) and Gina Carbonin (SOGEI) for valuable data
provision. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the position of the Bank of Italy or of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any
errors or omissions are the sole responsibility of the authors.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Massimo Anelli, Gaetano Basso, Giuseppe Ippedico, and Giovanni Peri. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Youth Drain, Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Massimo Anelli, Gaetano Basso, Giuseppe Ippedico, and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 26055
July 2019
JEL No. J61,M13,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

Migration outflows, especially of young people, may deprive an economy of entrepreneurial
energy and innovative ideas. We exploit exogenous variation in emigration from Italian local
labor markets to show that between 2008 and 2015 larger emigration flows reduced firm creation.
The decline affected firms owned by young people and innovative industries. We estimate that
for every 1,000 emigrants, 10 fewer young-owned firms were created over the whole period. A
simple accounting exercise shows that about 60 percent of the effect is generated simply by the
loss of young people; the remaining 40 percent is due to a combination of selection of emigrants
among highly entrepreneurial people, negative spillovers on the entrepreneurship rate of locals,
and negative local firm multiplier effect.

Massimo Anelli                                          Giuseppe Ippedico
Department of Social and Political Sciences             Department of Economics
Bocconi University                                      University of California Davis
Via Sarfatti 25                                         One Shields Avenue
Milan 20136                                             Davis, CA 95616
Italy                                                   gippedico@ucdavis.edu
massimo.anelli@unibocconi.it
                                                        Giovanni Peri
Gaetano Basso                                           Department of Economics
Directorate General for Economics,                      University of California, Davis
Statistics and Research                                 One Shields Avenue
Bank of Italy                                           Davis, CA 95616
Via Nazionale 91                                        and NBER
00184 Rome                                              gperi@ucdavis.edu
Italy
gaetano.basso@bancaditalia.it
1        Introduction

Young people are often vehicles of innovation and economic change. This may be because

their recently acquired human capital is complementary with new technologies or because

they are more willing to take risks and invest in uncertain and "more disruptive" projects.

Therefore, large cohorts of young people in an economy may spur innovative ability and

firm creation. Young managers, professionals and entrepreneurs are important drivers of

growth as they contribute to the Schumpeterian "creative destruction" by introducing new

practices and technologies in the productive system (Liang et al., 2018; Acemoglu et al.,

2017).

        Advanced economies, where fast aging of the population is reducing the size of the

young cohorts, risk a decline in creative and entrepreneurial energies. This issue is par-

ticularly relevant for several Southern European countries where population is aging and

young cohorts are shrinking due to demographic transition as well as to emigration towards

the rest of Europe. While emigration of Southern European youth has been significant for

a long time (Schivardi and Schmitz, 2018), the Great Recession has hit Southern Europe

much harder than Northern Europe and has provided strong incentives for young indi-

viduals to leave their countries as employment opportunities worsened significantly. The

decline in the number of young people may imply a slowdown in the creation of new firms

and start-ups. It may also hinder innovation, slowing technological progress and economic

growth and, hence, depress labor demand.1 The key question we ask in this paper is: does

a decline in young people reduce firm creation? And what sectors and type of firms are

most affected?
    1
     A similar concern expressed in developing countries, and called "brain drain" is that their young,
highly-educated individuals leave the country, lured by better opportunities in richer economies. This
leaves the economy and society of origin deprived of human capital and innovative capacity (Docquier,
2014).




                                                  2
       To answer these questions we focus on Italy, a Southern European country characterized

by a surge in the number of young people emigrating since the onset of the Great Recession.

Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows the scale and the sudden nature of the increase in the overall

emigration rate, for Italy. The emigration rate, shown from year 2005, increased very

sharply starting in 2010, and tripled by 2015, going from a yearly 0.07% to 0.18% of

the population in working age. Over the entire period 2008-2015 the cumulative flows

recorded by the administrative data sum up to 0.9% of the entire population.2 Emigration

was common to all age groups, but its rate was especially large among young individuals.

Panel (b) of Figure 1 shows the emigration rates among young people (aged 25-44) and

older people (aged 45-64) revealing that for the first group the rate grew more significantly

and it was more than double that of the second group as of 2015.3

       Estimating the causal effect of emigration on local economic outcomes is challenging. A

least squares regression of local outcomes on local emigration rates would produce biased

estimates. The most relevant threats are reverse causality, as people are more likely to

leave poorly performing regions and omitted variable bias, as several unobserved factors

may push people to emigrate and cause poor performance of firms. Measurement error in

emigration flows, due for instance to under-reporting of changes in administrative residence,

may also contribute to the bias. To overcome these issues, we adopt an instrumental

variable strategy in the spirit of Anelli and Peri (2017), using what we call "pull-driven

emigration". We construct the network links of the diaspora from each local labor market

in Italy to a destination country, in a baseline year, that we choose to be year 2000.

Then, we interact this bilateral network with the economic performance of the destination
   2
     Comparable statistics on nationals' emigration flows across countries are extremely hard to obtain.
A report from the Portuguese Observatory of Emigration (2015) indicates that the cumulative outflows of
Portuguese citizens between 2011 and 2014 reached about 485 thousand people, or about 1.2 percent of the
Portuguese population per year.
   3
     Emigration rates were also larger among college graduates (Appendix Figure A1); however, the increase
during this period was comparable for college and non-college graduates.



                                                    3
countries. In this way, we capture the facts that people residing in municipalities with

stronger network ties to countries with strong economic performance during the period

2008-2015, were more likely to emigrate. This instrumental variable allows us to leverage

cross-sectional variation of emigration rates driven only by "pull factors" of emigration.

By construction this IV is independent of any location-specific push factor, such as the

economic conditions in the local labor market, which are likely to be correlated with local

outcomes. We also perform a battery of tests showing that our pull-driven emigration

instrument is uncorrelated with previous local economic outcomes. This is consistent with

the assumed exclusion restriction that the instrument is not correlated with unobservable

and persistent local economic trends.

   Our results show that emigration ­ instrumented by its pull-driven component­ caused

a decline in the number of existing firms. The depressive effect on firm creation was driven

by fewer firm births, rather than by more firm deaths. This is consistent with the loss

of managerial and entrepreneurial capital that drives firm creation. Moreover we observe

a negative effect in the creation of firms whose owners and managers were 45 years old

or younger. Importantly, we show that the instrument has stronger explanatory power

for local labor markets with younger population at the baseline, and the instrument is

positively associated with an increase in the average age of the remaining population. The

estimated (local) treatment effect reveals that in an average-sized local labor market, which

lost 1,724 individuals to emigration, 178 fewer firms were created and managed by young

owners over the period 2008-2015. As reference, during that period, 2,470 firms managed

by young owners were created in the average local labor market. This is a significant

effect. To better characterize the underlying mechanisms, we present a simple accounting

exercise that shows that about 60% of this effect can be attributed to the change in the

age composition of the local labor market ­ the pure demographic effect ­ triggered by



                                             4
emigration. Given the pre-emigration entrepreneurship rate among young people, 107 out

of 178 missing firms were indeed lost simply due to young individuals leaving the local

labor market. Selection of emigrants among individuals with a higher entrepreneurship-

rate, and negative spillovers onto other entrepreneurs, explain up to 35% of the overall

effect. The remaining 5% can be attributed to diminished demand for goods and services

due to a lower population level. As further evidence indicating the potential innovative

role of the young people who left, we find a decline in the number of innovative start-ups

(operating in technology-intensive sectors). Finally, we find that local labor markets with

higher emigration rates exhibit a decline in overall employment and a negative change in

the share of qualified workers (i.e., white collars).4

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 frames our contribution in the

existing literature. Section 3 describes the main data and trends for emigration and firm

creation in Italian local labor markets. Section 4 introduces the empirical specification and

the 2SLS identification strategy, and discusses its validity. Section 5 presents the main

results, and Section 5.5 reports several robustness checks. Section 6 concludes the paper.



2         Literature Review

We know little about how a decline in the number of young people affects the economic

performance of an economy, and yet this phenomenon has very important implications

for the economies of both rich and developing countries. In developing countries, the

emigration rate of the high-skilled population, often referred to as brain drain, has increased

significantly in the last two decades (see Docquier and Rapoport, 2012; Mayr and Peri,
    4
     The worsening of the composition of the workforce is an additional mechanism that could explain
the drop in entrepreneurship, as more skilled workers could have contributed to the formation of new
productive firms absent migration. However, such a mechanism, which is captured by both the "selection"
and the "local multiplier" effect in our decomposition, is hard to quantify given that we observe only few
characteristics of the migrants and of the workforce in the data.



                                                    5
2009; Docquier et al., 2014; Di Giovanni et al., 2015). This trend significantly reduces the

number of young people ­ who are more likely to migrate ­ depriving the countries-of-origin

of their economic and creative contributions. In developed economies, the dramatic fertility

decline experienced in recent decades is causing the size of young cohorts to markedly

shrink. Our analysis takes advantage of a sharp increase in emigration in Italy which can

be attributed to economic motivations along with free mobility within the EU. We exploit

the strongly selective nature of this episode, affecting young (25-44 years old) individuals

much more than any other group, to estimate its impact on firm creation and innovative

start-ups. Our results contribute to several branches of the economic literature.

       A growing body of literature shows that radical innovations are adopted by young man-

agers, and that their presence in a firm proxies for innovation intensity as they sort into

more innovative firms (Acemouglu et al., 2017).5 There is also evidence that entrepreneur-

ship peaks at an early age (Kopecky, 2017). Using cross-sectional variation Liang et al.

(2018) show that there is a significant positive relationship between the share of young

people in a country (or region) and its entrepreneurship rate. The share of young also

correlates positively with productivity (Ciccarelli et al., 2017), growth (Engbom, 2019)

and birth rate of start-ups (Karahan et al., 2019).

       A more established literature shows that brain drain from developing countries may

negatively impact growth (despite positive general equilibrium effects through remittances,

return migration and innovation exchanges; Docquier et al., 2014). In the context of

developed countries, there is little causal evidence on the effects of emigration on origin

economies, an exception being recent work on Mexico and eastern Europe that points to

short-term positive wage effects for stayers (due to a labor supply shortage; Mishra, 2007;

Elsner, 2013a, 2013b; Dustmann et al., 2015). A paper closely related to ours is Giesing
   5
   Part of this effect can be due to the investments that young professionals make in R&D and technology-
complementary human capital (Barker and Mueller, 2002; MacDonald and Weisbach, 2004).



                                                   6
and Laurentsyeva (2017) who find negative effects on regional TFP due to labor mobility

after the Eastern EU enlargnment of the 2000s.6 A related literature, beginning with

Rauch (1999), shows that links between origin and destination countries may have a causal

impact on trade flows (Rauch, 2001; Rauch and Trindade, 2002; Combes et al., 2005; Peri

and Requena-Silvente, 2010; Javorcik et al., 2011; Bratti et al., 2018a; Bratti et al., 2018b).

We discuss whether these established trade patterns may pose a threat to our identification

in Section 5.5.

        Finally, we contribute to a broader literature on the positive role of labor mobility in

absorbing demand shocks (Blanchard and Katz, 1992; Bayer and Smets, 2015; Arpaia et

al., 2016; Dao et al., 2017; Basso et al., 2018). In this paper we only identify a short-

run negative effect of emigration, but declines in entrepreneurship and innovative ability

may also affect longer term growth prospects. Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010) show

that immigrants to the US are more likely to be active in patenting and innovation than

comparable natives. This paper confirms that migrants may be positively selected among

those with high entrepreneurial and innovative potential.



3         Data

3.1       Data on Firms and Local Labor Markets

We combine data on the emigration flows (described later in this section) with firm-level

data on the universe of all Italian firms, obtained from the Chambers of Commerce and

also with data from the social security administration (INPS) on local employment and

wages.7
    6
     In his master dissertation Ippedico (2017) also looked at the relationship between migration and firm
creation. In their work on the start-up deficits, Karahan et al. (2019) use variation on immigration across
US states and relate it to firm entry.
   7
      Both the Chambers of Commerce and INPS data identify the location of the firm by its headquar-
ters. The vast majority of Italians firms have only one establishment, so the main location will typically


                                                    7
   The data from the Chambers of Commerce include information on entry and exit of

firms and demographic characteristics of owners, shareholders and managers for each firm

for the period 2005-2015. We use this latter piece of information to classify firms with a

majority of owners and managers aged below 45, which we refer to as "young-owned firms".

INPS data cover the period 1990-2015, and collect information on the yearly number of

employees (broken down by broad occupation category, i.e., apprentices and blue collars,

white collars and managers), average monthly wage, industry and geographic location of

each employer.

   Our unit of analysis is the local labor market (LLM), defined using the national statis-

tical institute (ISTAT) 2001 definition. According to ISTAT, LLMs are clusters of munic-

ipalities with commuting patterns that are mainly within LLMs rather than across LLMs.

Similar to US Commuting Zones, they include geographic aggregations such that people

reside and work within them. They are used as a proxy for local labor markets. There

are 686 LLMs in Italy covering the whole national territory. Usually they do not cross

provincial boundaries. We focus our analysis on the period 2005-2015, and consider the

period 2008-2015 as the "treatment" period, when emigration increased substantially. We

can control for pre-2008 economic performance (e.g., LLMs unemployment rate and value

added obtained from ISTAT) and test the correlation of the instrument with pre-2008

trends.


3.2       Data on Emigration Flows

We obtained data on emigration flows from each Italian municipality from ISTAT. The

data, which cover the period 2002-2015, come from administrative sources and are aggre-
encompass the whole firm.




                                            8
gated into municipality of origin-country of destination-age group cells.8 We also obtained

emigration flows directly from the registry of Italians residing abroad (AIRE; Anelli and

Peri, 2017) that cover more years in the past (from 1990 to 2014) and contain information

about country of destination. These two features allow us to construct the networks of

emigrants as of 2000.

       Despite the fact that emigrants are required by the law to register their residence abroad

within six months from the date of emigration, there are concerns about under-registration

and not all changes of residence may be recorded by the Italian authorities ­ thus not

showing up in our data. Figure 2 compares the outflows of Italians as registered by the

AIRE registries and the registration of Italians recorded by the UK social security system.

The UK data indicate that the level of outflows from Italy to the UK is underestimated

by about two thirds (panel (a)), while the year-to-year changes follow closely those of the

UK social security registrations, but with one year of lag (panel (b)), which is consistent

with the six month window to communicate the new residence abroad and the bureaucratic

delays characterizing the formal registration process, which involves communications be-

tween the consulate and the municipality of origin. An analysis based on data from the

Switzerland Immigration Agency show similar patterns (Figure 3).9 According to the UK

and Switzerland data, actual emigration flows are about 2.6 times that registered by of-

ficial records: it will be important to account for such difference in measurement when

interpreting the magnitudes of our estimates.
   8
     The data also contain information on educational attainment, which we use in additional analyses not
reported. We restrict the data to include only Italian citizens emigrating abroad although all the results
are robust to the inclusion of non-citizens.
   9
     A similar analysis has been carried out for the US using the 2005-2015 American Community Survey
and the information on the year of arrival and the country of birth. For the earliest years the US data
register inflows of Italian born migrants similar, if not larger, than those seen migrating to the UK and
Switzerland. However, the survey nature of the data does not allow to precisely estimate the immigration
of Italians in the most recent years, nor the year-to-year changes. In any case, the analysis based on the
US data also confirms qualitatively the evidence based on the UK and Swiss administrative data.




                                                    9
    Table 1 shows the stock of emigrants from Italy by country of destination as of 2000,

and their cumulative flows also decomposed into age groups post-2008. The table shows

two important points. First, the top destination countries have slightly changed over time:

while Italians always emigrated towards Germany, Switzerland and France, in recent years

they also moved more towards better-performing countries (e.g., U.K. and the United

States) rather than to countries with strong historic ties (e.g., Argentina and Belgium).

Second, we already saw in aggregate that the recent emigration flow was stronger for young

people.10



4      Empirical Specification and Identification

If we could rely on a randomly distributed outflow of young people across local economies,

it would be possible to estimate the causal treatment effect of such outflows on firm creation

and innovation with a simple OLS regression. However, emigration is likely to be correlated

to local observable and unobservable economic and social conditions which are likely to be

correlated with our outcomes of interest. Moreover, due to under-reporting of the change

of residence status, it is likely that we measure emigration with error. Nevertheless, it is

useful to start by looking at the correlation between the change in the firm stock (and in

cumulative entry and exit of firms) across local labor markets indexed by l (indicated yl in
                                                                              2015
equation (1) for brevity), and the cumulative migration outflows,             t=2008 ml,t   (normalized

by the baseline population in 2000 and multiplied by 100) using an OLS regression. In this

baseline specification, we also control for a set of pre-determined and observable local labor

market characteristics, Xl,2004 , namely GDP per capita and unemployment rate in 2004,

to account for economic and demographic performance of the area before the emigration
  10
     The table also reports the countries' GDP performances relative to Italy, which will be discussed in
Section 4.1.




                                                   10
event. We also include, in different specifications, region and province fixed effects, p ,

which capture unobserved shocks common within clusters of LLMs. We thus estimate the

following equation:

                                   2015
                                   t=2008 ml,t
                      yl =  +                    · 100 + p + Xl,2004 + l                 (1)
                                   popl,2000

   Table 2 reports the OLS estimates of the coefficient  . The main outcomes, represented

by birth, death and changes in number of firms, do not appear to be significantly correlated

with the emigration of young individuals. OLS estimates, however, could be biased by

several factors. First, the error term l includes unobserved area-specific variations in

economic, demographic and social factors that may be positively or negatively correlated

with emigration. One the one hand, if more successful and resilient localities tend to have

more youth emigration (as it appears to be the case from the descriptive statistics shown

in Figure 4) the OLS would be biased positively. On the other hand, if young individuals

disproportionately leave less economically attractive labor markets, this would produce a

negative correlation between emigration and entrepreneurship. Second, the measurement

error in emigration could bias the coefficient toward zero.

   To reduce these potential biases of the OLS estimates, we exploit variation in migration

flows driven by historical networks and due to pull, rather than push, factors. We thus

develop an IV strategy.


4.1   Identification: The IV Approach

The key intuition for the instrumental variable, which is based on the work by Anelli

and Peri (2017), is that municipalities have connections with specific foreign countries

through their networks of past-residents who emigrated to those countries. This network

is likely to generate flows of information and opportunities, through personal and family


                                               11
connections between the foreign country and the municipality of origin. These connections

are especially valuable during an economic downturn if those countries provide favorable

economic opportunities, thus attracting residents of the municipality abroad. Hence we

leverage the interaction between such networks and economic attractiveness of destination

countries. First, to proxy for these pre-determined networks, we count the number of people

who emigrated from the municipalities in local labor market l to each foreign country c

before year 2000, as a percentage of the LLM population in 2000.11 It is reasonable to

think that these networks are stronger the larger is the size of the community of emigrants

in the receiving country. We then interact these shares with the real GDP growth of foreign

countries during the period 2008-201512 . Summing across destination countries results in

a LLM-specific pull factor, which captures the intensity of the economic attractiveness

exerted by foreign countries during the 2008-15 period to each specific LLM. The variable

is defined as follows:



                           P ulll =        shl,c,2000  (GDPc2015 /GDPc2008 )                            (2)
                                       c

    In expression (2), the first term shl,c,2000 is the number of people from local labor market

l who live in country c as of year 2000, as share of the LLM population in year 2000. This

factor captures the relative size of the historic network between local labor market l and

each specific foreign country c. The second term GDPc2015 /GDPc2008 is the real GDP

growth in country c during the period 2008-2015, which includes the deep recession that

hit the Mediterranean economies much more then the rest of the European Union. This

factor captures the relative, country-specific "pull factor", which proxies the economic
  11
     Importantly, while the AIRE registry was started in 1990, all Italians emigrated in previous decades
were required to register to continue having consular services. This has allowed to construct historical
network using virtually all the first-generation Italian emigrants and not just those emigrating after 1990.
  12
     Source: IMF International Financial Statistics. We are able to match more than 100 destination
countries that comprise almost all emigration outflows.



                                                    12
incentives for moving to country c during the considered period. Table 1 summarizes the

variation in GDP growth between 2008 and 2015 for the main destination countries. The
                                                                                2015
                                                                                t=2008 ml,t
variable defined in (2) is used as instrument for the actual emigration rate,   popl,2000 ,   our

main variable of interest in the estimating equation (1).

   The interaction between these two factors, the strength of expatriates network in year

2000 and the economic attractiveness of destination countries in 2008-2015, is likely to be

uncorrelated with unobserved factors specific to the local labor markets that may drive

both business creation and emigration. Threats to identification remain, however. For

instance, past economic shocks, if they are persistent and affected past emigration as

well as current firm creation, may constitute such a threat. To increase confidence in the

exclusion restriction of our IV strategy, we examine the correlation between pre-2008 trends

of the main outcomes of interest (namely in 2005-2008) and the IV capturing predicted

emigration. Table 3 reports the pre-period changes in local labor markets with below

median predicted emigration (left column) and in LLMs with above median predicted

emigration in the post-period. Such distinction allows to compare LLMs with low predicted

emigration (as induced by the pull IV) to those with more predicted emigration and to

assess whether these two sets of locations differ systematically in their pre-2008 trends.

Reassuringly, the two groups of LLMs look remarkably similar in all respects. While this

simple check suggests that pre-2008 trends are similar for LLMs with high or low levels

of emigration as predicted by our instrument, we conduct more systematic tests of the

validity of our IV strategy below, in section 4.3.


4.2   First Stage Results

In Table 4 we report the first stage results when using the "pull factor", P ulll , as our

instrument and the emigration rate as the dependent variable. In the regressions we control



                                             13
for GDP per capita and the unemployment rate in 2004, and we include region fixed

effects in column (2) and province fixed effects in column (3). These controls capture pre-

determined economic conditions in the LLMs of origin. The estimates in the first row of

Table 4 show that the pull factor (Emigration IV ) has a significant predictive power for

actual emigration and the size of the coefficient is stable across specifications at around 3.8.

The first stage F-statistics lie between 12 and 26, well above the standard rule of thumb

value of 10, below which weak instrument concerns would arise.

   Among the three specifications, the one including the province fixed effects is the most

restrictive as it leverages variation only within provinces; that is, the fixed effects ac-

count for all unobservable characteristics common to local labor markets within the same

province. In the rest of the paper we use this more demanding specification. Figure 4

shows the geographic variation which we are leveraging. The maps plot the variation in

emigration rates (panel (a)) from local labor markets within each province (in bold) as well

as the variation in emigration as predicted by the IV pull factor (panel (b)).


4.3   Instrument Validity

In order to strengthen our confidence that the constructed "pull-driven" IV is not correlated

to unobserved economic trends at the local level, we perform a series of checks. First,

we can exploit information on the period before 2008 (2005-2008) when there was very

little emigration (this would be a pre-treatment period using the difference-in-difference

terminology). To have a first visual check, we start by dividing the Italian local labor

markets into those with high pull-driven emigration rates (above the median) and those

with low pull-driven emigration rates (below the median) as measured by our IV. Then

Figures 5, 6(a) and 6(b) show, respectively, the three main outcomes of interest: changes in

stock of firms and cumulative entries and exits of firms, all normalized by the existing stock



                                              14
of firms in 2005. All three graphs show that the LLM with high "predicted emigration"

(solid line) and those with low "predicted emigration" (dashed line) have similar pre-

2008 trends. The number of firms and the average firm creation and firm destruction

(as of share of firms in 2005) were moving together prior to 2008 for these two groups of

LLMs. However, as the Italian economy starts under-performing with respect to the other

major European economies around 2009, and more clearly since 2010, the stock of firms in

LLMs with large predicted emigration rates fell behind that of LLMs with few emigrants.

Importantly for the validity of our identification strategy, the economies with high or low

predicted emigration behave similarly in the pre-2008 period. This is consistent with the

instrument being uncorrelated with unobserved and persistent economic factors affecting

the firm creation outcomes.

       Along the same lines, in order to check the correlation of our instrument with the pre-

2008 trends for firm creation, we report the results of two more formal tests. In Table 5

we regress the pre-2008 change in the stock, birth and death of firms on the emigration

predicted by the pull-driven instrument post-2008. The test confirms formally that the

IV does not predict the pre-2008 firm creation rate ­ the change in stock for the universe

of firms (panel A) or for those owned and managed by people under 45 (panel B). We

find, however, a significant negative effect on pre-2008 firm deaths.13 One could also be

concerned that our instrument captures other dimensions of demographic change. Further

results, reported in Table 4 Panel B, shows that the instrument predicts emigration abroad

and not internal outflows (while it marginally predicts internal past immigration). The

analysis is interesting in itself, as it indicates that pull forces from abroad, as identified by
  13
     The negative effect on pre-period firm deaths indicates that in areas with more predicted emigration
during the Great Recession there were relatively fewer firm exits before the recession, which would imply
the instrument is correlated with good economic performance pre-2008. Note also that, in a regression
not reported but available upon request, we test the first stage effect of the IV on the pre-2008 migration
outflows: although positive, the relationship is quite weak and falls below the conventional F-statistics
threshold of 10.



                                                    15
our IV, are not substituting or complementing internal migration flows.

         Finally, the pull IV resembles the traditional Bartik/shift-share IV in that it combines

variation in the cross-sectional distribution of emigrants-stock by destination country with

the countries' aggregate economic performance. Recent work by Borusyak et al. (2018) and

Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2018) show the sufficient conditions needed for identification.

On the one hand, our instrument does not seem to violate the conditions for identification

regarding the time-varying shock because these are determined outside the Italian economy

(one of the strategies suggested by Borusyak et al., 2018). On the other, it could be that

the emigration networks that drive the pull factor are strong for few countries only and

these are correlated with some characteristics of the origin area. Following the suggestions

of Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2018), we analyze the cross-sectional components of the

IV, including the weight associated with each country in the instrument, and how the

stock of emigrants in the main destination countries correlates with the main observable

characteristics of the local labor market of origin. Appendix Tables A1 and A2 report the

results of such tests: although emigration to Germany drives a large part of the variation

of the pull factor-IV, we conclude that there is no systematic reason to believe that our

identification strategy would be violated.14



5         Main Results

5.1        LATE and Characterization of the Shock

Before getting to the main results, it is important to better understand the characteristics

of the local labor markets most affected by the instrument, i.e. the "compliers" LLMs.

Those have migration flows due to the external pull factors, and they would not have if the

pull factor was absent (or, alternatively, if the emigrant network was empty). Column (1)
    14
         See the Appendix for more comments and a description of the tests.


                                                      16
of Table 6 reports again the main first stage result (column 3, Table 4), while columns (2)

and (3) show the specification on the subsample of LLMs with a low median age and on the

subsample of LLM with a high median age (measured in the period prior to the emigration

wave)15 . Confirming the descriptive facts about emigration presented in Table 1 and Figure

1, the LLMs most affected by the pull factor are those with a relatively low median age. The

estimated first stage coefficient is about twice as large for relatively younger LLMs than

for relatively older ones. Following a LATE interpretation of the instrumental variable

identification, the effects we are going to estimate are identified locally for LLMs with

higher shares of young workers ­ who are potentially also those individuals with higher

entrepreneurial skills and more likely to start a new firm.

       In Table 7 we then report the results of three regressions (reduced form IV, OLS and

2SLS) in which the outcome is the ratio of 25-44 years old to 45-64 population. Control-

ling for province fixed effects, economic conditions at the baseline and pre-trends in the

ageing structure, we observe that the instrumental variable has a direct negative effect

on the relative size of the younger cohort in LLMs. This effect carries through if we run

the 2SLS specification (column 3), but it is not observed in the OLS estimates (column

2). This table, although merely suggestive, confirms the idea that the recent emigration

wave was more prominent among young people and that the variation we leverage pro-

duces a decline in the number of young versus older people, which is consistent with the

idea that young people respond more to the economic pull captured by the IV. Another

exercise to characterize complier LLMs is based on geography rather than on demographic

characteristics (Appendix Table A3). It shows that LLMs affected by the pull factor are

more likely to be in the North of the country. This exercise is relevant because actual

and predicted emigration plotted in the maps of Figure 4 differ somewhat because of their
  15
    The median age of an Italian LLM in the pre-period is 43.6 years and the distribution is close to a
Normal with average 43.8 and standard deviation 2.8 years (minimum 35.3 and maximum 57.9).



                                                  17
geographical location. This is consistent with the idea that stronger economic pull had

a larger impact on emigration from the North and is not only correlated with long-term

trends in emigration which are more prominent in the South.


5.2      Effects on Firm Creation

Panel A of Table 8 shows the results of estimating equation (1) using the change in the stock

of active firms as dependent variable, as well as the creation of new and the destruction of

existing firms. The coefficients reported are from 2SLS regressions where the endogenous

migration flow is instrumented with the pull factor. The dependent variable is the change

in total number of firms over the post period (2008-2015) in column (1), cumulative firm

births in column (2), and cumulative firm deaths in column (3). All the outcomes are

standardized by the stock of active firms in each local labor market in 2005. Standard

errors are clustered at the province level.

       The estimates indicate that in areas with larger emigration flows between the period

2008-2015 the number of firms declined. This effect is driven by fewer firm births (that is,

less firm creation) rather than more firm deaths: on average, for a one percentage point

increase in emigration rate there has been a 8.8 percent decline in firms created as share

of 2005 LLM firms. A simple back of the envelope calculation, which also accounts for the

under-reporting of emigrants in the official data discussed above, indicates that over the

whole period, on average, 1,724 individuals left the average LLM and 617 fewer firms have

been created.16

       The small and non-significant coefficient of emigration on the number of firm deaths

is reassuring. First, emigration of young people is more logically associated with a decline
  16
    The back of the envelope simply relates the emigration flow, aggregated over the period and adjusted
by the misreporting factor of 2.6, with the estimated effect on each outcome in an average local labor
market.




                                                  18
in potential firm-creation. Second, a prominent channel through firm-failure could suggest

a reverse channel of causation, namely people left local labor markets where firms were

closing.

   The fact that firm creation was particularly affected is consistent with the idea that

emigration drained potential entrepreneurs, likely reducing the creation of new firms in the

area, an hypothesis we further test later. Further evidence on this is provided in panel B of

Table 8. To zoom specifically into the role of young people in starting new firms, we look at

the creation and destruction of firms whose owners and managers are younger than 45 (i.e.,

the same age threshold we use throughout the paper to define "young individuals"). The

age of owners and managers is reported in the data from the Chambers of Commerce and

we use this information to construct a synthetic measure that identifies a firm as "owned

and managed" by young people if the majority of owner-managers are under 45. We then

look at the number, creation and destruction of these firms "owned and managed" by young

people. The results in panel B, which mirror those of panel A, indicate that emigration

reduced the creation of firms whose owners and managers are 45 or younger. According

to the estimates, absent emigration (as induced by our pull instrument) there would have

been 178 more firms created with respect to an average of 2,470 firms created in the average

LLM (or of 2,750 "young-managed" firms for every 10,000 existing in 2005). The effect on

"young-managed" firms is, on average, about 30 percent of the total change in new firms

created observed.

   It is important to consider that this estimated effect of emigration (178 fewer new

"young-managed firms") is not simply the result of potential entrepreneurs leaving the

region, but captures the aggregate, reduced form effect resulting from multiple channels.

With a simple "accounting" exercise, we can decompose the total effect into three compo-

nents.



                                             19
   The first part is simply due to the fact that some of the young individuals who emi-

grated would have started a business. This is a pure demographic effect and we evaluate it

assuming the average probability of starting a firm, r (entrepreneurship rate), for people

in the age group of the emigrants, as of 2005. The second part is the effect of depar-

tures on the entrepreneurship rate of those who are left. This may be due to the selection

of emigrants among those with higher entrepreneurship relative to the average, hence a

selection effect. Additionally, it may be due to a peer spillover effect, the potential exter-

nality that emigrants might have on those who did not migrate. For instance, a computer

programmer might become an entrepreneur if her friend with a great entrepreneurial idea

stays, but may not start a business if her friend leaves the region. Finally, the third part

of the effect is a local multiplier. As fewer firms are created and fewer people remain in

the area, this decreases the local demand for goods and services reducing the opportunity

for additional firms to be created. We call this latter the local multiplier effect. Hence, in

equation notation we can decompose the aggregate effect of emigration on the creation of

young-managed firms as follows:


                         Demographic         Selection+Spillover                           Local Multiplier Effect

Y oungF irmBirths = Y oung × rpre        + Y oungpre ×        r        +                ×[Y oung × rpre + Y oungpre × r ]
                        -849    0.0187       23480         -0.00047        Multiplier      Demographic       Selection+Spillover

                                                                                                                          (3)
                      Demographic                Selection+Spillover       Local Multiplier Effect

             -178 =     -107                 +          -63            + 0.05 × [-107 - 63]                               (4)
                      Demographic                Selection+Spillover       Local Multiplier Effect

            100% =       60%                 +          35%            +            5%                                    (5)




   The decomposition above shows simple imputations that allows us to give a quantita-

tive assessment of each channel and to have an estimate of the local multiplier coefficient.


                                                      20
We estimate the demographic effect by calculating the annualized entrepreneurship rate r

for individuals aged 25-44 before the Great Recession (between 2005 and 2008) which is

equal to 1.8 percent per year. We then multiply the average number of individuals aged

25-44 who left the representative average-sized local labor market (849) by the annualized

pre-recession entrepreneurship rate r cumulative over the 7 year period for which we esti-

mate our aggregate effect. This calculation generates a decrease of -107 "young-managed"

firms. Therefore, roughly 60% of the aggregate estimated effect (-178) is imputable to the

simple demographic channel. Then, we evaluate the effect on the entrepreneurship rate

of people left in the LLM, over the 2008-2015 period, r = r2015 - r2008 . We do this by

estimating our main equation, using 2SLS, with this change as outcome. r captures both

the change in the entrepreneurship rate due to selection and that due to peer spillovers.

The estimated effect of emigration on r corresponds to a -0.04 percentage point change in

entrepreneurship rate per year. This coefficient multiplied by the average number of young

people in the LLM, 23,480, produces a decrease by 63 firms. This accounts for about 35%

of the aggregate effect. Then, the residual difference between the total effect and the sum

of the two above effects is the "local multiplier effect" (i.e., -8 firms corresponding to 5%

of the aggregate effect). Exploiting the simple accounting equation presented above, it is

possible to calculate the local firm multiplier  implied by our downstream effect: for every

100 firms not created due to the main effects (demographic plus selection plus spillover),

around 5 firms are not created because of the diminished local multiplier.

   We acknowledge that part of both the demographic and the local multiplier effects may

be due to a loss of workforce rather than of entrepreneurs. The magnitude of this effect

is hard to quantify given the limited information we have on those who left and on the

characteristics of the employees. In this paper we are focused on the effect on firm creation,

and we interpret the reduced demand for qualified labor that we show below as an impact



                                             21
of fewer firms and hence fewer job opportunities for those people (see section 5.4 and Table

10).


5.3       Effects on Innovative Firms

As entrepreneurship and firm creation are engines to introduce new technologies and to

create new jobs, the loss due to emigration may hinder growth through these channels. Such

a loss can be particularly damaging if it is also associated with less innovation and slower

technological and productivity growth. We analyze the potential impact on innovation, or

at least on economic activity in innovative sectors, by focusing on the creation of start-

ups, namely newly created firms that operate in technology-intensive sectors and are not

spin-offs of larger established firms. We call this group of new firms "innovative start-ups"

as they are those more likely to embody genuinely new technologies and ideas.17 Table

9 shows the results of equation (1) estimated using the number of start-ups in each LLM

in the post period as dependent variables. One limitation of our data is that we observe

only the net cumulative number of such firms: given that innovative start-ups tend to be

short-lived, our variable captures those which were able to survive during the entire period.

       The estimated coefficient is statistically significant and indicates that the larger is the

migrant outflows from Italian LLMs, the less likely is the creation of innovative start-ups.

While on average there were five additional innovative start-ups for every 10,000 existing

firms in a local labor market, areas with emigration rates one percentage point higher than

the average had essentially zero innovative start-ups. Emigration seems associated with a
  17
      Data on start-ups come from the Registry of Innovative Start-ups, a special section of the Italian firms
registry. Newly born firms which develop, produce or sell highly innovative products or services can apply
to this registry if they satisfy one of the following conditions: i) 1/3 of their workforce hold a PhD or 2/3
hold a graduate degree; ii) R&D expenditures amount at least to 15% of revenues (or costs, if higher);
iii) they hold at least a patent of innovative nature. If accepted, these firms benet from favourable fiscal
treatments and simplified labor regulations. Firms can maintain this status up to 5 years after registration
provided their revenues do not exceed 5 million euros.




                                                     22
worrying decline in the creation of innovative firms which are responsible for job creation

and growth. Given the well known tendency of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering

and Math) professionals to dominate the group of highly educated migrants to countries

such as the US (see Peri et al., 2015) or the UK, and their significant contribution to

innovation in the destination countries (see Kerr and Lincoln, 2010), it is very likely that

the corresponding effect in countries of origin could be a slowdown of innovation. Moreover,

this result has important consequences for job creation, as the youngest firms are those

responsible for most job creation (Haltiwanger et al., 2013).

   A second, related, exercise splits the main analysis reported in Table 8 for two sub-

groups: firms acting in high- and in low-value-added (VA) sectors (over the total number of

firms present in the LLM in 2005). The results are very informative (Table 9): emigration

is impacting the creation of both low- and high-VA firms. This shows that emigration does

not only impact low-VA firm dynamism, but has a significant impact on the creation of

high-VA firms. When comparing the magnitude of the effects of emigration on high- and

low-VA firms, back of the envelope calculations point to a larger decline among low-VA

sector firms in absolute value (482 fewer firms created versus 8 in the high-VA in response

to an emigration outflows of 1,700 people). However, the initial stock of high-VA firms is

very low (around 8.5 percent in 2005). To better appreciate the magnitude of the effect on

high-VA firms, the point coefficients indicate that the decline in high-VA firms is as large

as the average change over the period. That is, in a local labor market affected by a one

percentage point higher emigration outflow, the creation of high-VA firms declines by 1.3

firms for every 100 existing firms at the beginning of the period. This decline is about the

same size as the average change of high-VA firms over the period, but has opposite sign. In

other words, LLMs with high emigration fully reversed the creation of high-VA firms that

LLMs had on average over the same period. For comparison, the decline of low-VA firms



                                            23
following a one percentage point emigration rate is only one third in size with respect to

the average change increase of low-VA firms over the period. These considerations point

to a significant role of emigration for creation of firms operating in high-VA sectors.


5.4   Effects on Employment and Skill Composition

The evidence presented suggests that the outflow of young people deprived local economies

of entrepreneurs. This also potentially reduced local employment opportunities by lowering

job creation. Ex-ante, we can think that for each person who leaves the municipality less

than one job may be lost (if the person was not employed or if she is replaced by previously

unemployed stayers). To test this we inquire into the effect of emigration on local labor

market employment, and decompose this effect by workers' qualification. We show the

estimates of this regression in Table 10. The coefficient in column (1) indicates that the

associated decline in employees, as a percentage of initial employment, is about 9 percentage

points for a one percent increase in emigration ­ that is, about 1,200 workers for the average

emigration rate. Column (2) shows the corresponding effect on the average firm size that

is equivalent in magnitude, although not statistically significant.

   To better interpret the average effect on employment we perform a similar back of the

envelope calculation as the ones proposed in Table 8. Backing out the number of employees

lost in an average local labor market, we find a sizeable effect, yet smaller than a 1-to-1

decline: 1,230 fewer employees are observed for 1,724 people (of all working age) who left.

We find this effect large, but reasonable, as most of the people who emigrate are working

age and it is generally costly to emigrate abroad, especially for low-income, unemployed or

inactive people.

   Columns (3) to (5) of Table 10 explore in some detail the effects of emigration rates

on the labor market skill structure by estimating the effects on the change in the number



                                             24
of workers, separately by broad occupation group. We distinguish between blue collars,

white collars and managerial jobs. We find that, while there is a small non-significant

negative coefficient on the number of blue collar workers in the labor market, the negative

effect is substantially larger for white collar workers. The association of emigration with

a (negative) change in managers is very large but imprecisely estimated and it is not

statistically significant. The coefficients indicate a possibly vicious cycle in the decline of

highly skilled workers and managers in areas where the youth drain takes place.18

       Still, there could be a complementary channel that goes through local demand: as more

people leave an area, fewer opportunities are created for non-tradable activities. Appendix

Table A5 reports the effects of emigration on firms in the tradable and the non-tradable

sectors. The coefficients are larger for non-tradable than for tradables firms: in response to

a one percentage point higher emigration rate, we find one percentage point fewer tradable

firms created versus eight percentage points fewer non-tradable firms created. However, as

the number of firms in the non tradable sector is much larger than those in the tradable

sector, relative to the average, the effect on firm creation is larger for tradable firms. These

are usually firms employing more skilled workers and using more advanced technology, so

this result is in line with the high skill content of emigrants.


5.5       Robustness checks

To ensure that our identification strategy is effectively capturing variation in emigrant

flows due only to pull forces, we want to rule out some possible alternative channels and
  18
     On the one hand fewer workers in the local labor market, if there are issues of crowding or decreasing
returns, may increase wages at least in the short-run (Dustmann et al., 2015). On the other hand, the
larger loss of skilled young people may reduce local productivity, and the composition of workers will
change towards lower wage workers. The combination of selection and productivity effects can therefore
produce negative effects on local average wages. This is what we find in Appendix Table A4 for both the
total wage bill and average individual wages. It seems therefore that the drain of young productive workers
drive wages down, consistent also with the change in skill composition presented in Table 10.




                                                    25
confounding factors.

   First, as we focused on net emigration flows, we are neglecting substitution effects be-

tween emigrants, Italian internal migrants and foreign-born immigrants. These groups can

relocate into areas experiencing migration outflows and re-equilibrate their demographic

structure. So, we augment the main analysis by adding as a control the immigration in-

flows in both the first and second stage. Table 11 shows that the main results hold strongly

when adding this control.

   The map in Figure 4(a) shows that migration outflows were stronger from border re-

gions, which are possibly different from the rest of the LLMs because their connection

with foreign countries in terms of commuting patterns and local trade. Related, a large

literature shows that emigrants establish trade relations with their origin countries and

possibly with firms in their birth region (Rauch, 1999, 2001). This latter concern would

hardly be a threat to our identification strategy as more emigration to a certain country

would possibly imply more economic activity and a stronger firm creation in the munic-

ipality of origin, especially in the tradable sector, something that we do not find in the

data. Yet, this channel might lead to underestimation of the negative effect of emigra-

tion on entrepreneurship. We tackle this concern in several ways. First, in our preferred

specifications trade patterns are absorbed by the province fixed effects as long as they are

common to a province. Second, we test the robustness of our estimates to the exclusion of

border provinces, which also have strong trade relations with border countries. The results

are presented in Table 11 Column 2: the point estimates barely change, reassuring that

our main conclusions are not biased by the presence of specific channels in border regions.

Finally, in Table A6 we control for the initial share of tradable firms in the local labor

markets and the change in the value of exports from each LLM in the period of interest:




                                            26
the main conclusions continue to hold.19

    Tables A7-A11 report additional checks. For each outcome, we run the main 2SLS

specification, but also including as controls, in turn, the pre-2008 outcome (whether it is

the change of firm stock, the cumulative entries, the cumulative exits, local employment,

etc.). The main results are confirmed for all the outcomes.

    The set of tests and checks performed support the validity of our IV strategy and,

therefore, the identification of causal effects of emigration on firm creation.



6      Conclusions

In this paper, we provide empirical evidence on an important question about which we

know very little: what happens to firm creation if the cohort of young individuals becomes

smaller? We do this by taking advantage of an emigration wave from Italy, mainly concen-

trated among young people, and by using an instrumental variable to isolate pull, rather

than push, factors. We then combine data on emigrants at the local labor market level

with data on firm creation and on new start-ups operating in technology-intensive sectors.

The IV-induced variation in the emigration rates across local economies, which exploits

past emigration networks and GDP growth in destination countries, is concentrated in

areas with a younger demographic structure. Moreover, the validity of our identification

strategy is supported by several tests, including the independence of the IV with pre-2005

local trends in firm creation and economic outcomes.

    Our results indicate that Italian LLMs that lost more young to emigration experienced

less firm creation. Moreover, we observe a smaller number of innovative start-ups in those

areas and, in turn, a decrease in local job creation and a drop in the share of highly qualified
  19
     Additional regressions, which are not currently available for publication, show that emigration flows
do not predict a change in export values.




                                                   27
workers. We then provide a quantitative assessment of how strong are different channels

linking emigration to firm creation. We find that about 60 percent of the loss in firm

creation can be attributed to a pure demographic effect, as emigration deprives an area of

young people. The remaining 40 percent is mainly due to selection of immigrants among

people who are more entrepreneurial than average, and to spillovers on the entrepreneur-

ship of people who remain. The results are consistent with ideas put forth by Liang et

al. (2018), Acemoglu et al., (2017) and Engbom (2019), namely that demography, and

specifically the lack of young managers and young entrepreneurs, may negatively affect

firm creation, innovation and ultimately labor demand. Such negative effects of emigration

on the economic outcomes of markets of origin may be in part overturned if "brain gain"

benefits materialize (e.g., destination-origin trade and innovation networks or higher local

investments in human capital; see Beine et al, 2001, and Docquier and Rapoport, 2012).

Moreover, the long-term benefits of economic mobility and the role of out-migration in

re-equilibrating asymmetric shocks are well acknowledged, but beyond the scope of this

paper.




                                            28
References

[1] Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit and Murat Alp Celik, 2017. "Young, Restless and

   Creative: Openness to Disruption and Creative Innovations," NBER Working Papers

   19894 (updated), National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[2] Altonji, Joseph G. and David Card, 1991. "The Effects of Immigration on the Labor

   Market Outcomes of Less-skilled Natives," NBER Chapters, in: Immigration, Trade,

   and the Labor Market, pages 201-234 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[3] Anelli, Massimo and Giovanni Peri, 2017. "Does Emigration Delay Political Change?

   Evidence from Italy during the Great Recession." Economic Policy, vol. 32(91), pages

   551­596.

[4] Arpaia, Alfonso, Aron Kiss, Balazs Palvolgyi and Alessandro Turrini, 2016. "Labour

   mobility and labour market adjustment in the EU," IZA Journal of Migration, vol. 5,

   pages 1-21.

[5] Barker, Vincent L. and George C. Mueller, 2002. "CEO Characteristics and Firm

   R&D Spending," Management Science, 48(6), pages 782-801.

[6] Basso, Gaetano, Francesco D'Amuri and Giovanni Peri, 2018. "Immigrants, Labor

   Market Dynamics and Adjustment to Shocks in the Euro Area," NBER Working

   Papers 25091, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[7] Beine, Micheal, Fr´
                      ed´
                        eric Docquier and Hillel Rapoport, 2001. "Brain drain and eco-

   nomic growth: theory and evidence," Journal of Development Economics, vol. 64,

   pages 275­289.




                                         29
 [8] Beyer, Robert C. M. and Frank Smets, 2015. "Labour market adjustments and mi-

    gration in Europe and the United States: how different?" Economic Policy, Volume

    32, Issue 84, pages 643682.

 [9] Blanchard, Olivier J. and Larry F. Katz, 1992. "Regional Evolutions." Brookings Pa-

    pers on Economic Activity, vol. 1, pages 1-75.

[10] Borusyak, Kirill, Peter Hull, and Xavier Jaravel, 2018. "Quasi-Experimental Shift-

    Share Research Designs," NBER Working Papers 24997, National Bureau of Economic

    Research, Inc.

[11] Bratti, Massimiliano and Chiara Conti, 2018a. "Immigration, Population Diversity

    and Innovation of Italian regions," Regional Studies, vol. 52(7), pages 934-947.

[12] Bratti, Massimiliano, Luca De Benedictis and Gianluca Santoni, 2018b. "Immigrant

    Entrepreneurs, Diasporas and Exports," IZA DP 11280.

[13] Ciccarelli, Carlo, Matteo Gomellini and Paolo Sestito, 2017. "Demographics and Pro-

    ductivity Growth: The Case of Italy," mimeo.

[14] Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Lafourcade Miren and Mayer Thierry, 2005. "The trade-

    creating effects of business and social networks: Evidence from France," Journal of

    International Economics, vol. 66(1), pages 129.

[15] Dao, Mai, Davide Furceri and Prakash Loungani, 2017. "Regional labor market adjust-

    ment in the United States: trend and cycle," The Review of Economics and Statistics,

    vol. 99(2), pages 243-257.

[16] Di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei A. Levchenko and Francesc Ortega, 2015. "A Global

    View Of Cross-Border Migration," Journal of the European Economic Association,

    European Economic Association, vol. 13(1), pages 168-202.

                                           30
[17] Docquier, Fr´
                 ed´
                   eric, 2014. "The brain drain from developing countries," IZA World of

    Labor, no. 31.

[18] Docquier, Fr´
                 ed´
                   eric and Hillel Rapoport, 2012. "Globalization, Brain Drain, and De-

    velopment", Journal of Economic Literature, 50(3), pages 681-730.

[19] Docquier Fr´
                ed´
                  eric, C
                        ¸ a     ¨
                           glar Ozden and Giovanni Peri, 2014. "The Labour Market Ef-

    fects of Immigration and Emigration in OECD Countries," Economic Journal, Royal

    Economic Society, vol. 124(579), pages 1106-1145.

[20] Dustmann, Christian, Tommaso Frattini and Anna Rosso, 2015. "The Effect of Em-

    igration from Poland on Polish Wages," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Wiley

    Blackwell, vol. 117(2), pages 522-564.

[21] Elsner, Benjamin, 2013a. "Does Emigration Benefit the Stayers? Evidence from EU

    Enlargement," Journal of Population Economics, vol. 26(2).

[22] Elsner, Benjamin, 2013b. "Emigration and wages: The EU enlargement experiment,"

    Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, vol. 91(1), pages 154-163.

[23] Engbom, Nicklas, 2019. "Firm and Worker Dynamics in an Aging Labor Market,"

    Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper series, no. 756.

[24] Giesing, Yvonne and Nadzeya Laurentsyeva, 2017. "Firms Left Behind: Emigration

    and Firm Productivity," CesIfo Working Papers, no. 6815.

[25] Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin, Henry Swift, 2018. "Bartik Instruments:

    What, When, Why, and How," NBER Working Papers, no. 24408 (updated), Na-

    tional Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.




                                             31
[26] Grogger, Jeffrey and Gordon H. Hanson, 2011. "Income Maximization and the Selec-

    tion and Sorting of International Migrants", Journal of Development Economics, vol.

    95 (1), pages 42-57.

[27] Hunt, Jennifer and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle, 2010. "How Much Does Immigration

    Boost Innovation?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics vol. 2, pages 3156.

[28] Ippedico, Giuseppe, 2017. "Are we losing our entrepreneurs? Evidence from Italian

    emigration during the 2008-2013 crisis," Master thesis, Universit`
                                                                     a Bocconi.

                             ¨
[29] Javorcik, Beata, Caglar Ozden, Mariana Spatareanu and Cristina Neagu, 2011. "Mi-

    grant networks and foreign direct investment," Journal of Development Economics,

    vol.94, pages 231241.

[30] Karahan, Fatih, Benjamin Pugsley and Ayseg¨
                                               ul Sahin, 2018. "Demographic Origins

    of the start-up Deficit," NBER Working Papers 25874, National Bureau of Economic

    Research, Inc.

[31] Kerr, William R. and William F. Lincoln, 2010. "The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B

    Visa Reforms and U.S. Ethnic Invention," Journal of Labor Economics, University of

    Chicago Press, vol. 28(3), pages 473-508.

[32] Kopecky, Joseph, 2017. "An aging dynamo: demographic change and the decline of

    entrepreneurial activity in the United States," mimeo.

[33] Liang, James, Hui Wang and Edward P. Lazear, 2018. "Demographics and En-

    trepreneurship," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 126(S1), pages S140-S196.

[34] MacDonald, Glenn and Michael S. Weisbach, 2004. "The Economics of Has-beens,"

    Journal of Political Economy, 2004, vol. 112, no. 1, pages S289-S310.


                                           32
[35] Mayr, Karin and Giovanni Peri, 2009. "Brain Drain and Brain Return: Theory and

    Application to Eastern-Western Europe," The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis &

    Policy, De Gruyter, vol. 9(1), pages 1-52.

[36] Mishra, Prachi, 2007. "Emigration and wages in source countries: Evidence from

    Mexico," Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 82(1), pages 180-199.

[37] Peri, Giovanni and Francisco Requena-Silvente, 2010. "The trade creation effect of

    immigrants: evidence from the remarkable case of Spain," Canadian Journal of Eco-

    nomics, 2010, vol. 43(4), 1433-1459.

[38] Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shih and Chad Sparber, 2015. "STEM Workers, H-1B Visas,

    and Productivity in US Cities," Journal of Labor Economics, University of Chicago

    Press, vol. 33(S1), pages S225 - S255.

[39] Portuguese Observatory of Emigration, 2015. "Emigra¸
                                                        c~ao Portuguesa Relat´
                                                                             orio Es-

    tat´
       istico 2015," Technical report (available at https://bit.ly/2U1Bb6E, last checked

    on April 7, 2019).

[40] Rauch, James E., 1999. "Networks versus markets in international trade," Journal of

    International Economics, vol. 48(1), pages 735.

[41] Rauch, James E., 2001. "Business and social networks in international trade," Journal

    of Economic Literature, vol. 39(1), pages 11771203.

[42] Rauch, James E. and Vitor Trindade, 2002. "Ethnic Chinese networks in international

    trade," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 84(1), pages 116130.

[43] Schivardi, Fabiano and Tom Schmitz, 2018. "The IT Revolution and Southern Eu-

    rope's Two Lost Decades," CPER Discussion Papers, no. 12843.


                                             33
Figures

                                       Figure 1: Emigration flows, percentage of 2005 population, 2005-2015




                                                                                              .3
               .2




                                                                                                          .25
                                                                                Percentage of 2005 age group
Percentage of 2000 population
                     .15




                                                                                         .15      .2
     .1




                                                                                 .1           .05
                                                                                                                2005        2007    2009     2011           2013   2015
               .05




                                2005    2007    2009     2011    2013   2015                                                         25-44          45-64



                                       (a) Annual overall outflows                                                     (b) Annual outflows, by age group




                                                                           34
           Figure 2: Recorded Emigration and UK Registered Italian Inflows




(a) Annual inflows from AIRE and UK Social Se-(b) Annual changes from AIRE and UK Social
curity Registry, 2005-2015                    Security Registry, 2005-2015




       Figure 3: Recorded Emigration and Switzerland Registered Italian Inflows




(a) Annual inflows from AIRE and Switzerland(b) Annual changes from AIRE and Switzerland
BFS Registry, 2002-2015                     BFS Registry, 2002-2015




                                          35
Figure 4: Actual and Predicted Emigration from Italian LLMs




  (a) Emigration                       (b) Predicted Emigration




                            36
                                              Figure 5: Firm stock in predicted high and low emigration LLMs, 2005-2015
                                   1.08
                  Number of firms (over 2005 firms)
                    1.02        1.04
                                   1       1.06




                                                      2005                    2007                        2009                                                   2011                      2013                     2015

                                                                                 Low pred'd emigration                                                                    High pred'd emigration


                                              Figure 6: Firm flows in predicted high and low emigration LLMs, 2005-2015
              .08




                                                                                                                                        .08
 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07




                                                                                                                                        .07
Firm entries (over 2005 firms)




                                                                                                                           Firm exits (over 2005 firms)
                                                                                                                           .02 .03 .04 .05 .06
              .01




                                                                                                                                        .01
              0




                                                                                                                                        0




                                 2005                    2007          2009         2011           2013             2015                                  2005     2007          2009        2011           2013             2015

                                                         Low pred'd emigration             High pred'd emigration                                                  Low pred'd emigration            High pred'd emigration



                                                                (a) Firm births                                                                                           (b) Firm deaths



                                                                                                                      37
Tables




         38
Table 1: Emigration by country of destination, top 5 countries: 2000 stock, GDP perfor-
mance and 2005-2015 flows

                                                          (1)                    (2)
             Panel A
             Top countries in 2000             Stock of Emigrants        GDP 2015/2008

             Germany                                    286,570                 1.07
             Switzerland                                228,725                 1.09
             France                                     165,244                 1.04
             Belgium                                    117,935                 1.06
             Argentina                                   99,506                 1.11

             Panel B
             Top countries in 2008 - 15                 Flows              % 25-44-y.o.

             Germany                                    70,104                  48.6
             U.K.                                       66,094                  61.2
             Switzerland                                53,567                  52.3
             France                                     45,046                  46.8
             United States                              27,563                  54.9

Notes: Panel A reports the top 5 main countries in terms of size of the emigration network as of 2000 as
measured in the AIRE data, and the GDP growth between 2008 and 2015 calculated on IMF data (out of a
total of 92 countries considered). For reference, both UK and US growth was 1.19 in the period of interest
and GDP growth in Italy was 0.93. Panel B reports the flows of emigrants to the top destination countries
in the periods 2008-2015 and the share of 25-44-year old measured in the ISTAT-AIRE data.




                                                   39
      Table 2: OLS regression of LLMs firm dynamics on observed emigration rates

                                              (1)           (2)            (3)
                                           All Firms     All Firms      All Firms
                                            Stock           Births         Deaths
                   VARIABLES                2008-15       2008-15        2008-15
                   Panel A
                   Emig Rate                  -0.008        0.005        0.013**
                                             (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.005)

                   R-squared                  0.004         0.001         0.014

                   Panel B
                   Emig Rate                  0.005       0.021***      0.016***
                                             (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.006)
                   Emig Rate*Young          -0.027**     -0.036***        -0.009
                                             (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.010)

                   R-squared                  0.072         0.104         0.039

                   Panel C
                   Emig Rate                  -0.000       0.015*        0.015**
                                             (0.004)       (0.008)       (0.006)
                   Unemp.Rate 2004             0.214      0.764***      0.550***
                                             (0.144)       (0.230)       (0.149)
                   GDP 2004                 0.205***       0.278*         0.073
                                             (0.078)       (0.146)       (0.070)

                   R-squared                 0.567         0.460         0.599
                   Avg. Outcome               0.005         0.344        0.339
                   Avg. Treatment           8518.980      8518.980      8518.980

 Notes: OLS estimates. The sample is composed of 686 Local Labor Markets (LLMs). The dependent
variables are the changes in firm stock (column 1), cumulative firm entry (column 2) and exit (column
3) between 2008 and 2015 as a fraction of the stock of firms in 2005. The independent variable is the
cumulative emigration rate between 2008 and 2015 as a fraction of the LLM population in 2000, times 100.
In Panel A there are no control variables. In Panel B we include the indicator Young defined as average
age in 2002 below median, and we interact it with emigration. In Panel C we control for unemployment
rate and value added per capita in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM level and we include province (110)
FEs. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent level, respectively.




                                                  40
             Table 3: Pre-period local labor market characteristics, 2005-2008

                                                                Below median              Above median
                                                             predicted emigration      predicted emigration
 Firm stock over 2005 firm stock                                      0.023                     0.025
                                                                    (0.032)                   (0.038)
 Under 45 owned firms over 2005 firm stock                           -0.006                    -0.002
                                                                    (0.022)                   (0.024)
 Entry of firms over 2005 firm stock                                  0.196                     0.199
                                                                    (0.039)                   (0.041)
 Exit firms over 2005 firm stock                                      0.167                     0.169
                                                                    (0.023)                   (0.025)
 Entry of under 45 owned firms over 2005 firm stock                   0.185                     0.193
                                                                    (0.040)                   (0.039)
 Exit of under 45 owned firms over 2005 firm stock                    0.077                     0.080
                                                                    (0.020)                   (0.018)
 Change in LLM employees over 2005 employees                          0.116                     0.121
                                                                    (0.118)                   (0.115)
 Change in avg firm size                                              0.021                     0.119
                                                                    (0.810)                   (0.840)
 Change in number of managers to blue collars                        -0.004                    -0.014
                                                                    (0.245)                   (0.091)


Notes: LLM averages and standard deviations in parenthesis, 2005-2008. The 686 LLMs are split in two
subsamples, one above and one below the median emigration rate as predicted by the pull-instrument.
Further details in the text.




                                                41
                                    Table 4: First stage regression

                Panel A
                                                  (1)             (2)             (3)
                                               Emig Rate       Emig Rate       Emig Rate

                Emig. IV                        3.722***        3.883***          3.803***
                                                 (0.771)         (0.758)           (1.077)
                Unemp.Rate 2004                 -1.720**          0.784             1.791
                                                 (0.736)         (1.114)           (1.621)
                GDP 2004                        0.564***        0.566***          0.665***
                                                 (0.141)         (0.111)           (0.195)

                Observations                       686             686               686
                R-squared                        0.131            0.243             0.397
                F-excluded instrument            23.312          26.243            12.458
                Avg. Outcome                      0.825           0.825             0.825
                FE                                  -            Region           Province

               Panel B
                                                    (1)                 (2)
                                              Internal Emig       Immigration 05-08

               Emig. IV                            -0.661               -1.259*
                                                  (2.624)               (0.690)

               Observations                         686                    686
               R-squared                           0.400                  0.677
               F-excluded instrument               0.064                  3.329
               Avg. Outcome                        8.496                  1.316
               Province FE                           X                      X

Notes: OLS estimates. The sample is composed of 686 Local Labor Markets (LLMs). In Panel A, the
dependent variable is the cumulative emigration rate between 2009 and 2015 as a fraction of the LLM
population in 2000, times 100. The independent variable is the predicted emigration rate based on the
shares of pre-2000 emigrants to different countries to LLM population in 2000 interacted with real GDP
                                                                                  2015     2008
growth of each country between 2008 and 2015, P ulll = c shl,c,2000  (GDPc             /GDPc    ). We further
control for unemployment rate and value added per capita in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM level.
Column 1 include no fixed effects while Columns 2 and 3 include region (20) and province (110) FEs
respectively. In Panel B, Column 1, the dependent variable is the cumulative emigration rate between 2009
and 2015 to different LLMs in Italy, while in Column 2 the dependent variable is the change in the stock
of immigrants from abroad between 2015 and 2009, as a fraction of LLM population in 2000. ***, **, *
indicate significance at 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent level, respectively.


                                                     42
Table 5: Instrument validity check: Effect of emigration rates on pre-shock change in stock
and flows of firms (2005-08)

                                                             (1)            (2)            (3)
                                                          All Firms      All Firms      All Firms
                                                           Stock            Births         Deaths
                                                           2005-08        2005-08        2005-08
      Panel A: All firms
      Emig. IV                                               -0.062        -0.081         -0.019
                                                            (0.051)       (0.064)        (0.023)

      R-squared                                              0.483          0.495         0.608
      Avg. Outcome                                           0.025          0.198         0.173
      Avg. Treatment                                         0.825          0.825         0.825

      Panel B: Firms with ownership under 45
      Emig. IV                                               0.016         -0.087       -0.103***
                                                            (0.047)       (0.063)        (0.032)

      R-squared                                               0.449         0.474         0.483
      Avg. Outcome                                           -0.004         0.190         0.193
      Avg. Treatment                                          0.825         0.825         0.825

      Observations                                            686            686           686
      Province FE                                              X              X             X

Notes: OLS estimates. The sample is composed of 686 Local Labor Markets (LLMs). The dependent
variables are the changes in firm stock, cumulative firm entry and exit between 2005 and 2008 as a fraction
of the stock of firms in 2005, in each column respectively. In Panel A we include all firms while in Panel B
we include only firms owned and managed by individuals under 45 years old, which we discuss in Section
5. The independent variable is the predicted emigration rate based on the shares of pre-2000 emigrants to
different countries to LLM population in 2000 interacted with real GDP growth of each country between
                                               2015       2008
2008 and 2015, P ulll = c shl,c,2000  (GDPc         /GDPc      ). We further control for unemployment rate
and value added per capita in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM level (not reported), as well as for 110
province FEs. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent level, respectively.




                                                    43
          Table 6: First stage regression: Complier LLMs, by median age in 2005

                                            (1)            (2)               (3)
                                            All       Rel. Younger       Rel. Older

                    Emig. IV            3.803***         5.084***         2.449**
                                         (1.077)          (1.695)         (0.995)

                    Observations           686              343              343
                    R-squared             0.397            0.472            0.477
                    F-excl. instr.        12.460           9.000            6.060
                    Avg. Outcome          0.825            0.899            0.750
                    Province FE             X                X                X

Notes: OLS estimates. The sample is composed of 686 Local Labor Markets (LLMs). The dependent
variables is the emigration rate in LLMs with a relatively young and a relatively old demographic structure
based on their median age in the pre-period (2005) in Columns 2 and 3 respectively. The independent
variable is the predicted emigration rate based on the shares of pre-2000 emigrants to different countries
to LLM population in 2000 interacted with real GDP growth of each country between 2008 and 2015,
                               2015       2008
P ulll = c shl,c,2000  (GDPc        /GDPc      ). We further control for unemployment rate and value added
per capita in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM level (not reported), as well as 110 province FEs. ***, **,
* indicate significance at 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent level, respectively.




                                                    44
                 Table 7: Emigration and local labor market age composition

                                           (1)                 (2)                  (3)
                                        25-44/45-64         25-44/45-64          25-44/45-64

        Emigration IV                     -0.100***
                                           (0.028)
        Emigration rate                                          0.002             -0.024***
                                                                (0.003)              (0.007)
        pre-period 25-44/45-64             0.739***            0.746***             0.761***
                                            (0.014)             (0.014)              (0.015)

        Observations                          686                 686                 686
        R-squared                            0.898               0.896               0.880
        Avg Ratio 09-15                      0.918               0.918               0.918
        Avg Ratio 05-08                      1.099               1.099               1.099
        Avg Emigr IV                         0.053                                   0.053
        Avg Emig                                                 0.828               0.828
        Province FE                          Yes                  Yes                 Yes
        Method                               OLS                 OLS                 2SLS

Notes: OLS, reduced form IV and 2SLS estimates, in each column respectively. The sample is composed
of 686 Local Labor Markets (LLMs). The dependent variables is the age composition odds ratio, i.e. the
ratio between the average number of residents aged 25-44 between 2009 and 2015 over the average number
of residents aged 25-64 in the same period. The independent variables are the cumulative emigration rate
between 2008 and 2015 as a fraction of the LLM population in 2000, the predicted emigration rate based
on the shares of pre-2000 emigrants to different countries to LLM population in 2000 interacted with real
                                                                                  2015      2008
GDP growth of each country between 2008 and 2015, P ulll = c shl,c,2000  (GDPc         /GDPc     ), and the
emigration rate instrumented with the predicted emigration rate, in each column respectively. We control
for the age composition odds ratio for the period 2005-2008, unemployment rate and value added per capita
in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM level (not reported), as well as 110 province FEs. ***, **, * indicate
significance at 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent level, respectively.




                                                     45
          Table 8: Effect of emigration rates on change in stock and flows of firms

                                                             (1)            (2)            (3)
                                                          All Firms      All Firms      All Firms
                                                           Stock            Births         Deaths
                                                           2008-15        2008-15        2008-15
      Panel A: All firms
      Emig Rate                                           -0.053***       -0.088**        -0.035
                                                           (0.018)         (0.038)       (0.026)

      R-squared                                              0.427          0.125         0.447
      F-excl. instr.                                        12.458         12.458         12.458
      Avg. Outcome                                           0.005          0.344         0.339
      Avg. Treatment                                         0.825          0.825         0.825
      Back of Env Avg. Emig.                                 1724           1724           1724
      Back of Env Firms                                      -373           -617           -244

      Panel B: Firms with ownership under 45
      Emig Rate                                            -0.018**       -0.061**        -0.043
                                                            (0.009)        (0.030)       (0.028)

      R-squared                                              0.415          0.300         0.289
      F-excl. instr.                                        12.458         12.458         12.458
      Avg. Outcome                                          -0.089         0.275          0.364
      Avg. Treatment                                         0.825          0.825         0.825
      Back of Env Avg. Emig.                                 1724           1724           1724
      Back of Env Firms                                       -53           -178           -125

      Observations                                            686            686           686
      Province FE                                              X              X             X

Notes: 2SLS estimates. The sample is composed of 686 Local Labor Markets (LLMs). The dependent
variables are the changes in firm stock, cumulative firm entry and exit between 2008 and 2015 as a fraction
of the stock of firms in 2005, in each column respectively. In Panel A we include all firms while in Panel B
we include only firms owned and managed by individuals under 45 years old. The independent variable is
the cumulative emigration rate between 2008 and 2015 as a fraction of the LLM population in 2000 times
100, instrumented by the predicted emigration rate based on the shares of pre-2000 emigrants to different
countries to LLM population in 2000 interacted with real GDP growth of each country between 2008 and
                                      2015       2008
2015, P ulll = c shl,c,2000  (GDPc         /GDPc      ). We further control for unemployment rate and value
added per capita in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM level (not reported) as well as 110 province FEs. The
back of the envelope report the number of emigrants from the average local labor market over the period
adjusted by the misreporting factor of 2.6 and the estimated effect on each outcome in an average LLM.
***, **, * indicate significance at 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent level, respectively.



                                                    46
                        Table 9: Effect of emigration rates on innovation

                                                    (1)           (2)           (3)
                                                 Start-Ups      High VA       Low VA
                                                    Births        Births        Births
                                                  2008-15       2008-15       2008-15

                Emig Rate                        -0.049***     -0.013***      -0.074**
                                                  (0.017)       (0.004)        (0.035)

                Observations                         686           686          686
                R-squared                          0.241          0.168        0.194
                F-excl. instr.                     12.458        12.458        12.458
                Avg. Outcome                       0.052          0.013        0.330
                Avg. Outcome 2005                  0.000          0.085        0.915
                Avg. Treatment                     0.825          0.825        0.825
                Back of Env Avg. Emig.              1724          1724          1724
                Back of Env Firms                                   -8          -479

Notes: 2SLS estimates. The sample is composed of 686 Local Labor Markets (LLMs). In Column 1, the
dependent variable is the number of innovative start-ups created between 2010 and 2016 as a fraction of
the stock of firms in 2005 times 10,000. In Columns 2 and 3, the dependent variables are the changes are
the changes in cumulative firm entry between 2008 and 2015 as a fraction of the stock of firms in 2005,
in high and low value added sectors respectively. The independent variable is the cumulative emigration
rate between 2008 and 2015 as a fraction of the LLM population in 2000 times 100, instrumented by
the predicted emigration rate based on the shares of pre-2000 emigrants to different countries to LLM
population in 2000 interacted with real GDP growth of each country between 2008 and 2015, P ulll =
                      2015      2008
   c shl,c,2000  (GDPc     /GDPc     ). We further control for unemployment rate and value added per capita
in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM level (not reported) as well as 110 province FEs. The back of the
envelope report the number of emigrants from the average local labor market over the period adjusted by
the misreporting factor of 2.6 and the estimated effect on each outcome in an average LLM. ***, **, *
indicate significance at 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent level, respectively.




                                                    47
     Table 10: Effect of emigration rates on change in local labor market employment

                              (1)               (2)           (3)              (4)              (5)
                           Employees%         Avg. Size      Blue Coll       White Coll       Managers
                            2008-15           2008-15       2008-15          2008-15          2008-15

   Emig Rate                  -0.089**          -0.089          -0.032         -0.110*           -3.187
                               (0.041)         (0.217)         (0.054)         (0.058)          (3.296)

   Observations                  686              686            686             686              584
   R-squared                    0.198            0.278          0.197          0.233            0.162
   F-excl. instr.              12.458           12.458         12.458          12.458           4.379
   Avg. Outcome                -0.110           -0.042         -0.117          -0.013            0.248
   Avg. Outcome 2005          16709.0              5.5        8950.138        6737.377         163.226
   Avg. Treatment               0.825            0.825          0.825           0.825            0.799
   Estimated Emig.              1724             1724           1724            1724             1672
   Back of Env. Effect        -1229.9             -0.4         -233.5          -612.4           -415.8
   Province FE                    X                 X             X               X                X

Notes: 2SLS estimates. The sample is composed of 686 Local Labor Markets (LLMs). The dependent
variables are the change in employment (as a share of initial number of employees in each local labor market
in 2005), average size and workers by qualifications between 2008 and 2015, in each column respectively.
The independent variable is the cumulative emigration rate between 2008 and 2015 as a fraction of the
LLM population in 2000 times 100, instrumented by the predicted emigration rate based on the shares of
pre-2000 emigrants to different countries to LLM population in 2000 interacted with real GDP growth of
                                                                     2015      2008
each country between 2008 and 2015, P ulll = c shl,c,2000  (GDPc          /GDPc     ). We further control for
unemployment rate and value added per capita in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM level (not reported) as
well as 110 province FEs. The back of the envelope report the number of emigrants from the average local
labor market over the period adjusted by the misreporting factor of 2.6 and the estimated effect on each
outcome in an average LLM. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent level,
respectively.




                                                     48
Table 11: Robustness checks: controlling for immigration and excluding border provinces

                            Panel A: Second stage
                                                             (1)          (2)
                                                          All Firms    All Firms
                                                             Births       Births
                                                           2008-15      2008-15

                            Emig Rate                     -0.072**      -0.093**
                                                           (0.031)       (0.042)
                            Immig Rate                    0.015***
                                                           (0.003)

                            Observations                     686           590
                            R-squared                      0.262          0.086
                            F-excl. instr.                 15.083        11.165
                            Avg. Outcome                   0.344          0.350
                            Avg. Treatment                  0.825         0.767
                            Back of Env Avg. Emig.          1724          1605
                            Back of Env Firms               -502          -591
                            Province FE                       X             X

                           Panel A: First stage
                                                        (1)              (2)
                                                     Emig Rate        Emig Rate

                           Emig. IV                   4.166***        3.728***
                                                       (1.073)         (1.116)
                           Immig Rate                 0.085***
                                                       (0.017)

                           Observations                    686          590
                           R-squared                      0.426        0.313
                           F-excluded instrument         15.083        11.165
                           Avg. Outcome                   0.825        0.767
                           Province FE                      X            X

Notes: 2SLS (Panel A) and first-stage OLS (Panel B) estimates. In Column 1, the sample is composed of
686 Local Labor Markets, while in Column 2 the sample is composed of 590 Local Labor Markets (LLMs),
excluding those in the provinces at the boundary of Italy. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the change
in cumulative firm entry between 2008 and 2015 as a fraction of the stock of firms in 2005. The independent
variable is the cumulative emigration rate between 2008 and 2015 as a fraction of the LLM population in
2000 times 100, instrumented by the predicted emigration rate based on the shares of pre-2000 emigrants
to different countries to LLM population in 2000 interacted with real GDP growth of each country between
                                              2015       2008
2008 and 2015, P ulll = c shl,c,2000  (GDPc        /GDPc      ). In Column 1, we also include the cumulative
immigration rate between 2008 and 2015 as a percentage of LLM population in 2000. In both columns, we
further control for unemployment rate and value added per capita in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM
level (not reported) as well as 110 province FEs. In Panel B, the dependent variable is the Emigration
rate defined above and the independent variables are P ulll , unemployment rate and value added per capita
in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM level (not reported) as well as province FEs. ***, **, * indicate
significance at 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent level, respectively.

                                                    49
A                        Appendix for Online Publication

A.I                            Additional figures

Figure A1: Absolute share of 2005 population emigrating by education level, 2005-2015
                 .6
 Percentage of 2005 education group
   .2       .3   .1  .4        .5




                                      2005   2007            2009         2011         2013        2015

                                                    High School or less          College or more




                                                                    50
             Figure A2: Recorded Emigration and US Registered Italian Inflows




(a) Annual inflows from AIRE and US Census(b) Annual changes in inflows from AIRE and US
ACS, 2005-2015                            Census ACS, 2005-2015



A.II    IV diagnostics

The following tables, A1 and A2, report the main tests proposed by Goldsmith-Pinkham et

al. (2018). Table A1 reports the diagnostics of the cross-sectional components of the pull

emigration forces instrumental variable. The  s are estimated on the change in the stock

of firms in each local labor market. As it can be noted in panel A, the share of the weights

below zero is very small indicating that our estimates are likely to be little sensitive to

misspecification. More important is panel C that reports the five top destination countries

in terms of weights, i.e., the countries that matters the most for our identifying variation.

To a certain extent it is worrisome to observe that Germany weighs up to 44 percent of the

total instrument variation. On the other hand, the estimated coefficients for the top five

destinations are all negative and close to each other and to the main estimates. Note that

we do not report diagnostics by time period because our variation spans only the period

2008-2015.

   Table A2 instead relates the stock of emigrants in the five main destination countries



                                             51
with the main observable characteristics of the origin local labor markets (unemployment

rate and GDP per capita in the baseline year, and emigration flows by demographic group

in the pre-period 2005-2008). As Germany has a prominent weight in our IV variation, we

are concerned that emigration to Germany is concentrated in labor markets with peculiar

characteristics. From this Table, however, we see no systematic correlation between the

destination country networks and the origin area characteristics in the baseline period.

   One might be concerned that our instrument is correlated with internal migration flows.

While these should not be correlated with pull factors from abroad, the network of emi-

grants may be correlated with the internal flows and with local push factors. For instance,

local labor markets with high emigration rates to foreign countries could also exhibit sub-

stantial emigration to other Italian LLMs, and the latter may reduce firm creation, violating

the exclusion restriction. We thus test whether our estimates are robust to this potential

threat. In Table 4 Panel B we report the results of our first-stage equation where internal

migration outflows is the outcome variable. The effect is not statistically significant: this

indicates that the instrument predicts emigration abroad and not internal flows. Moreover,

the analysis is interesting in itself, as it indicates that pull forces from abroad, as identified

by our IV, are not substituting or complementing internal migration flows. In column (2)

we test whether there is a direct substitution effect by regressing immigration inflows on

(instrumented) emigration. We estimate a negative and marginally statistically significant

effect. While this may imply that areas with lower business dynamism ­ triggered by higher

emigration flows ­ are less attractive for immigrants, our main estimates are robust to the

inclusion of immigration as a control variable (Table 11).

   Finally, in Table A3 we perform an exercise to characterize complier LLMs based on

geography rather than on demographic characteristics (in Table 6). Dropping the province

fixed effects, Table Table A3 shows whether LLMs affected by the pull factor are more



                                               52
likely to be in the South or the North of the country. This exercise is relevant because

actual and predicted emigration plotted in the maps of Figure 4 differ somewhat because of

their geographical location. While predicted emigration was slightly higher in the South,

where historically there has been more emigration and hence stronger networks, actual

emigration in the considered period was stronger in the North despite better economic

conditions. The table shows that the first stage coefficient is higher for Northern than

for Southern LLMs. This is also consistent with the idea that stronger economic pull had

a larger impact on emigration from the North and is not only correlated with long-term

trends in emigration which are more prominent in the South. We also emphasize that in

the IV specification with province fixed effects we use variation within a province, which

is much more specific to local networks and does not rely on generic differences between

North and South, which are also correlated with economic performance.




                                           53
                         Table A1: Emigration pull factor IV diagnostics

              Panel A
                                 Sum       Mean      Share
              s 0               -0.034     -0.001    0.446
              s> 0               1.034      0.020    0.554

              Panel B
                                  s          G         s
              s                  1.000
              G                 -0.069      1.000
              s                 -0.033     -0.037    1.000

              Panel C                                                                           .
                                             G          
              Germany            0.442     1.141     -0.043
              Switzerland        0.271     1.165     -0.035
              France             0.054     1.115     -0.137
              Australia          0.040     1.283     -0.073
              Canada             0.037     1.196     -0.096

              Panel D
                                 Sum       Mean       p25      Median        p75     Sh< 0
              ^k
                                 4.640     0.050     -0.129    -0.024       0.098    0.620


Notes: The table reports the emigration pull diagnostics as suggested by Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2018).
Panel A reports the share of negative weights; panel B reports correlations between the weights, the 2008-
2015 destination country GDP growth (G) and the just-identified coefficient estimates; panel C reports the
top five destination countries according to the Rotemberg decomposition calculated with the Goldsmith-
Pinkham et al.'s Stata package. Finally, panel D reports statistics about the dispersion in the just identified
coefficients ^k




                                                      54
Table A2: Relationship between country of destination emigration networks and LLMs'
characteristics

                                 (1)             (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)
                               Germany       Switzerland     France     Australia    Canada

       Unempl rate 2004            0.076        -0.001         0.014      -0.054       -0.007
                                 (0.068)       (0.047)       (0.025)     (0.038)      (0.022)
       GDP per cap 2004           -0.001        -0.001        -0.000      -0.000       -0.000
                                 (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
       pre Emig 25-44             -0.021         0.029        -0.001      -0.001        0.007
                                 (0.022)       (0.028)       (0.017)     (0.009)      (0.009)
       pre Emig 45-64             0.036         0.018          0.038       0.021        0.008
                                 (0.038)       (0.041)       (0.026)     (0.015)      (0.013)
       pre Emig 65+               -0.066         0.048        0.004       -0.025        0.017
                                 (0.051)       (0.036)       (0.023)     (0.023)      (0.013)
       pre Emig Female           0.031*          0.017         0.021      -0.002       -0.000
                                 (0.017)       (0.023)       (0.014)     (0.007)      (0.006)
       pre Emig Male               0.014        -0.041        -0.019      -0.001       -0.011
                                 (0.024)       (0.036)       (0.018)     (0.009)      (0.008)

       Observations                686           686           686         686          686
       R-squared                  0.492         0.386         0.427       0.498        0.343
       Province FE                  X             X             X           X            X

Notes: OLS estimates. The sample is composed of 686 Local Labor Markets (LLMs). The dependent
variables are the shares of emigrants in the five destination countries described in each column. The
independent variables are the LLMs main observable characteristics. ***, **, * indicate significance at
1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent level, respectively.




                                                  55
A.III      Additional tables

              Table A3: First stage regression: complier LLMs, by macro-region

                                             (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)
                                             All          North      Center        South

                Emig. IV                 3.803***      4.443**     2.621**       3.903***
                                          (1.077)      (1.933)      (1.218)       (0.953)
                Unemp.Rate 2004            1.791        0.268      -2.611**         0.546
                                          (1.621)      (7.059)      (1.176)       (1.271)
                GDP 2004                 0.665***      0.488**     0.472***        -0.106
                                          (0.195)      (0.185)      (0.088)       (0.630)
                Constant                 0.682***      0.779**     0.728***      0.431***
                                          (0.085)      (0.312)      (0.065)       (0.156)

                Observations                686            235        154           297
                R-squared                  0.397          0.074      0.111         0.193
                F-excl. instr.             12.460         5.290      4.630        16.770
                Avg. Outcome               0.825          0.927      0.661         0.828
                Province FE                  X             NO         NO            NO

Notes: OLS estimates. The sample is composed of 686 Local Labor Markets (LLMs). The dependent
variables is the emigration rate in LLMs by macro-region, in each column respectively. The independent
variable is the predicted emigration rate based on the shares of pre-2000 emigrants to different countries
to LLM population in 2000 interacted with real GDP growth of each country between 2008 and 2015,
                               2015      2008
P ulll = c shl,c,2000  (GDPc        /GDPc     ). We further control for unemployment rate and value added
per capita in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1-percent, 5-percent
and 10-percent level, respectively.




                                                     56
        Table A4: Effect of emigration rates on change in local labor market wages

                                                     (1)              (2)
                                                   Wage Bill         CZ Wage
                                                   2008-15          2008-15

                       Emig Rate                       -0.034         -0.023***
                                                      (0.045)          (0.008)

                       Observations                     686              686
                       R-squared                       0.264            0.098
                       F-excl. instr.                 12.458           12.458
                       Avg. Outcome                   -0.113           -0.007
                       Avg. Outcome 2005             3486.004         1644.434
                       Avg. Treatment                  0.825            0.825
                       Estimated Emig.                 1724             1724
                       Back of Env. Effect             -96.5            -30.6
                       Province FE                       X                X

2SLS estimates. The sample is composed of 686 Local Labor Markets (LLMs). The dependent variables
are the change 2008-2015 in wage bill (as a share of initial wage bill in each LLM in 2005) and the change
2008-2015 in average LLM wage (as a share of initial average wage in each LLM in 2005) in each column
respectively. The independent variable is the cumulative emigration rate between 2008 and 2015 as a
fraction of the LLM population in 2000 times 100, instrumented by the predicted emigration rate based on
the shares of pre-2000 emigrants to different countries to LLM population in 2000 interacted with real GDP
                                                                                2015      2008
growth of each country between 2008 and 2015, P ulll = c shl,c,2000  (GDPc           /GDPc     ). We further
control for unemployment rate and value added per capita in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM level (not
reported) as well as 110 province FEs. The back of the envelope report the number of emigrants from the
average local labor market over the period adjusted by the misreporting factor of 2.6 and the estimated
effect on each outcome in an average LLM.




                                                    57
Table A5: Effect of emigration rates on firms growth, in tradable and non tradable sectors

                                                         (1)            (2)
                                                      Tradable      Non Tradable
                                                        Births          Births
                                                      2008-15         2008-15

                     Emig Rate                        -0.011***         -0.076**
                                                       (0.004)           (0.035)

                     Observations                          686             686
                     R-squared                            0.248           0.178
                     F-excl. instr.                      12.458          12.458
                     Avg. Outcome                        0.030           0.314
                     Avg. Outcome 2005                   0.119           0.881
                     Avg. Treatment                      0.825           0.825
                     Back of Env Avg. Emig.               1724            1724
                     Back of Env Firms                      -9            -470

Notes: 2SLS estimates. The sample is composed of 686 Local Labor Markets (LLMs). The dependent
variables are the changes in cumulative firm entry between 2008 and 2015 as a fraction of the stock of firms
in 2005, in tradeble sectors (Column 1) and non tradable sectors (Column 2) respectively. The independent
variable is the cumulative emigration rate between 2008 and 2015 as a fraction of the LLM population in
2000 times 100, instrumented by the predicted emigration rate based on the shares of pre-2000 emigrants
to different countries to LLM population in 2000 interacted with real GDP growth of each country between
                                               2015      2008
2008 and 2015, P ulll = c shl,c,2000  (GDPc         /GDPc     ). We further control for unemployment rate
and value added per capita in 100,000 euros in 2004 at the LLM level (not reported) as well as 110 province
FEs. The back of the envelope report the number of emigrants from the average local labor market over the
period adjusted by the misreporting factor of 2.6 and the estimated effect on each outcome in an average
LLM. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1-percent, 5-percent and 10-percent level, respectively.




                                                    58
                 Table A6: Robustness check - Main effect controlling for the share of tradeable sector in the LLM
                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)         (12)
                                  All Firms   All Firms   All Firms   All Firms   All Firms   All Firms   All Firms   All Firms   All Firms   All Firms   All Firms    All Firms
                                   Stock       Stock       Stock       Stock         Births      Births      Births      Births      Deaths      Deaths      Deaths       Deaths
                                   2008-15     2008-15     2008-15     2008-15     2008-15     2008-15     2008-15     2008-15     2008-15     2008-15     2008-15      2008-15

     Emig Rate                    -0.041***   -0.073***   -0.033**    -0.053***    -0.064*    -0.109***     -0.028    -0.088**      -0.023      -0.036       0.005       -0.035
                                   (0.015)     (0.022)     (0.016)     (0.018)     (0.033)     (0.040)     (0.026)     (0.038)     (0.024)     (0.025)      (0.021)     (0.026)
     Tradable Sh. 2005            0.388***                0.405***                0.748***                0.827***                0.360***                 0.422***
                                   (0.111)                 (0.107)                 (0.167)                 (0.160)                 (0.073)                  (0.069)
     Tradable Sh. x Emigr. 2000                 1.301       -0.487                              1.396     -2.253**                              0.094     -1.766***
                                               (1.258)     (0.832)                             (1.828)     (0.966)                             (0.852)      (0.660)
      Trade per capita                                                  0.001                                           0.001                                            0.001
                                                                       (0.001)                                         (0.001)                                          (0.001)

     Observations                    686         686         686         686         686        686          686         686         686         686         686           686
     R-squared                      0.509       0.306       0.540       0.427       0.320                   0.475       0.125       0.535       0.438       0.632         0.447
     F-excl. instr.                11.638      15.483      13.992      12.402      11.638      15.483      13.992      12.402      11.638      15.483      13.992        12.402
     Avg. Outcome                   0.005       0.005       0.005       0.005       0.344       0.344       0.344       0.344      0.339       0.339        0.339         0.339
     Avg. Treatment                 0.825       0.825       0.825       0.825       0.825       0.825       0.825       0.825      0.825       0.825        0.825         0.825
     Back of Env Avg. Emig.         1724        1724        1724        1724        1724        1724        1724        1724        1724        1724        1724          1724
     Back of Env Firms              -287        -512        -232        -373        -452        -766        -194        -617        -165        -254          37          -244
     Province FE                      X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X             X




59
     Sample: Italian Local Labor Markets.
     Specifications: 2SLS
     Dependent variable: Changes in firm stock (col 1-4), cumulative firm entry(col 5-8) and exit (col 9-12).
     Independent Variable: Emigration flows computed using AIRE registry enrollment as share of population in 2000 instrumented by our
                                                                                                                                       2015     ml,t
     instrumental variable of the pull emigration factor based on the pre-period LLM emigration network:                               t=2008 popl,2000   =     c   shi(l),c,2000 
         2015     2008
     (GDPc    /GDPc    )
     Control variables: Per capita added value in 100,000 euros and unemployment rate in 2004 at local labor market level, share of firms in
     tradeable sectors, change in local labor market export per capita
Table A7: Robustness check - Effect of emigration rates on change in stock and flows of
firms (2008-15) controlling for lagged outcome difference (2005-08)

                                                  (1)           (2)          (3)
                                               All Firms     All Firms    All Firms
                                                Stock         Births       Deaths
                                                2008-15       2008-15      2008-15

                Emig Rate                      -0.068***     -0.073***     -0.045**
                                                (0.022)       (0.025)       (0.021)
                Stockpre                       0.995***
                                                (0.085)
                  Birthspre                                  1.792***
                                                              (0.085)
                  Deathspre                                                1.219***
                                                                            (0.195)

                Observations                       686          686           686
                R-squared                        0.851        0.856          0.740
                F-excl. instr.                   19.476       22.055        19.657
                Avg. Outcome                     0.005        0.344          0.339
                Avg. Treatment                   0.825        0.825          0.825
                Back of Env Avg. Emig.           25707        25707         25707
                Back of Env Firms                 -475         -514          -315
                Province FE                         X            X             X

Sample: Italian Local Labor Markets.
Specifications: 2SLS
Dependent variable: Change in firms between 2008-2015 as a share of initial number of firms in each
LLM in 2005.
Independent Variable: Emigration flows computed using AIRE registry enrollment as share of population
in 2000 instrumented by our instrumental variable of the pull emigration factor based on the pre-period
                            2015    m  l,t                           2015     2008
LLM emigration network:     t=2008 popl,2000 = c shi(l),c,2000  (GDPc     /GDPc    )
Control variables: Per capita added value in 100,000 euros and unemployment rate in 2004 at local labor
market level, Change in Firms between 2005-2008 as a share of initial number of firms in each commuting
zone in 2005.




                                                  60
Table A8: Robustness check - Effect of emigration rates on change in stock and flows of
firms owned by under 45 (2008-15) controlling for lagged outcome difference (2005-08)

                                             (1)               (2)              (3)
                                         Young Firms       Young Firms      Young Firms
                                            Stock              Births           Deaths
                                           2008-15           2008-15          2008-15

          Emig Rate                         -0.019**         -0.029**            0.000
                                             (0.009)          (0.013)           (0.013)
           Stockpre                           0.139
                                             (0.088)
              Birthspre                                      1.415***
                                                              (0.053)
              Deathspre                                                        1.588***
                                                                                (0.074)

          Observations                         686              686               686
          R-squared                           0.418            0.856             0.799
          F-excl. instr.                     13.302           15.622            15.183
          Avg. Outcome                       -0.089           0.275              0.364
          Avg. Treatment                     0.825             0.825             0.825
          Back of Env Avg. Emig.              1724             1724              1724
          Back of Env Firms                    -55              -83                1
          Province FE                           X                X                 X

Sample: Italian Local Labor Markets.
Specifications: 2SLS
Dependent variable: Change in firms between 2008-2015 as a share of initial number of firms in each
LLM in 2005.
Independent Variable: Emigration flows computed using AIRE registry enrollment as share of population
in 2000 instrumented by our instrumental variable of the pull emigration factor based on the pre-period
                            2015    m  l,t                           2015     2008
LLM emigration network:     t=2008 popl,2000 = c shi(l),c,2000  (GDPc     /GDPc    )
Control variables: Per capita added value in 100,000 euros and unemployment rate in 2004 at local labor
market level, Change in Firms between 2005-2008 as a share of initial number of firms in each commuting
zone in 2005.




                                                  61
Table A9: Robustness check - Effect of emigration rates on LLM employment (2008-15)
controlling for lagged outcome difference (2005-08)

                                      (1)                  (2)               (3)
                                   Employees%            Avg. Size       Qualified Empl.
                                    2008-15              2008-15           2008-15

        Emig Rate                       -0.087**           -0.182              -0.041
                                         (0.041)          (0.256)             (0.101)
        Employeespre                      0.060
                                         (0.087)
        Avg. Sizepre                                       -0.154
                                                          (0.195)
        Qualified Empl.pre                                                     -0.210
                                                                              (0.176)

        Observations                     686                686                686
        R-squared                       0.201              0.283              0.143
        F-excl. instr.                  12.630            12.440              12.197
        Avg. Outcome                    -0.110            -0.042              0.027
        Avg. Outcome 2005               1.671             5.466               0.367
        Avg. Treatment                  0.825             0.825               0.825
        Province FE                       X                  X                  X

Sample: Italian Local Labor Markets.
Specifications: 2SLS
Dependent variable: Change in LLMs employment between 2008-2015 as a share of initial employment
in each LLM in 2005.
Independent Variable: Emigration flows computed using AIRE registry enrollment as share of population
in 2000 instrumented by our instrumental variable of the pull emigration factor based on the pre-period
                            2015    m  l,t                           2015     2008
LLM emigration network:     t=2008 popl,2000 = c shi(l),c,2000  (GDPc     /GDPc    )
Control variables: Per capita added value in 100,000 euros and unemployment rate in 2004 at local labor
market level, Change in Firms between 2005-2008 as a share of initial number of firms in each commuting
zone in 2005.




                                                   62
Table A10: Robustness check - Effect of emigration rates on LLM employment composition
(2008-15) controlling for lagged outcome difference (2005-08)

                                              (1)         (2)              (3)
                                             Blue        White
                                              Coll        Coll        Managers
                                            2008-15     2008-15       2008-15

                  Emig Rate                   -0.032     -0.102*         -3.366
                                             (0.054)     (0.057)        (3.288)
                  Blue Collpre                -0.006
                                             (0.079)
                  White Collpre                           0.162
                                                         (0.103)
                  Managerspre                                            0.052
                                                                        (0.267)

                  Observations                 686         686            584
                  R-squared                   0.197      0.242           0.153
                  F-excl. instr.             12.752      12.449          4.418
                  Avg. Outcome               -0.117      -0.013          0.248
                  Avg. Outcome 2005         8950.138    6737.377        163.226
                  Avg. Treatment              0.825       0.825          0.799
                  Province FE                   X           X              X

Sample: Italian Local Labor Markets.
Specifications: 2SLS
Dependent variable: Change in LLMs employment composition 2008-2015.
Independent Variable: Emigration flows computed using AIRE registry enrollment as share of population
in 2000 instrumented by our instrumental variable of the pull emigration factor based on the pre-period
                            2015    m  l,t                           2015     2008
LLM emigration network:     t=2008 popl,2000 = c shi(l),c,2000  (GDPc     /GDPc    )
Control variables: Per capita added value in 100,000 euros and unemployment rate in 2004 at local labor
market level, Change in Firms between 2005-2008 as a share of initial number of firms in each commuting
zone in 2005.




                                                  63
Table A11: Robustness check - Effect of emigration rates on LLM wages (2008-15) con-
trolling for lagged outcome difference (2005-08)

                                                   (1)             (2)
                                                  Wagebill        CZ Wage
                                                 2008-15         2008-15

                       Emig Rate                    -0.033        -0.017***
                                                   (0.045)         (0.006)
                       Wagebillpre                   0.016
                                                   (0.065)
                        CZ Wagepre                                -0.546***
                                                                   (0.032)

                       Observations                  686             686
                       R-squared                    0.265           0.512
                       F-excl. instr.              12.273          12.634
                       Avg. Outcome                -0.113          -0.007
                       Avg. Outcome 2005          3486.004        1644.434
                       Avg. Treatment               0.825          0.825
                       Province FE                    X               X

Sample: Italian Local Labor Markets.
Specifications: 2SLS
Dependent variable: Change in LLMs wages.
Independent Variable: Emigration flows computed using AIRE registry enrollment as share of population
in 2000 instrumented by our instrumental variable of the pull emigration factor based on the pre-period
                            2015     m l,t                           2015     2008
LLM emigration network:     t=2008 popl,2000 = c shi(l),c,2000  (GDPc     /GDPc    )
Control variables: Per capita added value in 100,000 euros and unemployment rate in 2004 at local labor
market level, Change in Firms between 2005-2008 as a share of initial number of firms in each commuting
zone in 2005.




                                                  64
