                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE FOUR EQUATION NEW KEYNESIAN MODEL

                                          Eric R. Sims
                                        Jing Cynthia Wu

                                       Working Paper 26067
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26067


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Eric R. Sims and Jing Cynthia Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Four Equation New Keynesian Model
Eric R. Sims and Jing Cynthia Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 26067
July 2019
JEL No. E1,E50,E52

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper develops a New Keynesian model featuring financial intermediation, short and long
term bonds, credit shocks, and scope for unconventional monetary policy. The log-linearized
model reduces to four key equations ­ a Phillips curve, an IS equation, and policy rules for the
short term nominal interest rate and the central bank's long bond portfolio (QE). The four
equation model collapses to the standard three equation New Keynesian model under a simple
parameter restriction. Credit shocks and QE appear in both the IS and Phillips curves. Optimal
monetary policy entails adjusting the short term interest rate to offset natural rate shocks, but
using QE to offset credit market disruptions. The ability of the central bank to engage in QE
significantly mitigates the costs of a binding zero lower bound.


Eric R. Sims
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
esims1@nd.edu

Jing Cynthia Wu
Department of Economics
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
cynthia.wu@nd.edu
1     Introduction
The textbook three equation New Keynesian (NK) model (see, e.g., Woodford 2003 or Gal´           i
2008) has enormous influence in both policy circles and among academic researchers due
to its elegance and tractability. The model boils down to a forward-looking IS equation
characterizing aggregate demand, a Phillips curve describing aggregate supply, and a rule
for the central bank's principal policy tool, the short term interest rate. The model has
yielded several important insights, including the potential desirability of inflation targeting,
the gains from policy commitment over discretion, and the importance of having the policy
rate track the "natural" or "neutral" rate of interest.
    In spite of its myriad uses, the textbook model has proven inadequate for examining
a range of issues that have come to the fore in policy circles over the last decade. As
it abstracts from the financial sector, the model is unable to address the consequences of
financial market disruption of the sort that rocked the global economy in 2007-2009. It is also
incapable of directly speaking to the potential benefits and costs of quantitative easing (QE)
type policies. QE policies were among the first and most prominent of several unconventional
policy interventions deployed to fight the global financial crisis once policy rates were lowered
to zero. There is now a nascent literature incorporating QE into medium-scale DSGE models
(e.g. Gertler and Karadi 2011, 2013; Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian 2017; or Sims and Wu
2019b). While this work has proven useful and generated several important insights, these
quantitative frameworks lack the simplicity and transparency of the textbook three equation
model.
    Our paper bridges the gap between the complicated quantitative DSGE models that have
been developed to study QE with the elegance and tractability of the textbook three equation
model. Our model incorporates financial intermediaries, short and long term bonds, credit
market shocks, and scope for central bank bond holdings to be economically relevant. The
linearized version of our model reduces to four, rather than three, key equations. The IS
and Phillips curves are similar to the three equation benchmark. The innovation is that
credit shocks and central bank long bond holdings appear additively in both the IS and
Phillips curves. This differs from many ad-hoc treatments of financial disturbances, which
often simply include residuals in the IS equation meant to proxy for credit spreads (see, e.g.,
Smets and Wouters 2007). The model is closed with a rule for the short term policy rate
(as in the benchmark three equation model) and a rule for the central bank's long bond
portfolio.
    We study optimal monetary policy in the context of our four equation model. Reflecting
central banks' dual mandate, we focus on an objective function that minimizes a weighted


                                                1
sum of volatilities of inflation and the output gap. Because credit shocks appear in the
Phillips curve, the so-called "Divine Coincidence" (Blanchard and Gal´    i 2007) does not hold,
and it is not possible to achieve the global minimum of the loss function with just one
policy instrument. Optimal policy entails adjusting the short term interest rate to track
fluctuations in the natural rate of interest (as in the benchmark three equation model),
but adjusting the long bond portfolio to offset the effects of credit market disturbances.
Our model therefore has an implication that differs from the conventional wisdom among
policymakers that adjustment of short term interest rates is sufficient to meet a dual mandate
of price and output stability ­ in general, quantitative easing policies ought to be used all
the time to counter credit market shocks, not only when policy rates are constrained by the
zero lower bound (ZLB).
     We also explore the implications of the ZLB for policy. A couple of interesting results
emerge. First, credit market shocks need not have differential effects at the ZLB in compar-
ison to normal times. Adjusting the long bond portfolio in exactly the same way as it would
absent a ZLB constraint, the central bank is able to stabilize both inflation and the output
gap in response to credit shocks at the ZLB. Second, QE policies can serve as an effective (al-
beit imperfect) substitute for conventional policy actions in response to natural rate shocks.
Without QE available, output and inflation react suboptimally to natural rate shocks when
the short term policy rate is constrained, the more so the longer the anticipated period of
the ZLB. A central bank can partially offset these non-optimal responses by adjusting its
long bond portfolio. We derive an analytical expression for the optimal QE rule at the ZLB
as a function of the relative welfare weight on the output gap in the loss function. Though
it is not possible to completely stabilize both inflation and the gap, a central bank engaging
in QE operations can significantly reduce the costs of the ZLB.
     Our model has important implications for central banks facing a dual mandate to stabilize
both inflation and real economic activity due to the failure of the Divine Coincidence. First,
how much QE is desired at the ZLB depends critically on how much weight the central
bank puts on inflation vs. output fluctuations. The more weight the central bank puts
on the output gap, the less QE is required in response to a shock to the neutral rate of
interest. Second, suppose the central bank were not allowed to respond to a credit shock
with bond purchases. This was the operating framework of modern central banks prior to
the Great Recession. The direction for the optimal short rate response to a credit shock
depends on whether the central bank cares more about inflation or output stabilization. For
a positive credit shock, a central bank focusing solely on inflation would increase the short
rate; whereas if the central bank only cares about the output gap, it would instead cut the
short rate. Alternatively, if a central bank can use bond purchases all the time as a policy


                                               2
instrument, there need not be any conflict between the two aspects of the dual mandate.
    In the background of our four equation linear model, there are a number of different
agents. The production side of the economy is identical to the standard three equation
model. There are two types of households, which we refer to as the "parent" and the "child."
The representative parent consumes, supplies labor, and has an equity share in production
firms and financial intermediaries. It saves through one period nominal bonds. Each period,
it makes an equity transfer to financial intermediaries, provides a lump sum transfer to the
child, and receives dividends. The representative child does not supply labor and has no
equity interest in firms or intermediaries. It is less patient than the parent. The child may
not buy or sell short term debt, but may issue long term nominal bonds. It finances its
consumption as well as the coupon payments on outstanding debt via the lump sum transfer
it receives from the parent.
    Debt markets are segmented such that only financial intermediaries can simultaneously
access both the short term savings of the parent and the long term bonds issued by the child.
Market segmentation is crucial for QE policies to work. New financial intermediaries are born
each period and exist for only one period. They each receive a fixed amount of startup net
worth at birth and return accumulated net worth to the parent upon exiting. Because of this
setup, there is effectively a representative intermediary. In addition to startup net worth,
the representative intermediary finances its operations with short term bonds. On the asset
side of the balance sheet, it holds long term bonds issued by the child and interest-bearing
reserves issued by the central bank. The intermediary is subject to a risk-weighted leverage
constraint. Long bonds receive a risk-weight of one, while reserves have a risk-weight of
zero. Risk-weighted assets cannot exceed an exogenous multiple of net worth. We refer to
stochastic fluctuations in the leverage multiple as credit shocks. The model is calibrated
such that the risk-weighted leverage constraint always binds so that the return on long term
bonds is higher than that on short term bonds in expectation. The structure of financial
intermediaries can be considered as a special case of Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013) and
Sims and Wu (2019b).
    Unconventional monetary policy allows the central bank to also hold long term bonds
issued by the child, and to in effect serve as an additional financial intermediary. It finances
these holdings by creating interest-bearing reserves. It sets the interest rate on reserves, or
the policy rate, according to some policy rule. In equilibrium, the interest rate on reserves
equals the interest rate on short term bonds. Quantitative easing policies have effects iso-
morphic to positive credit shocks ­ when the central bank buys long term bonds, it eases
the constraint facing the intermediary, leading to an expansion in the supply of credit and a
reduction in long-short interest rate spreads.


                                               3
    Linearizing the model about the steady state, many of these details drop out, leaving a
four equation system. In addition to the two policy rules, the linearized IS curve expresses
the current output gap as a function of the expected future output gap and the spread
between the real short term interest rate and the natural rate of interest, which is identical
to the textbook three equation model. What is new in our model is a term related to credit
shocks and the central bank's long bond portfolio. The Phillips curve relates current inflation
to the current output gap, expected future inflation, and a new term capturing credit shocks
as well as the central bank's long bond portfolio. Under the parameter restriction that all
households are parents, both the IS and Phillips curves reduce to their standard expressions
in the benchmark three equation model. Importantly, credit shocks and the central bank's
long bond portfolio appear in both the IS and Phillips curves. This means that such shocks
have both "demand" and "supply" effects, and also means that credit shocks generate a sort
of endogenous "cost-push" term.
    Our paper relates to a large literature on monetary policy in the New Keynesian model
more generally and to that on unconventional policy actions in particular. Clarida et al.'s
(1999) seminal work concerns monetary policy design in the canonical three equation New
Keynesian model. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Adam and Billi (2006, 2007) make
early contributions on the consequences of a binding ZLB for optimal policy. Gertler and
Karadi (2011, 2013), Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2017), Sims and Wu (2019b), and
Mau (2019) all represent attempts to model large scale asset purchases in a quantitative
DSGE framework. Distinct from this strand of the literature, one important contribution
of our paper is to incorporate the financial frictions giving rise to effective QE policies in
these papers into the tractable small-scale New Keynesian model of Clarida, Gal´  i and Gertler
(1999) that is so popular among academics and policymakers alike. In that sense, our paper
is similar to Wu and Zhang (2017), who propose replacing the policy rate in the three
equation New Keynesian model with the shadow Federal Funds rate at the ZLB, meant as
a summary statistic for unconventional interventions. We differ in that our model features
four equations instead of three, explicitly modeling QE as a separate policy instrument.
    The implications of our model relate to an empirical literature suggesting that unconven-
tional policy actions have been successful antidotes to the ZLB ­ see, for example, Swanson
and Williams (2014), Wu and Xia (2016), Wu and Zhang (2017, 2019), Gar´         in, Lester and
Sims (2019), Debortoli, Gal´ i and Gambetti (2016), Mouabbi and Sahuc (2017), Swanson
(2018a,b), and Sims and Wu (2019a). Different from this literature, we emphasize why and
how the substitutability between conventional and unconventional policy tools is not perfect.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Sec-
tion 3 discusses optimal central bank policy. Section 4 offers concluding thoughts.


                                              4
2       Model
This section presents our model. We first present the four equation linearized model in
Subsection 2.1, on which we base our subsequent analysis. The full non-linear model is
derived from first principles in Subsection 2.2. Subsection 2.3 studies positive properties of
a calibrated version of the model before turning to normative issues in Section 3. Details
are available in Appendixes A - C.


2.1     The Four Equation Model
The principal equations of our linearized model are an IS curve:

                  1-z s
 xt = Et xt+1 -                      f
                      rt - Et t+1 - rt    bF I (Et t+1 - t ) + ¯
                                       -z ¯                    bcb (Et qet+1 - qet ) , (2.1)
                   

and a Phillips Curve:

                                        z ¯F I
                          t = xt -          b t + ¯
                                                  bcb qet +  Et t+1 .                              (2.2)
                                        1-z

    Lowercase variables with a t subscript denote log deviations about the non-stochastic
                                                 f                                     f
steady state. t is inflation and xt = yt - yt       denotes the output gap, where yt     is the
equilibrium level of output consistent with price flexibility and no credit shocks. Similarly,
  f
rt  denotes the natural rate of interest ­ i.e. the real interest rate consistent with output
equaling potential. It follows an exogenous process. t captures credit conditions in the
financial market; positive values correspond to more favorable conditions. This is described
further in Subsection 2.2. We take it to be exogenous and henceforth refer to it as a credit
                                                                                              s
shock. qet denotes the real market value of the central bank's long term bond portfolio. rt
is the short term nominal interest.
    Letters without t subscripts are parameters or steady state values.  ,  , and  are
standard parameters ­  measures the inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution,  is
a subjective discount factor, and  is the elasticity of inflation with respect to real marginal
cost.1 ¯bF I and ¯
                 bCB are parameters measuring the steady state long-term bond holdings of
financial intermediaries and the central bank, respectively, relative to total outstanding long
term bonds. These coefficients sum to one, i.e. ¯ bF I + ¯
                                                         bCB = 1.
    As described in Subsection 2.2, there are two kinds of households in our model. We will
refer to these types of households as "parent" and "child," respectively. The parent is the
   In particular,  = (1-)(1
    1
                            
                             - )
                                   is the standard expression in the three equation model, where   [0, 1)
measures the probability of non-price adjustment.



                                                   5
standard household in a textbook New Keynesian model ­ it consumes, borrows or saves
via one-period bonds, supplies labor, and owns firms. The child does not supply labor nor
does it have an equity interest in production firms. It is less patient than the parent and
finances its consumption by issuing long term bonds. It pays the servicing cost of these long
term bonds with a transfer from the parent each period. The parameter z  [0, 1) represents
the share of children in the total population.  is the elasticity of real marginal cost with
respect to the output gap; it is conceptually similar to the corresponding parameter in the
standard three equation model, but augmented to account for two types of households.2 Our
model collapses to the standard three equation NK model when z = 0. In this case, credit
shocks and the central bank's long bond portfolio are irrelevant for the equilibrium dynamics
of output and inflation. In addition,  reduces to the same expression as in the standard
model.
    Our four equation New Keyneian model consists of (2.1)-(2.2), together with policy rules
                                   s
for the short term interest rate rt  and central bank's long bond portfolio qet . Simple rule-
based policies are specified in Subsection 2.3 for positive analyses, whereas we discuss optimal
policies in Section 3.

QE vs. Conventional Monetary Policy Let us highlight an important difference be-
tween a QE shock and a conventional monetary policy shock concerning the impact on
inflation. In our model, a QE shock is less inflationary than a conventional monetary policy
rate cut. This finding is in-line with the results in the richer model of Sims and Wu (2019b),
and empirically consistent with the lack of inflationary pressures from the expansive QE
operations in the US and other parts of the world in the wake of the Great Recession.
Economically, this finding emerges because the qet term enters in both the IS, (2.1), and
Phillips Curves, (2.2). In particular, qet enters with a positive sign in the IS relationship,
and hence serves as a positive demand shock, but with a negative sign in the Phillips Curve,
and hence acts as a sort of endogenous "cost-push" shock. Both of these channels make QE
expansionary for output, but have competing effects on inflation.


2.2       Derivation of the Four Equation Model
In this subsection, we present, from first principles, the economic environment giving rise to
the linearized four equation model laid out in Subsection 2.1. The economy is populated by
the following agents: two types of households (parent and child), a representative financial
intermediary, production firms, and a central bank. We discuss the problems of each below.
  2                       (1-z )+
      In particular,  =     1-z   ,   where  is the inverse Frisch labor supply elasticity for the parent.



                                                          6
2.2.1   Parent

A representative parent receives utility from consumption, Ct and disutility from labor, Lt .
It discounts future utility flows by   (0, 1). Its lifetime utility is:

                                                      -
                                                   Ct1+j -1   L1+
                                                               t+j
                         Vt = max Et          j             -      .                       (2.3)
                                       j =0
                                                     1-       1+

 > 0 is the inverse elasticity of intertemporal substitution,   0 is the inverse Frisch
elasticity, and  > 0 is a scaling parameter.
    The nominal price of consumption is Pt . The parent earns nominal income from labor,
with a wage of Wt , receives dividends from ownership in firms and financial intermediaries,
            FI
Dt and Dt      , respectively, and receives a lump sum transfer from the central bank, Tt . It
                                                                                         s
can save via one period nominal bonds, St , which pay gross nominal interest rate Rt       . In
addition, it makes a time-varying transfer, Xtb , to the child each period, as well as a fixed
transfer, X F I , to financial intermediaries.

                               s                      FI              b        FI
          Pt Ct + St  Wt Lt + Rt-1 St-1 + Pt Dt + Pt Dt + Pt Tt - Pt Xt - Pt X    .        (2.4)

  The objective is to pick a sequence of consumption, labor, and one period bonds to
maximize (2.3) subject to the sequence of (2.4). The optimality conditions are standard:



                                 L  t  = Ct- wt ,                                          (2.5)
                                                    -
                                              Ct
                                 t-1,t =              ,                                    (2.6)
                                             Ct-1
                                           s
                                    1 = Rt   Et t,t+1 t+1 .                                (2.7)

    In (2.5), wt = Wt /Pt is the real wage; and in (2.7), t = Pt /Pt-1 is gross inflation. t-1,t
is the parent's stochastic discount factor.

2.2.2   Child

The child gets utility from consumption, Cb,t , and does not supply labor. Its flow utility
function is the same as the parent, but it discounts future utility flows by b <  ; i.e. it is
less patient than the parent. Its lifetime utility is:

                                                        1-
                                                   j   Cb,t +j - 1
                                Vb,t = Et          b               .                       (2.8)
                                            j =0
                                                         1-


                                                   7
    The child can borrow/save through long term bonds, the new issuance of which is denoted
by CBt . These bonds are structured as perpetuities with decaying coupon payments, as in
Woodford (2001). Coupon payments decay at rate   [0, 1]. Issuing one unit of bonds in
period t obligates the issuer to a coupon payment of 1 dollar in t + 1,  dollars in t + 2, 2
dollars in t + 3, and so on. The total coupon liability due in t + 1 from past issuances is
therefore:

                          Bt = CBt + CBt-1 + 2 CBt-2 + . . . .                         (2.9)

    The attractive feature of these decaying coupon bonds is that one only needs to keep
track of the total outstanding bonds, Bt , rather than individual issues. In particular:

                                    CBt = Bt - Bt-1 .                                 (2.10)

   New issuances in period t trade at market price Qt dollars. Because of the structure of
coupon payments, the prices of bonds issued at previous dates are proportional to the price
of new issues; i.e. bonds issued in t - j trade at j Qt in t. The total value of the bond
portfolio can therefore conveniently be written as Qt Bt .
   The nominal value of consumption plus coupon payments on outstanding debt cannot
exceed the value of new bond issuances plus the nominal value of the transfer from the
parent. The flow budget constraint facing the child is therefore:

                         Pt Cb,t + Bt-1  Qt (Bt - Bt-1 ) + Pt Xtb .                   (2.11)

   Define the gross return on the long bond as:

                                       b     1 + Qt
                                      Rt =          .                                 (2.12)
                                               Qt-1
   The optimality condition for the child is an Euler equation for long term bonds, where
b,t-1,t denotes its stochastic discount factor:


                                                        -
                                            Cb,t
                              b,t-1,t = b              ,                              (2.13)
                                          Cb,t-1
                                                   b     -1
                                   1 = Et b,t,t+1 Rt+1 t+1 .                          (2.14)




                                             8
2.2.3   Financial Intermediaries

A representative financial intermediary (FI) is born each period and exits the industry in
the subsequent period. It receives an exogenous and fixed amount of real net worth from
the parent household, X F I . It also attracts deposits, StF I , from the parent household. It
                                                            FI
can hold newly issued long bonds issued by the child, CBt      , or reserves on account with the
central bank, REtF I . The FI is structured as a special case of intermediaries in Sims and Wu
(2019b) and Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013), with intermediaries exiting after each period
with probability one. Because the probability of exit after each period is unity, we can think
of there being a (newly born) representative FI each period.
    The balance sheet condition of the FI is:

                                   FI
                              Qt CBt  + REtF I = StF I + Pt X F I .                      (2.15)
                           s                                        re
    The FI pays interest, Rt , on short term debt, earns interest, Rt  , on reserves, and earns
                                                          b
a return on long term bonds carried from t into t + 1, Rt  +1 .
    Upon exiting after period t, the FI therefore returns a dividend to the parent household
that satisfies:

                 FI     b      s      FI    re   s     FI   s      FI
                Dt+1 = Rt+1 - Rt Qt CBt + (Rt - Rt ) REt + Rt Pt X                       (2.16)
                                   FI
    The FI may freely choose CBt       and REtF I . Since it exits after one period, it does not
                                FI
take into how its choice of CBt    will affect the stock of bonds over which future FIs will act
as custodians.
    The FI is subject to a risk-weighted leverage constraint. We assume that this constraint
applies to both newly purchased as well the outstanding stock of long bonds (in addition
to on-balance sheet assets and liabilities as shown in (2.15), the FI acts as a custodian of
the existing stock of long term bonds.) The value of the bonds over which the FI serves
                      FI
as custodian is Qt Bt  -1 . Long term bonds receive a risk weight of unity, while reserves on
account with the central bank have a risk weight of zero. The leverage constraint is:

                                    FI    FI          FI
                               Qt CBt  + Bt-1  t Pt X    .                               (2.17)

    In other words, (2.17) says that the value of long bonds held by the FI cannot exceed
a time-varying multiple, t , of its nominal net worth, Pt X F I . We assume that t obeys a
known stochastic process and refer to changes in t as credit shocks.
    The objective of the FI is to maximize the expected one period ahead value of (2.16),
discounted by the nominal stochastic discount factor of the parent household, i.e. t,t+1 - 1
                                                                                         t+1 ,



                                               9
subject to (2.17). Letting t denote the multiplier on the constraint, the first order conditions
are:



                                 Et t,t+1 - 1  b      s
                                          t+1 Rt+1 - Rt = t ,                             (2.18)
                                 Et t,t+1 - 1   re   s
                                          t+1 (Rt - Rt ) = 0.                             (2.19)

   (2.19) says that the FI will hold an indeterminate amount of reserves so long as the return
               re                              s
on reserves, Rt   , equals the cost of funds, Rt . Absent a leverage constraint, the FI would
buy newly issued long bonds up until the point at which the expected return on long bonds
equals the cost of funds. The constraint being binding, i.e. t > 0, generates excess returns.

2.2.4   Production

The production side of the economy is split into three sectors: final output, retail output,
and wholesale output. There is a representative final good firm and representative wholesale
producer. There are a continuum of retailers, indexed by f  [0, 1].
    The final output good, Yt , is a CES aggregate of retail outputs, with  > 1 the elasticity
of substitution. This gives rise to a standard demand function for each variety of retail
output and an aggregate price index:


                                                            -
                                             Pt (f )
                               Yt ( f ) =                         Yt ,                    (2.20)
                                              Pt
                                                                            1
                                                  1                        1-
                                                                 1-
                                   Pt =               Pt ( f )        df        .         (2.21)
                                              0


    Retailers purchase wholesale output at price Pm,t and repackage it for sale at Pt (f ). Pm,t
has the interpretation as nominal marginal cost. Retailers are subject to a Calvo (1983)
pricing friction ­ each period, there is a probability 1 -  that a retailer may adjust its price,
with   [0, 1]. When given the opportunity to adjust, retailers pick a price to maximize the
present discounted value of expected profits, where discounting is by the stochastic discount
factor of the parent household. Optimization results in an optimal reset price, P,t , that is
common across updating retailers. Letting pm,t = Pm,t /Pt denote real marginal cost, the
optimal reset price satisfies:




                                                  10
                                               X1,t
                                P,t =               ,                                                 (2.22)
                                          - 1 X2,t
                                X1,t   = Pt pm,t Yt +  Et t,t+1 X1,t+1 ,                              (2.23)
                                X2,t = Pt -1 Yt +  Et t,t+1 X2,t+1 .                                  (2.24)

       The wholesale firm produces output, Ym,t , according to a linear technology in labor:

                                               Ym,t = At Lt .                                         (2.25)

At is an exogenous productivity disturbance obeying a known stochastic process. Letting
wt = Wt /Pt denote the real wage, the optimality condition is standard:

                                               wt = pm,t At .                                         (2.26)

2.2.5      Central Bank
                                                           cb
The central bank can hold a portfolio of long bonds, Bt       . It finances this portfolio via the
creation of reserves, REt . Its balance sheet condition is:

                                                  cb
                                              Qt Bt  = REt .                                          (2.27)

    We will refer to the real value of the central bank's bond portfolio as QEt = Qt bcb
                                                                                      t , where
bcb     cb
 t = Bt /Pt , and shall assume that the central bank may freely choose this (equivalently, it
can freely choose reserves). The central bank potentially earns an operating surplus that is
returned to the parent household via a lump sum transfer.3 This transfer satisfies:

                                          b                 re
                                 Pt Tt = Rt Qt-1 Bcb,t-1 - Rt-1 REt-1 .                               (2.28)

2.2.6      Aggregation and Equilibrium

Market-clearing requires that REt = REtF I and St = StF I (i.e. the FI holds all reserves
issued by the central bank and all one period bonds issued by the parent household), while
       FI     cb
Bt = Bt   + Bt   (i.e. the total stock of long term bonds issued by the child must be held by
   3
     Alternatively, we could assume that the transfer is returned to the fiscal authority, who then adjusts
the lump sum tax/transfer levied on households accordingly. Because we are not interested in describing
fiscal policy, it is simpler to instead assume that the central bank provides rebates to the parent household
directly.




                                                     11
the FI or the central bank). Some algebraic substitutions give rise to a standard aggregate
resource constraint:

                                          Yt = Ct + Cb,t .                                   (2.29)
                                                                                        p
   Aggregating across retailers gives rise to the aggregate production function, where vt is
a measure of price dispersion:

                                                p
                                           Yt v t = At Lt .                                  (2.30)

   We assume that the transfer from parent to child, Xtb , is time-varying in a way that
represents a complete payoff of outstanding debt obligations each period:

                                     Pt Xtb = (1 + Qt )Bt-1 .                                (2.31)

    Neither the parent nor the child behaves as though it can influence the value of Xtb .
The particular assumption embodied in (2.31) implies that, even though the child solves
a dynamic problem and has a forward-looking Euler equation, (2.14), its consumption is
effectively static:

                                          Pt Cb,t = Qt Bt .                                  (2.32)

This assumption on the parent-child transfer allows us to eliminate a state variable and
simplifies the system to four equations, although it is not crucial for the qualitative or
quantitative properties of the model.
     At and t obey conventional AR(1) processes in the log. We define potential output,
   f
Yt , as the equilibrium level of output consistent with price flexibility (i.e.  = 0) and where
                                                                               f
the credit shock is constant, i.e. t = . The natural rate of interest, Rt        , is the gross real
                                                                            f
short term interest rate consistent with this level of output. Xt = Yt /Yt is the gross output
gap. The full set of equilibrium conditions are contained in Appendix A. The system can be
greatly simplified, and the equilibrium conditions log-linearized about a zero inflation steady
state can be reduced to the four equation system presented at the beginning of this section;
i.e. (2.1)-(2.2) along with rules for the short term policy rate and the central bank's long
bond portfolio. Details of the linearization may be found in Appendix B.


2.3    The Four vs. the Three Equation Model
Before turning to normative optimal policy analysis in Section 3, we first explore the positive
properties of the linearized model as described above in Subsection 2.1.

                                                 12
   For the purpose of studying positive properties of the model, we suppose that the short
term rate follows a Taylor-type rule while the long bond portfolio obeys an exogenous process:

                              s      s
                             rt = r rt -1 + (1 - r )  t + x xt + sr r,t ,                               (2.33)

                                          qet = q qet-1 + sq q,t .                                      (2.34)
   f
  rt and t , the natural rate of interest and credit shock, respectively, obey stationary
AR(1) processes:

                                            f       f
                                           rt =  f rt-1 + sf f,t ,                                      (2.35)

                                            t =  t-1 + s ,t .                                           (2.36)


    A full description and justification of the underlying parameter values of the non-linear
model is provided in Appendix C. Here, we focus only on the parameter values necessary
for solving the linearized model. These parameter values are listed in Table 1. The dis-
count factor and elasticity of substitution take on standard values. The child-share of total
consumption is set to one third. Given our calibrations of other steady state parameters
(discussed further in Appendix C), we have ¯   bF I = 0.7 and ¯
                                                              bcb = 0.3. The elasticity of infla-
tion with respect to real marginal cost is  = 0.086 and the elasticity of the output gap with
respect to real marginal cost is  = 2, implying a slope of the Phillips Curve of 0.21. The
parameters of the Taylor rule are standard. The autoregressive parameters in the exogenous
processes are all set to 0.8.
    Figure 1 displays impulse responses to a one percent positive shock to potential output.4
The solid black lines are responses in our baseline four equation model, whereas the dashed
blue lines depict responses in the conventional three equation model (i.e. our model imposing
z = 0). These responses are familiar and do not differ much in our model compared to the
more standard three equation model. Output increases but by less than potential, resulting
in a negative output gap. This puts downward pressure on inflation, which is met with policy
accommodation with the short term interest rate declining. Relative to three equation model,
output reacts slightly less on impact in our model, though this difference is not large.
   4
    As written, the linearized model presented in Subsection 2.1 writes the exogenous process in terms of
the natural rate of interest. As shown in Appendix B, there is a mapping between the natural rate of interest
and potential output. When comparing the four equation to the three equation model, the mapping between
the natural rate of interest and potential output is not identical due to the presence of z in the four equation
model. The comparison is more natural for an equal sized shock to potential output rather than the natural
rate of interest.



                                                      13
                               Table 1: Parameter Values of Linearized Model


                          Parameter       Value     Description (Target)
                                          0.995     Discount factor
                          z               0.33      Consumption share of child
                                          1         Inverse elasticity of substitution
                          ¯
                          bF I            0.70      Weight on leverage in IS/PC curves
                          ¯
                          bcb             0.30      Weight on QE in IS/PC curves
                                          0.086     Elasticity of inflation w.r.t. marginal cost
                                          2         Elasticity of gap w.r.t. marginal cost
                          r               0.8       Taylor rule smoothing
                                          1.5       Taylor rule inflation
                          x               0         Taylor rule gap
                          f               0.8       AR natural rate
                                          0.8       AR leverage
                          q               0.8       AR QE
Note: this table lists the values of calibrated parameters of the linearized four equation model.



    Figure 2 plots impulse responses to a conventional monetary policy shock. The size and
sign of the shock are chosen to generate the same impact response of output to the potential
output shock in the four equation model. Output (and hence the output gap) rises on impact
before reverting to its pre-shock value. Inflation rises and follows a similar dynamic path as
output. As in the case of the potential output shock, there is little meaningful difference in
the responses of variables in our four equation model relative to the baseline three equation
model.
    Figure 3 plots impulse responses to a leverage (t ) or QE (qet ) shock. Because these
differ only according to scale in the linear system (i.e. ¯
                                                          bF I = ¯
                                                                 bcb ), because we have assumed
equal AR parameters (0.8), and because the shock sizes are normalized to produce the same
impact response of output, the IRFs of endogenous variables to a leverage or QE shock are
identical. We therefore only show one set of impulse responses.
    Unlike responses to the other shocks, in Figure 3, there is a meaningful difference between
the four equation model and the three equation model. In the three equation model, both
shocks are irrelevant for the dynamics of endogenous variables. In our four equation model,
an increase in leverage (equivalently a central bank purchase of long bonds) is expansionary
for output. In the current calibration, such an expansion also results in an increase in
inflation and a resulting increase in the short term interest rate. That financial shocks have
economic effects in-line with the traditional understanding of an aggregate demand shock
and the fact that there is scope for QE policies represent a key advancement in our four
equation model relative to the standard three equation model. These properties are critical
for understanding the post-Crisis economy.


                                                               14
                                    Figure 1: IRFs to Natural Rate Shock


                  0.6                                                         0




                                                            Output Gap
                  0.4                                                       -0.2
        Output




                  0.2                                                       -0.4


                    0                                                       -0.6
                         0   5        10     15        20                          0   5     10       15       20
                                   Horizon                                                 Horizon

                    0                                                         0

                                                            Interest Rate
                                                                            -0.2
      Inflation




                  -0.5

                                                                            -0.4
                                                                                                     4 eq NK
                   -1                                                                                3 eq NK

                                                                            -0.6
                         0   5        10     15        20                          0   5     10       15       20
                                   Horizon                                                 Horizon
Notes: Black solid lines: IRFs to a one percentage point shock to the natural rate of output in the four
equation model. Output and the output gap are expressed in percentage points, while the responses of
inflation and the short term interest rate are expressed in annualized percentage points. Blue dashed lines:
IRFs to the same-sized natural rate shock in the baseline three equation NK model.


    As noted above, an expansionary QE shock is less inflationary than a conventional mone-
tary policy shock. Quantitatively comparing Figure 2 with Figure 3, one observes that a QE
shock that increases output by the same amount as a conventional policy rate cut results in
about one-third the response of inflation. Another important difference between a QE shock
and a conventional policy shock concerns how each affects the yield curve. Though a long
term interest rate does not appear in the baseline four equation model in Subsection 2.1,
one is operating in the background and can be inferred from an alternative representation
of the IS curve (which is derived in Appendix B):

                                                  1 s               z     b      s
                                 yt = Et yt+1 -    (rt - Et t+1 ) -   Et rt+1 - rt .                                (2.37)
                                                                    
    b
Et rt+1 is the expected return on the long bond in the model. Hence, the last term in (2.37)


                                                            15
                                        Figure 2: IRFs to Policy Shock


                   0.6                                                   0.6




                                                            Output Gap
                   0.4                                                   0.4
       Output




                   0.2                                                   0.2


                    0                                                     0
                         0   5     10       15     20                          0   5     10        15      20
                                 Horizon                                               Horizon

                    1                                                     0

                                                        Interest Rate                            4 eq NK
                                                                        -0.2                     3 eq NK
       Inflation




                   0.5
                                                                        -0.4


                    0                                                   -0.6
                         0   5     10       15     20                          0   5     10        15      20
                                 Horizon                                               Horizon
Notes: Black solid lines: IRFs to a conventional monetary policy shock. The size and sign of the shock
are chosen to generate the same impact response of output as in Figure 1. Output and the output gap are
expressed in percentage points, while the responses of inflation and the short term interest rate are expressed
in annualized percentage points. Blue dashed lines: IRFs to the same-sized policy shock in the baseline three
equation NK model.


can be interpreted as a credit spread.
    The conventional expansionary monetary policy shock results in a steeping of the yield
curve (i.e. an increase in the long rate relative to the short rate). In contrast, a stimulative
QE shock results in a flattening of the yield curve. QE works by freeing up space on the FI's
balance sheet to purchase long bonds, thereby pushing the price of these bonds higher and
the yield lower. There is no direct effect on the short term rate except through the policy
rule. As calibrated, the short rate actually rises modestly (due to the slightly inflationary
nature of a QE shock under the current calibration). Impulse responses of the long-short
spread to both a conventional policy shock and a QE shock are depicted in Figure 4.




                                                        16
                                 Figure 3: IRFs to Leverage/QE Shock



                   0.4                                                     0.4

                   0.3                                                     0.3




                                                              Output Gap
          Output




                   0.2                                                     0.2

                   0.1                                                     0.1

                    0                                                       0
                         0   5     10      15     20                             0   5     10      15        20
                                 Horizon                                                 Horizon

                                                                           0.1
                   0.2                                                                             4 eq NK
                                                                                                   3 eq NK
                                                       Interest Rate

                 0.15
     Inflation




                                                                       0.05
                   0.1

                 0.05

                    0                                                       0
                         0   5     10      15     20                             0   5     10      15        20
                                 Horizon                                                 Horizon
Notes: Black solid lines: IRFs to a leverage (t ) or QE (qet ) shock. The size and sign of the shocks are chosen
to generate the same impact response of output as in Figure 1. Because the QE and leverage shock only
differ according to scale in the linearized model (i.e. ¯
                                                        bF I = ¯bcb ) and the AR parameters are the same, the
normalized impulse responses are identical. Output and the output gap are expressed in percentage points,
while the responses of inflation and the short term interest rate are expressed in annualized percentage
points. Blue dashed lines: IRFs to the same-sized policy shock in the baseline three equation NK model.


3       Optimal Monetary Policy
In this section, we explore the design of optimal monetary policy in the context of our four
equation NK model. Leverage shocks generate an endogenous cost-push term in the Phillips
Curve, so they lead to a non-trivial tradeoff for a central bank wishing to solely implement
policy via adjustment of the short term interest rate. As such, heretofore unconventional
policies like quantitative easing ought to be used even when the short rate is unconstrained
by the ZLB. Further, quantitative easing policies can be a useful (albeit imperfect) substitute
for conventional policy when the short term rate is constrained by the ZLB.
    Given policymakers' emphasis on the so-called dual mandate, we focus on a policy-


                                                       17
       Figure 4: Response of Long-Short Spread to Monetary and QE Shocks


                                      1.5
                                                                                          MP Shock
                                                                                          QE Shock
                  Long-Short Spread     1



                                      0.5



                                        0



                                      -0.5



                                       -1



                                      -1.5
                                             0   2   4   6   8     10      12   14   16     18       20
                                                                 Horizon
                                                                                                    b      s
Notes: This figures plots the responses of the annualized long short interest rate spread, i.e. Et rt+1 - rt ,
inferred from (2.37), to a conventional monetary policy shock (solid black) and a QE shock (dashed blue).
The shocks are normalized so as to generate the same impact increase in output as in Figure 2 and Figure 3.


relevant quadratic loss function in inflation and the output gap, which is also what much of
the literature has used:
                                         L = µx2     2
                                                t + t .                                (3.1)

µ  0 is the relative weight attached to fluctuations in the output gap. An expression
like (3.1) can be motivated as the micro-founded welfare criterion for a central bank in the
standard three equation NK model under certain assumptions.5 , 6
    In what follows, we first consider optimal policy when there are no constraints, and then
study optimal policy when only one policy tool is available.
   5
     In particular, in the benchmark model (3.1) would be the micro-founded loss function when a Pigouvian
tax is in place to undo the steady state distortion associated with monopolistic competition; see, e.g.,
Woodford (2003). The optimal weight on the output gap would satisfy µ =  , where  is the slope of
the Phillips Curve and is the elasticity of substitution across varieties of retail goods. For conventional
calibrations, this weight would be quite low.
   6
      In our four equation model, a micro-founded loss function would be more complicated due to the two
types of households, and would depend on arbitrary welfare weights on each. Rather than deriving such a
loss function, we choose to focus on a policy-relevant loss function like (3.1) and consider a variety of different
values of µ.




                                                                 18
3.1     Unconstrained Optimal Policy
We begin by studying optimal monetary policy when both policy instruments are available.
Because the credit shock appears in both the IS and Phillips curves, the so-called "Divine
Coincidence" (Blanchard and Gal´i 2007) does not hold. This gives rise to Theorem 1:

Theorem 1 It is not possible to completely stabilize both inflation and the output gap with
the adjustment of a single policy instrument when both credit and natural rate shocks are
present.

Proof : See Appendix D.

    Although the formal proof of Theorem 1 is more involved, the intuition is straightforward.
                                                                            s      f
In the benchmark three equation model with no credit shocks, setting rt        = rt  would be
consistent with xt = Et xt+1 = Et t+1 = 0 in the IS curve, (2.1), which would also be
consistent with t = xt = Et t+1 = 0 in the Phillips Curve, (2.2). In other words, the global
minimum of the loss function can be achieved by setting the short term interest rate equal to
the natural rate, which would also be equivalent to implementing a strict inflation target of
                                                                   f
t = 0.7 With credit shocks and z = 0, in contrast, setting rts
                                                               = rt  would entail fluctuations
in both t and xt . This result obtains because credit shocks appear in the Phillips curve as
well as the IS curve. Via similar logic, were the short term rate exogenously fixed, it would
not be possible to endogenously adjust qet so as to implement t = xt = 0 either.
    Given the impossibility result of Theorem 1, the central bank should use both the short
term rate and its long bond portfolio as policy instruments. Doing so, it is in principle
possible to achieve the global minimum of the loss function with zero inflation and a zero
output gap. The optimal policy is described in Proposition 1.

Proposition 1 With both instruments available, optimal policy for any µ entails setting
      f             ¯F I
 s
rt = rt and qet = - b
                    bcb t
                    ¯     . This policy results in t = xt = 0.
                                                                  ¯F I
The proof of Proposition 1 is simple. Setting qet = - b       causes the t and qet terms
                                                          bcb t
                                                          ¯
to drop out from both the IS and Phillips curves. Then the model is isomorphic to the
                                                             s    f
standard three equation model, and consequently setting rt     = rt stabilizes both inflation
and the output gap in response to shocks to the natural rate of interest. The implication of
Proposition 1 is that QE-type policies in principle ought to be used to offset credit market
   7
    Note that we do not concern ourselves with issues of equilibrium determinacy. It is well-known that
interest rate pegs are inconsistent with a determinate rational expectations equilibrium (e.g. Sargent and
Wallace 1975). An interest rate rule with a sufficiently strong reaction to an endogenous variable, e.g.
 s     f                                               s    f
rt = rt  +  t with  > 1, would be consistent with rt     = rt and t = xt = 0 being the unique equilibrium
outcome.


                                                   19
shocks all the time, not only when conventional policy is constrained by the ZLB. While
somewhat counter to conventional wisdom, this implication is rather intuitive in our model
­ QE-type policies work similarly to exogenous credit market disturbances, and hence can
be deployed to offset them, leaving room for the short term policy rate to counter the sticky
price distortion as in the standard three equation model.


3.2     Optimal QE at the ZLB
Although QE type policies should always be used to offset credit market disturbances in
our model, they only became popular when short term interest rates were pushed to the
ZLB in the wake of the Financial Crisis and ensuing Great Recession at the end of the first
decade of the 2000s. In this section, we study how QE policies might be used to mitigate
the consequences of a binding ZLB.
    We approximate the effects of a binding ZLB in our linearized model following Eggertsson
and Woodford (2003) and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011). Suppose that a central
bank has been following the jointly optimal policy described in Proposition 1. But then in
                                                                          s
period t, suppose the natural rate of interest falls below zero, so that rt = 0. Suppose that it
will stay there in each subsequent period with probability   [0, 1), where this probability
is invariant over time. The expected duration of the ZLB is therefore 1/(1 - ). This means
that interest rate policy can be characterized as follows:

                                s
                               rt = 0                                                      (3.2)
                              s         f
                          Et rt+1 = Et rt+1 with probability 1 -                           (3.3)
                              s
                          Et rt+1 = 0 with probability                                     (3.4)

To solve for the equilibrium, we must in addition specify the path of the central bank's long
bond portfolio.

3.2.1   QE Only Stabilizing Credit Shocks

As a first step, we suppose that the central bank adjusts its long bond portfolio to offset
credit market disturbances regardless of whether the short term interest rate is stuck at the
                                  ¯F I
ZLB. This means that qet = - b    bcb t
                                  ¯     as in Proposition 1. We later study alternative policy
rules in which the long bond portfolio also reacts to natural rate shocks when the short term
interest rate is stuck at zero in Section 3.2.2.
    We solve for the policy functions assuming the short rate is stuck at zero and QE policies
are managed as described above. This gives rise to Lemma 1.


                                              20
Lemma 1 When the short rate is constrained for 1/(1 - ) periods in expectation and the
                                                 ¯F I
central bank's long bond portfolio obeys qet = - b
                                                 bcb t
                                                 ¯     , the equilibrium dynamics of inflation
                                                                     f            f
and the output gap are not impacted by credit shocks and xt = 1 rt     and t = 2 rt , where 1
and 2 are functions of underlying structural parameters.

Proof : See Appendix D.

    An important and novel implication of Lemma 1 is that the ZLB need not pose a problem
for credit shocks ­ adjusting QE policies exactly as a central bank would absent a ZLB
completely stabilizes the gap and inflation. The same is not true, however, for shocks to the
natural rate of interest.
    Focus on the parameter space where8

                                           1 > 0, 2 > 0.                                               (3.5)

Whereas absent a ZLB constraint the optimal policy would completely stabilize both inflation
and the output gap, at the ZLB both inflation and the gap fall in response to a negative
shock to the natural rate. The inability to lower the policy rate leaves policy too tight
relative to what is optimal, resulting in a contraction in aggregate demand. These effects
are more marked the larger is  (i.e. the longer is the expected duration of the ZLB).

3.2.2    QE: an Imperfect Substitute for Conventional Policy

The more interesting and policy-relevant question is whether, and to what extent, QE can
be an effective substitute for conventional monetary policy during periods in which the short
term interest rate is constrained by zero. This was the original motivation for the use of QE
in countries like Japan and the US when policy rates moved to the ZLB.

Lemma 2 When the short rate is constrained for 1/(1 - ) periods in expectation and the
                                                 f  ¯F I
central bank's long bond portfolio obeys qet =  rt -b
                                                    bcb t
                                                    ¯     , the equilibrium dynamics of infla-
                                                      f                f
tion and the output gap are characterized by xt = 1 rt   and t = 2 rt    , where:

                                            1 = 1 + d1                                                 (3.6)
                                            2 = 2 + d2                                                 (3.7)
   8
    As noted in Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2014), a caveat here is that for sufficiently large , the
signs of 1 and 2 can flip from positive to negative (see, e.g., (D.14)-(D.15) in Appendix D). Where this
perverse sign flip occurs depends on the values of other parameters, such as the slope of the Phillips Curve,
 . We restrict attention to values of  consistent with 1 and 2 being positive. An alternative experiment
would be to make the duration of the ZLB deterministic rather than stochastic. There would be no sign flip
at some sufficiently long duration, but the analytic expressions for 1 and 2 would be significantly more
complicated.


                                                     21
1 and 2 are identical to the values in Lemma 1.

Proof : See Appendix D.

    In Lemma 2, in addition to reacting optimally to credit shocks, the central bank's long
bond portfolio adjusts to changes in the natural rate of interest via the parameter  . The
resulting policy functions for the output gap and inflation are given in (3.6)-(3.7).
    We focus on values of  < 0, which means the central bank provides positive stimulus
in the face of a decline in the natural rate of interest. We also focus on the region of the
parameter space where, in addition to 1 and 2 being positive, d1 and d2 are positive. Most
standard calibrations of the underlying parameters place the economy in this region of the
parameter space. Hence, larger (in absolute value) values of  result in smaller declines in
both the output gap and inflation in response to a natural rate shock (i.e. 1 and 2 are less
positive). For sufficiently large values of  , the signs of 1 or 2 could flip from positive to
negative.
    Next, for a central bank following a QE rule such as the one described in Lemma 2, we
characterize the optimal value of the parameter  in Proposition 2:

Proposition 2 If the short rate is constrained for 1/(1 - ) periods in expectation, the
                                                 f  ¯F I
central bank's long bond portfolio obeys qet =  rt -b
                                                    bcb t
                                                    ¯     , and the central bank's objective is
to minimize (3.1), then the optimal  is:

                                             µd1 1 + d2 2
                                    = -                                                    (3.8)
                                               µd2    2
                                                 1 + d2


Proof : See Appendix D.

    Under our maintained assumptions concerning the parameter space, all relevant parame-
ters in (3.8) are positive, so that the optimal   < 0. Figure 5 plots responses of the output
gap and inflation to a natural rate shock when  is chosen optimally for different values of µ,
the relative weight on fluctuations in the output gap. The solid black line shows responses
when  = 0 for point of comparison. When the central bank places no weight on the output
gap (i.e. µ = 0), inflation is completely stabilized, the output gap increases quite markedly,
and the central bank increases the size of its long bond portfolio by a sizeable amount. When
virtually all weight is placed on the gap (µ = 100), in contrast, inflation declines, the gap is
completely stabilized, and the increase in the value of the long bond portfolio is much more
modest. The case of equal weight on inflation and the gap (shown in pink) is quite close to
the case of nearly all weight being on the gap in the loss function.


                                              22
Figure 5: IRFs to Natural Rate Shock at the ZLB, Endogenous QE, Optimal  ,
Different µ


                       0                                                  1

                                                                        0.5
      Natural Rate




                                                           Output Gap
                     -0.5                                                 0

                                                                        -0.5

                      -1                                                 -1
                            0   5     10        15    20                       0   5     10      15   20
                                    Horizon                                            Horizon

                       0                                                 10

                     -0.5
                                              =0
      Inflation




                                              =0
                                                                QE



                      -1                      =1                          5
                                              = 100
                     -1.5

                      -2                                                  0
                            0   5     10        15    20                       0   5     10      15   20
                                    Horizon                                            Horizon
Notes: Black solid lines: IRFs to a one hundred basis point shock to the natural rate of interest in the
four equation model when the short term interest rate is constrained by the ZLB for 1/(1 - ) periods in
expectation, where  = 3/4, and  = 0 so that there is no endogenous QE to the natural rate shock. The
dashed lines plot responses with the optimally chosen  for different welfare weights on the output gap,
µ. The output gap is expressed in percentage points, while the responses of inflation and is in annualized
percentage points. Blue dashed lines: IRFs to the same-sized natural rate shock in the baseline three equation
NK model.


   The results described in Figure 5 suggest that quantitative easing can be an effective,
albeit imperfect, substitute for conventional policy in response to natural rate shocks at the
ZLB. For example, in the case of equal relative weights (µ = 1), the output gap essentially
does not react to the natural rate shock and inflation falls by about two-thirds of a percent
given optimal QE policy. In comparison, with no endogenous QE at the ZLB, the output
gap would decline by nearly a full percentage point and inflation would fall by about three
times as much. Endogenous QE therefore entails a sizeable welfare improvement over doing
nothing at the ZLB. This will be true regardless of the value of µ.
   We close this section by plotting the optimal  as a function of µ. This is shown in

                                                           23
                            Figure 6: Optimal  As a Function of µ


                  -24

                  -26

                  -28

                  -30

                  -32
              *




                  -34

                  -36

                  -38

                  -40

                  -42
                        0   0.5    1     1.5     2     2.5    3     3.5     4     4.5     5



Notes: This figure plots the optimal  , i.e. (3.8), as a function of µ, the welfare weight on the output gap.


Figure 6. The optimal  is always negative, but is increasing in the relative weight on the
output gap. That is, for a central bank concerned solely with stabilizing inflation, it is
optimal to adjust the long bond portfolio quite strongly in response to natural rate shocks.
For a central bank more concerned with gap stabilization, the optimal QE response remains
sizeable but is nevertheless quite a bit smaller than for values of µ close to zero. The
optimal values of  are very similar for values of µ  0.5. To our knowledge, we are the
first to discuss how QE should be implemented differently when central banks place different
weights on their dual mandate.


3.3     Optimal Policy without QE
Next, consider an operating framework similar to the one prevailing in the US prior to the
Great Recession in which the central bank uses the short term interest rate as its sole policy
instrument. This subsection studies the optimal adjustment of the short term rate in this
scenario.

                                                                    s    f
Lemma 3 Suppose qet = 0 and the central bank obeys the policy rule rt = rt + t for all


                                                     24
t. Then, in equilibrium, the responses of the gap and inflation to credit shocks will be given
by xt = 1 t and t = 2 t , where:

                                      1 = 1 + a1                                         (3.9)
                                      2 = 2 + a2                                       (3.10)

Proof : See Appendix D.

   A policy rule such as the one described in Lemma 3 completely stabilizes the output
gap and inflation in response to natural rate shocks. This is not true conditional on credit
shocks, where in general it is impossible to choose  such that 1 = 2 = 0. Suppose that
the central bank wishes to choose  so as to minimize the welfare loss. The optimal  is
given in Proposition 3:
                                                                               s    f
Proposition 3 Suppose qet = 0 and the central bank obeys the policy rule rt      = rt + t for
all t. If the central bank's objective is to minimize (3.1), then the optimal  is:

                                           µ1 a1 + 2 a2
                                   = -                                                 (3.11)
                                            µa2     2
                                               1 + a2


Proof : See Appendix D.

    In general, the optimal value of  could be positive or negative, depending on the welfare
weight on the gap, µ, as well as other parameters of the model. Figure 7 plots the responses
of the output gap and inflation to a credit shock when  is chosen optimally as a function
of different values of µ, taking our baseline calibration of other parameters. The solid black
line shows responses for  = 0 for point of comparison.
    When there is no weight placed on the output gap, (shown with the blue dashed lines
corresponding to µ = 0), the central bank raises the short term interest rate in response
to a positive credit shock (i.e.   > 0). This completely stabilizes inflation but results
in a sizeable increase in the output gap. In contrast, if the relative weight on the output
gap is large (µ = 100, shown in the red dashed lines), the central bank optimally cuts the
policy rate in response to the credit shock (i.e.   < 0). This stabilizes the output gap
but results in a significant decline in inflation. For equal weights on the output gap and
inflation (µ = 1, depicted via pink dashed lines), the optimal responses are not so different
from the no response case ­ the policy rate decreases slightly, but the output gap rises and
the inflation rate falls.
    An interesting result from Figure 7 is that the sign of the optimal policy rate response
to a credit shock depends on the relative weight placed on the output gap. A central bank

                                             25
                                 Figure 7: IRFs to Credit Shock, Optimal  , Different µ


                        1                                                        0.15
        Credit Shock




                                                                    Output Gap
                                                                                   0.1
                       0.5
                                                                                 0.05


                        0                                                            0
                             0      5     10      15           20                         0   5     10      15   20
                                        Horizon                                                   Horizon

                        0                                                          0.1
                                                                      Short Rate
                   -0.2                                                              0
      Inflation




                                                       =0
                                                       =0
                                                       =1
                   -0.4                                = 100                       -0.1


                   -0.6                                                            -0.2
                             0      5     10      15           20                         0   5     10      15   20
                                        Horizon                                                   Horizon
                                                                                               s    f
Notes: IRFs to a one percentage point credit shock in the four equation model. qet = 0, while rt = rt + t .
The output gap is expressed in percentage points, while the responses of inflation and is in annualized
percentage points. The black solid line corresponds to  = 0. The dashed lines choose  optimally given
different welfare weights, µ.


mostly concerned with stabilizing output ought to cut the policy rate in the face of a positive
credit shock, whereas it should raise the policy rate if it is mostly concerned with stabilizing
inflation. Figure 8 plots the optimal value of  as a function of µ. Consistent with what is
observed in Figure 7, the optimal  is positive when µ is very small and turns negative as µ
gets bigger, crossing zero at around µ = 0.6. For central banks facing a dual mandate, this
tradeoff between stabilizing inflation or the output gap can be eliminated if they can deploy
QE.




                                                                    26
                               Figure 8: Optimal  As a Function of µ


        0.03


        0.02


        0.01


           0
    *




        -0.01


        -0.02


        -0.03


        -0.04
                0      0.5       1      1.5       2       2.5      3       3.5       4      4.5        5

                Notes: This figure plots the optimal  , i.e., as a function of µ, the welfare weight
                on the output gap.


4       Conclusion
In this paper, we developed a four equation New Keynesian model with credit shocks, fi-
nancial intermediation, short and long term debt, and a channel for central bank long bond
holdings to be economically relevant. The model inherits the tractability and elegance of
the benchmark three equation New Keynesian model. It mainly differs in that credit shocks
appear as wedges in both the IS and Phillips curves. In addition to a rule for the short term
policy rate, the fourth equation in the model is a rule for QE.
    The model allows us to address the consequences of credit market disturbances as well as
the effects of large scale asset purchases. We produce several analytical results concerning
monetary policy design. The presence of credit market frictions breaks the Divine Coinci-
dence, meaning it is not possible to completely stabilize inflation and the output gap with
just one policy instrument. Optimal monetary policy entails adjusting the short term inter-


                                                        27
est rate to match fluctuations in the natural rate of interest, but manipulating the central
bank's long bond portfolio so as to neutralize credit shocks. When it is not possible to ad-
just the short term interest (for example, because of a binding ZLB), credit market shocks
need not result in amplified fluctuations if the central bank adjusts its long bond portfolio
as it would in normal times. In response to natural rate shocks, adjustment of the central
bank's long bond portfolio can serve as a highly effective, albeit imperfect, substitute for
conventional policy.




                                             28
References
Adam, Klaus and Roberto M. Billi, "Optimal Monetary Policy under Commitment
 with a Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
 October 2006, 38 (7), 1877­1905.

  and , "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest
  Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, April 2007, 54 (3), 728­752.

Blanchard, Olivier and Jordi Gal´    i, "Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian
  Model," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, February 2007, 39 (s1), 35­65.

Calvo, Guillermo A., "Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework," Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 1983, 12 (3), 383­398.

Carlstrom, Charles T., Timothy S. Fuerst, and Matthias Paustian, "Fiscal Multi-
 pliers under an Interest Rate Peg of Deterministic versus Stochastic Duration," Journal
 of Money, Credit and Banking, 2014, 46 (6), 1293­1312.

  , , and , "Targeting Long Rates in a Model with Segmented Markets," American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, January 2017, 9 (1), 205­42.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, "When Is the Gov-
 ernment Spending Multiplier Large?," Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (1), 78­121.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gal´ i, and Mark Gertler, "The Science of Monetary Policy:
  A New Keynesian Perspective," Journal of Economic Literature, December 1999, 37 (4),
  1661­1707.

Debortoli, Davide, Jordi Gal´i, and Luca Gambetti, "On the Empirical (Ir)Relevance
 of the Zero Lower Bound Constraint," 2016. Universitat Pompeu Fabra working paper.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Michael Woodford, "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates
 and Optimal Monetary Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003, 34 (1),
 139­235.

Gal´
   i, Jordi, Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: an Introduction to the
 New Keynesian Framework, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2008.

Gar´
   in, Julio, Robert Lester, and Eric Sims, "Are Supply Shocks Contractionary at
 the ZLB? Evidence from Utilization-Adjusted TFP Data," The Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 2019, 101 (1), 160­175.

                                           29
Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi, "A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy," Jour-
 nal of Monetary Economics, 2011, pp. 17­34.

   and , "QE 1 vs. 2 vs. 3 . . .: A Framework for Analyzing Large-Scale Asset Purchases
  as a Monetary Policy Tool," International Journal of Central Banking, 2013, 9(S1), 5­53.

Mau, Ronald, "Purchases and Sales of Long Bonds as a Monetary Policy Instrument,"
 2019. Working Paper.

Mouabbi, Sarah and Jean-Guillaume Sahuc, "Evaluating the Macroeconomic Effects
 of the ECB's Unconventional Monetary Policies," 2017. Working paper.

Sargent, Thomas J and Neil Wallace, "Rational Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
  Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, April
  1975, 83 (2), 241­254.

Sims, Eric and Jing Cynthia Wu, "Are QE and Conventional Monetary Policy Substi-
  tutable?," 2019. University of Notre Dame Working Paper.

  and , "Evaluating Central Banks' Tool Kit: Past, Present, and Future," 2019. NBER
  Working Paper 26040.

Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters, "Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
 Bayesian DSGE Approach," American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (3), 586­606.

Swanson, Eric T., "The Federal Reserve is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on
 Nominal Interest Rates," 2018. NBER Working Paper 25123.

  , "Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on
  Financial Markets," 2018. Working Paper, University of California, Irvine.

   and John C. Williams, "Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium-
  and Longer-Term Interest Rates," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (10), 3154­3185.

Woodford, Michael, "Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability," Journal of Money, Credit
 and Banking, August 2001, 33 (3), 669­728.

  , Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton, NJ: Prince-
  ton University Press, 2003.

Wu, Jing Cynthia and Fan Dora Xia, "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Mon-
 etary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 2016, 48
 (2-3), 253­291.

                                            30
 and Ji Zhang, "A Shadow Rate New Keynesian Model," 2017. NBER Working Paper
No. 22856.

 and , "Global Effective Lower Bound and Unconventional Monetary Policy," Journal
of International Economics, 2019, 118, 200­216.




                                      31
A      The Full Non-Linear Model
This appendix describes the full set of non-linear equilibrium conditions of the model.
    The optimality condition for retail firms may be re-written in stationary terms by defining
p,t = P,t /Pt , x1,t = X1,t /Pt , and x2,t = X2,t /Pt -1 :
                                                     x1,t
                                        p,t =                                             (A.1)
                                                 - 1 x2,t
                              x1,t = pm,t Yt +  Et t,t+1 t+1 x1,t+1                       (A.2)
                                                            -1
                               x2,t = Yt +  Et t,t+1 t x2,t+1                             (A.3)
    The aggregate inflation rate evolves according to:

                                              1-      -1
                                   1 = (1 - )p ,t + t                                     (A.4)
    Price dispersion evolves according to:
                                   p                  p
                                  vt = (1 - )p-
                                              ,t + t vt-1                                 (A.5)
   Define lowercase variables as real values of nominal bonds, i.e. bt = Bt /Pt . The balance
sheet condition of the FI may be written:

                                    -1 F I
                            Qt bF I
                                t - t bt-1 + ret = st + X
                                                          FI
                                                                                          (A.6)
                         -1 F I
    Note that cbF I  FI
                t = bt - t bt-1 . The leverage constraint of the FI may be written:


                                        Qt bF I
                                            t  t X
                                                   FI
                                                                                          (A.7)
    The central bank's balance sheet can be written:

                                          Qt bcb
                                              t = ret                                     (A.8)
    Similarly, the market-clearing condition for long term bonds in real terms is:

                                         bt = bF I  cb
                                               t + bt                                     (A.9)
    The auxiliary QEt variable is just the real value of the central bank's long bond portfolio:

                                         QEt = Qt bcb
                                                   t                                     (A.10)
  Under our assumption on the transfer from parent to child, the consumption of the child
may be written:

                                          Cb,t = Qt bt                                   (A.11)
    At and t obey stationary AR(1) processes, where the non-stochastic steady state value
of productivity is normalized to unity and  denotes the non-stochastic steady state value
of leverage.



                                                32
                                             ln At = A ln At-1 + sA A,t                                               (A.12)
                                   ln t = (1 -  ) ln  +  ln t-1 + s ,t                                                (A.13)
    To close the model, it is necessary to specify rules for the policy rate and the central
bank's bond holdings. For the analysis in Subsection 2.3, we assume that the policy rate is
set according to a Taylor rule and that the central bank's bond holdings obey an exogenous
AR(1) process:


          s
      ln Rt = (1 - r ) ln Rs + (1 - r )  (ln t - ln ) + x (ln Yt - ln Ytf ) + sr r,t                                  (A.14)

                                ln QEt = (1 - q ) ln QE + q ln QEt-1 + sq q,t                                         (A.15)
In (A.14)-(A.15), Rs and QE denote the non-stochastic steady state values of the policy rate
and the central bank's balance sheet, respectively.
    Ytf can be found by solving the full system of equations assuming price flexibility ( = 0)
where the credit shock is constant, i.e. t = . Taking Ytf as given, the output gap is then:

                                                 ln Xt = ln Yt - ln Ytf                                               (A.16)
     The optimality conditions for the parent household, (2.5)-(2.7); the definition of the re-
turn on the long bond, (2.12); the optimality conditions for the child, (2.13)-(2.14); the
optimality conditions for the FI, (2.18)-(2.19); the balance sheet condition for the FI and
the leverage constraint re-written in real terms, (A.6)-(A.7); the labor demand condition
for the wholesale firm, (2.26); the optimality condition for optimal price-setting for retail-
ers, re-written in stationary form, (A.1)-(A.3); the market-clearing condition and aggregate
                                                                                                re
production function, (2.29)-(2.30); the central bank's policy rule for Rt                          , (A.14); the central
bank's balance sheet and definition of the QEt variable, (A.8) and (A.10); the central bank's
QE rule, (A.15); the consumption of the child, (A.11); the bond market-clearing condition,
(A.9); the evolution of inflation and price dispersion, (A.4)-(A.5); the definition of the out-
put gap, (A.16); and the exogenous processes (A.12)-(A.3) constitute twenty-seven variables,
                           s                  b
  Lt , Ct , wt , t-1,t , Rt  , t , b,t-1,t , Rt , Qt , bF I                     re
                                                        t , t , ret , st , t , Rt , p,t , x1,t , x2,t , pm,t , Yt , At , Cb,t ,
 p
vt , bcb,t , bt , QEt , Xt in twenty-seven equations.


B       Details of the Linearized Model
This Appendix provides details of the linearization of the non-linear model, the equilibrium
conditions for which are given in Appendix A. Where possible, lowercase variables denote log
deviations from steady state, e.g. t = ln t - ln . Where the corresponding level variable
is already lowercase, a "hat" is put atop the relevant variable to denote a log deviation from
steady state, e.g. pm,t = ln pm,t - ln pm . Variables without a time subscript denote non-
stochastic steady state values. The model is linearized about a steady state with zero trend
inflation (i.e.  = 1) where the leverage constraint on intermediaries binds. The complete
list of linearized equilibrium conditions are as follows:


                                                             33
                                            lt = -ct + wt                                                  (B.1)
                                        t-1,t = - (ct - ct-1 )                                             (B.2)
                                                     s
                                     0 = Et t,t+1 + rt - Et t+1                                            (B.3)
                                      b,t-1,t = - (cb,t - cb,t-1 )                                         (B.4)
                                           b    
                                          rt  = b qt - qt-1                                                (B.5)
                                                R
                                                      b
                                 0 = Et b,t,t+1 + Et rt+1 - Et t+1                                         (B.6)
                                              q t + bF I
                                                     t = t                                                 (B.7)
 QbF I (1 - -1 ) qt + QbF I bF I -1 FI FI   -2 FI
                             t -  Qb bt-1 +  Qb t + re · ret = s · st                                      (B.8)
                                                     Rb      b     Rs s
                           Et t,t+1 - Et t+1 +          E t rt+1 -   r = t                                 (B.9)
                                                     sp            sp t
                                                  re    s
                                                 rt  = rt                                                (B.10)
                                            p,t = x1,t - x2,t                                            (B.11)
   x1,t = (1 -  )pm,t + (1 -  )yt +  Et t,t+1 +  Et t+1 +  Et x1,t+1                                     (B.12)
             x2,t = (1 -  )yt +  Et t,t+1 + ( - 1) Et t+1 +  Et x2,t+1                                   (B.13)
                                             wt = pm,t + at                                              (B.14)
                                         (1 - z )ct + zcb,t = yt                                         (B.15)
                                             p
                                            vt + yt = at + lt                                            (B.16)
                                                   p
                                                  vt =0                                                  (B.17)
                                                    1-
                                             t =       p,t                                               (B.18)
                                                     
                                              qt + bcb
                                                    t = ret                                              (B.19)
                                               bF I F I bcb cb
                                         bt =       b + bt                                               (B.20)
                                                 b t       b
                                              cb,t = qt + bt                                             (B.21)
                                         qet = q qet-1 + sq q,t                                          (B.22)
                                         at = A at-1 + sA A,t                                            (B.23)
                                          t =  t-1 + s ,t                                                (B.24)
                           re      re
                          rt  = r rt-1 + (1 - r )  t + x xt + sr r,t                                     (B.25)
                                                 qet = ret                                               (B.26)
                                                          f
                                               xt = yt - yt                                              (B.27)
                                                          s                  b
This is twenty-seven equations in lt , ct , wt , t-1,t , rt , t , b,t-1,t , rt , qt , bF I                     re
                                                                                       t , t , ret , st , t , rt ,


                                                     34
                                             p cb
p,t , x1,t , x2,t , pm,t , yt , at , cb,t , vt , bt , bt , qet , xt in twenty-seven variables.
    The model can be reduced to the equations presented in Subsection 2.1 as follows. First,
                                                    re
(B.10) can be used to eliminate rt                     , so that the policy rule may be written as (2.33) in terms
     s
of rt . Second, (B.11)-(B.13) can be combined with (B.18), which yields the textbook New
Keynesian Phillips Curve expressed as a function of marginal cost, where  = (1-)(1                        
                                                                                                           - )
                                                                                                                :

                                            t =  pm,t +  Et t+1                                           (B.28)
                                                                         p
   Combining (B.1) with (B.14) and (B.16), making note of the fact that vt = 0 around a
zero inflation steady state, yields:

                                        pm,t = yt - (1 + )at + ct                                         (B.29)
    Making use of (B.15) allows us to write this as:

                             (1 - z ) +                      z
                              pm,t =      yt - (1 + )at -       cb,t                                      (B.30)
                                1-z                         1-z
    Combining (B.19)-(B.21) with (B.26) allows us to write:

                                       bF I                bcb
                                        cb,t =q t + bF
                                                     t
                                                       I
                                                         + qet                            (B.31)
                                         b                  b
    Defining ¯
             bF I = bF I /b and ¯
                                bcb = bcb /b (i.e. the fraction of total bonds held by financial
intermediaries and the central bank, respectively, in steady state), and making use of the
binding leverage constraint, (B.7), leaves:

                                             cb,t = ¯
                                                    bF I t + ¯
                                                             bF I qet                                     (B.32)
    Plugging (B.32) into (B.30) then gives:

                              (1 - z ) +                   z ¯F I
                     pm,t =               yt - (1 + )at -     b t + ¯
                                                                    bcb qet                               (B.33)
                                1-z                       1-z
                                                      f
    Define the hypothetical natural rate of output, yt  , as the level of output consistent with
                                                         f
flexible prices and no credit market shocks. That is, yt   is the level of output consistent with
pm,t = t = qet = 0, or:

                                             f     (1 + )(1 - z )
                                            yt =                  at                                      (B.34)
                                                    (1 - z ) + 
    But then, using (B.27), we can write marginal cost as:

                                       (1 - z ) +        z ¯F I
                            pm,t =                 xt +     b t + ¯
                                                                  bcb qet                                 (B.35)
                                         1-z            1-z
                                                -z )+
    Plugging (B.35) into (B.28), defining  = (11 -z
                                                      , yields (2.2).
    To derive the IS equation, combine (B.2)-(B.4) with (B.6) and (B.16). Doing so yields:
                                        1-z s               z     b
                     yt = Et yt+1 -        (rt - Et t+1 ) -   Et rt+1 - Et t+1                            (B.36)
                                                            

                                                       35
   But from the Euler equation for the impatient household, along with the "full bailout"
assumption embodied in (B.21), we can write:


        b                                      ¯F I (Et t+1 - t ) + ¯
                                                                    bcb (Et qet+1 - qet )
    Et rt+1 - Et t+1 =  [Et cb,t+1 - cb,t ] =  b                                                  (B.37)

    Combining (B.37) with (B.36) yields:

                      1-z s
     yt = Et yt+1 -      (rt - Et t+1 ) - z ¯
                                            bF I (Et t+1 - t ) + ¯
                                                                 bcb (Et qet+1 - qet )            (B.38)
                       
   Note that an alternative, and arguably more intuitive, way to write the IS expression is
based on a simple algebraic manipulation of (B.36):
                                       1 s                 z       b      s
                         yt = Et yt+1 -  (rt - Et t+1 ) -      Et rt+1 - rt                (B.39)
                                                           
   (B.39) is the familiar IS/Euler equation, written in terms of output rather than the output
                                                                                      b      s
gap, appended with a term equal to the long-short interest rate spread, i.e. Et rt     +1 - rt .
                                  f
   The natural rate of interest, rt , is defined as the real rate consistent with the IS equation
holding at the natural rate of output absent credit shocks. This implies that:
                                       f             f      f
                                      rt =       Et yt+1 - yt                                     (B.40)
                                             1-z
                             f          f
    Adding and subtracting yt   and Et yt+1 from both sides of (B.38) and re-arranging yields
                                                                        f
(2.1). Making use of (B.23), allows one to write an AR(1) process for rt  as in (2.35), where
                   (A -1)(1+)
f = A and sf = (1-z)+ .

                                           f      (A - 1) f
                                          rt =           yt                                       (B.41)
                                                   1-z
                                                      s                                           f
     Computing the dynamics of xt , t , and rt           does not require keeping track of yt , yt  ,q t ,
 b             FI                                                            s
rt , t , st , bt , bt , bcb,t or cb,t . Given the solution for xt , t , and rt , the dynamics of these
variables can be computed using the full system, (B.1)-(B.27).


C      Model Calibration
The parameters of the model are calibrated as follows. The unit of time is a quarter. We
assume a zero trend inflation rate, so  = 1. This implies that steady state price dispersion
is v p = 1 and the steady state relative reset price is p = 1. We set = 11, which implies
a steady state price markup of ten percent. The discount factor of the parent is set to
 = 0.995, which together with  = 1 implies a steady state short term rate of 200 basis
points at an annualized frequency (i.e. Rs = 1.005). We then target a steady state spread of
the return on the long bond over the short term bond of 200 basis points at an annualized
frequency, which implies b = 0.99 and Rb = 1.01. We set  = 1 - 40-1 , implying a ten year
duration of the long bond. Together with Rb , this implies a steady state value of Q.

                                                   36
    The coefficient of relative risk aversion,  , and the inverse Frisch elasticity, , are both
set to 1. We target a steady state share of child consumption, z = Cb /Y , of one-third. We
then pick  to normalize steady state labor input to unity. Together, these parameters imply
a value of the steady state transfer from parent to child, X b . We assume that the Calvo
parameter is  = 0.75, implying a mean duration between price changes of one year. We
assume that the size of the central bank's balance sheet is 10 percent of steady state output,
i.e. QE = 0.1 × Y . We pick a steady state target of the risk-weighted leverage ratio of
 = 5. This then implies a value of the steady state equity transfer from the parent to the
FI, X F I .
    For the exercises in Subsection 2.3, we assume that the Taylor rule parameters are r =
0.8,  = 1.5, and x = 0. The autoregressive parameter of the QE process, q , is also set to
0.8. The autoregressive parameters for productivity and the leverage shock are also both set
to 0.8. This implies, as shown below in Appendix B, that the AR parameter in the natural
rate process is also 0.8.

                                  Table C.1: Parameter Values of Full Model


             Parameter       Value         Description (Target)
                             0.995         Discount factor, parent
                             1             Inverse elasticity of substitution
                             1             Inverse Frisch elasticity
                             1.36          Labor disutility scaling parameter (target L = 1)
             b               0.99          Discount factor, child (target spread of 200 b.p. annualized)
                             1             Steady state trend inflation
                             11            Elasticity of substitution (target markup ten percent)
                             1 - 40-1      Coupon decay (target duration ten years)
                             0.75          Calvo price
                             5             Steady state risk-weighted leverage
             QE              0.1           Steady state central bank bond portfolio
             z               0.33          Steady state child share of consumption
             Xb              0.33          Steady state parent-child transfer
             XF I            0.046         Steady state parent-FI equity transfer
             r               0.8           Taylor rule smoothing
                             1.5           Taylor rule inflation
             x               0             Taylor rule gap
             A               0.8           AR productivity
                             0.8           AR leverage
             q               0.8           AR QE
Note: this table lists the values of calibrated parameters for the exercises in Subsection 2.3.




                                                               37
D     Proofs
D.1    Theorem 1
The theorem can be proved by contradiction. Suppose first we can achieve xt = t = 0 with
qet = 0 for all t. Then the Phillips curve may then be written as:
                                             z ¯F I
                                      0=-        b t ,                            (D.1)
                                             1-z
which does not hold unless t = 0, which contradicts the assumption. Hence, there is a
contradiction.
                                                                      s
   Second, suppose we can achieve xt = t = Et xt+1 = Et t+1 = 0 with rt = 0 for all t.
Then the Phillips Curve becomes
                                      z ¯F I
                                 0=       b t + ¯
                                                bcb qet .                         (D.2)
                                      1-z
This requires
                                             ¯
                                             bF I
                                      qet = - ¯cb t .                             (D.3)
                                              b
   Note that (D.3) is identical to the QE rule given in Proposition 1. With this QE rule
and the policy rate fixed, the IS curve becomes
                      1-z f
                 0=      r -z ¯
                              bF I (Et t+1 - t ) + ¯
                                                   bcb (Et qet+1 - qet ) .        (D.4)
                        t
Since Et t+1 =  t , this may be written:
                                           ¯
                                           bF I           1-z f
                          qet - Et qet+1 = ¯cb ( - 1) t - ¯cb rt .                (D.5)
                                           b              b z
Now guess that QE evolves according to:
                                                  f
                                   qet = 1 t + 2 rt ,                             (D.6)

which implies:
                                                      f
                               Et qet+1 = 1  t + 2 f rt .                         (D.7)

Now plug (D.6)-(D.7) into (D.5):
                                ¯
                                bF I                 1-z              f
                  qet =    1  + ¯cb ( - 1) t + 2 f - ¯cb             rt .         (D.8)
                                b                    b z




                                              38
Now solve for 1 and 2 :
                                         ¯
                                         bF I
                                    1 = - ¯cb                                          (D.9)
                                          b
                                              1-z
                                    2 = - ¯cb          .                              (D.10)
                                          b z (1 - f )

Therefore,
                                   ¯
                                   bF I         1-z       f
                            qet = - ¯cb t - ¯cb          rt .                         (D.11)
                                    b       b z (1 - f )
                                                                             f
(D.3) and (D.11) are not the same unless z = 1 (which we have ruled out) or rt = 0 (which
contradicts the assumption). Hence, we have another contradiction.

D.2     Lemma 1
                             ¯F I
First, suppose that qet = - b    . This means that the qet and t terms drop out of both
                             bcb t
                             ¯
(2.1) and (2.2). After imposing the ZLB on the short rate:
                                         1-z             f
                            xt = Et xt+1 +     Et t+1 + rt                            (D.12)
                                           
                                     t = xt +  Et t+1                                 (D.13)
                                 f                f
    We then guess that xt = 1 rt   and t = 2 rt     while the ZLB binds. After the ZLB lifts,
 s     f
rt = rt and consequently xt = t = 0. The ZLB lifts with probability 1 -  and remains
in place with probability . Making use of the guess, along with the fact that xt = t = 0
                           f        f
once the ZLB lifts and Et rt+1 = f rt , results in a system of two equations in two unknowns,
which can be solved for as:

                                    (1 - z )(1 - f )
                        1 =                                                           (D.14)
                               (1 - f )(1 - f ) - (1 - z )f
                                         (1 - z )
                        2 =                                                           (D.15)
                               (1 - f )(1 - f ) - (1 - z )f



D.3     Lemma 2
Instead, suppose that the QE rule is:

                                           f
                                               ¯
                                               bF I
                                   qet =  rt - ¯cb t                            (D.16)
                                               b
    = 0 is a special case of the QE rule in Lemma 1, hence 1 and 2 are identical to
Lemma 1. With the rule in (D.16) imposing the ZLB, the key equations of the model are:



                                             39
                                1-z
                xt = Et xt+1 +                 f
                                     Et t+1 + rt - z¯        f
                                                    bcb  Et rt      ¯cb f
                                                              +1 + z b  rt              (D.17)
                                  
                                                  z¯  bcb  f
                               t = xt +  Et t+1 -         r                             (D.18)
                                                   1-z t
                                                 f               f
    Guess that the policy functions are xt = 1 rt  and t = 2 rt    . One obtains the result in
the text that these functions may be written as in (3.6)-(3.7). The expressions for d1 and d2
are:

                               z¯  bcb (1 - f )(1 - f ) - f
                        d1 =                                                            (D.19)
                                (1 - f )(1 - f ) - (1 - z )f

       z¯
        bcb  (1 - z ) (1 - f )(1 - f ) - f -  (1 - f )(1 - f ) + (1 - z )f
d2 =
                     (1 - f )(1 - z )  (1 - f )(1 - f ) - (1 - z )f
                                                                                        (D.20)



D.4      Proposition 2
Applying results in Lemma 2, the objective function (3.1) becomes
                                           2   2    f 2
                                     L = (µ1 + 2 )(rt ).                                (D.21)

Next,
                  2   2
                µ^1 +^2 = µ(1 + d1  )2 + (2 + d2  )2
                            2    2
                        = µ1  + 2  + 2(µ1 d1 + 2 d2 ) + (µd2    2 2
                                                           1 + d2 )

Take the first order derivative
                       2   2
                    (µ^1 +^2 )
                               = 2(µ1 d1 + 2 d2 ) + 2(µd2    2
                                                        1 + d2 ) = 0                    (D.22)
                       
The minimum is achieved at (3.8).

D.5      Lemma 3
Suppose qet = 0 at all times. The IS and Phillips curves in this scenario may be written as:
                                1-z s
                xt = Et xt+1 -         rt - Et t+1 - rtf
                                                          - z¯bF I (Et t+1 - t )         (D.23)
                                  
                                           z ¯F I
                             t = xt -            b t +  Et t+1                           (D.24)
                                           1-z
   Given the linearity in the model, it will be possible and optimal to offset natural rate
shocks via adjusting the short term rate one-for-one with the natural rate of interest. Suppose
that the policy rule implemented by the central bank is therefore:

                                              40
                                         s    f
                                        rt = rt + t                                   (D.25)
   With the policy rate adjusting one-to-one to fluctuations in the natural rate, neither the
output gap nor inflation will react to natural rate shocks. Guess, therefore, that the policy
functions mapping credit shocks into inflation and the output gap are given by: xt = 1 t
and t = 2 t . The expressions for 1 and 2 are as in Lemma 3, where:

                               z¯ bF I (1 -  )(1 -  ) -  
                           1 =                                                        (D.26)
                                (1 -  )(1 -  ) - (1 - z ) 
                                         (1 - z )(1 -  )
                          a1 = -                                                      (D.27)
                                    (1 -  )(1 -  ) - (1 - z ) 
                   z ¯bF I (1 -  )(1 -  ) -             z¯    bF I
        2 =                                       -                                   (D.28)
              (1 -  )  (1 -  )(1 -  ) - (1 - z )    (1 - z )(1 -  )
                                            (1 - z )
                          a2 = -                                                      (D.29)
                                    (1 -  )(1 -  ) - (1 - z ) 



D.6     Proposition 3
Given results in Lemma 3, the objective function (3.1) becomes:

                                      L = (µ2   2 2
                                            1 + 2 )t .                                (D.30)

Next:

                µ2   2              2
                 1 + 2 = µ(1 + a1  ) + (2 + a2  )
                                                 2

                       = µ2     2                        2    2 2
                           1 + 2 + 2(µ1 a1 + 2 a2 ) + (µa1 + a2 )

Take the first order derivative
                        (µ2   2
                          1 + 2 )
                                  = 2(µ1 a1 + 2 a2 ) + 2(µa2    2
                                                           1 + a2 )                   (D.31)
                          

The minimum is achieved at (3.11).




                                             41
