                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




IS EMPLOYMENT POLARIZATION INFORMATIVE ABOUT WAGE INEQUALITY AND
                IS EMPLOYMENT REALLY POLARIZING?

                                          Jennifer Hunt
                                           Ryan Nunn

                                      Working Paper 26064
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26064


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 2019, Revised December 2019




We are grateful to Kihwan Bae for research assistance, and Brad Hershbein and Elisa Jacome for
providing us with code. For helpful comments on this version and a shorter, earlier version
entitled "Why Are Fewer Workers Earning Middle Wages and Is It a Bad Thing?", we thank
David Autor, Paul Beaudry, Leah Brooks, Matias Cortes, David Dorn, Nicole Fortin, David
Green, Barry Hirsch, Stephen Jenkins, Alan Manning, Larry Mishel, Pia Orrenius, Francesc
Ortega, Ben Sand, Alex Spitz-Oener, Ann Huff Stevens, Myeong-Su Yun, former colleagues at
the U.S. Department of the Treasury and participants in numerous seminars and conferences.
Hunt is grateful for funding through the James Cullen Chair in Economics. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jennifer Hunt and Ryan Nunn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Employment Polarization Informative About Wage Inequality and Is Employment Really
Polarizing?
Jennifer Hunt and Ryan Nunn
NBER Working Paper No. 26064
July 2019, Revised December 2019
JEL No. J31,J62

                                          ABSTRACT

Equating a job with an individual rather than an occupation, we re-examine whether U.S. workers
are increasingly concentrated in low and high-wage jobs relative to middle-wage jobs, a
phenomenon known as employment polarization. By assigning workers in the CPS to real hourly
wage bins with time-invariant thresholds and tracking over time the shares of workers in each, we
do find a decline since 1973 in the share of workers earning middle wages. However, we find that
a strong increase in the share of workers in the top bin is accompanied by a slight decline in the
share in the bottom bin, inconsistent with employment polarization. Turning to occupation-based
analysis, we show that the share of employment in low-wage occupations is trending up only
from 2002-2012, and that the apparent earlier growth and therefore polarization found in the
literature is an artefact of occupation code redefinitions. This new timing rules out the hypothesis
that computerization and automation lie behind both rising wage inequality and occupation-based
employment polarization in the United States.


Jennifer Hunt
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and IZA, CEPR, DIW-Berlin
and also NBER
Jennifer.hunt@rutgers.edu

Ryan Nunn
Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20036
rnunn@brookings.edu
1         Introduction
A decline in the middle class has become a concern not only in the United States, but also
in other countries, and not only for academics, but also for politicians and the public.1
Economists and sociologists who study the declining share of workers earning middle
wages are in some cases motivated by apprehension that it implies falling worker welfare,
and in other cases by an interest in the possible implications for other labor market
phenomena such as changing work tasks and rising wage inequality. To answer any of
these questions, it is crucial to understand whether workers earning middle wages are
instead earning higher wages, lower wages, or some mix of the two (what one might
loosely call "polarization").
        In this paper, we test for polarization of U.S. wages using three approaches, providing
insights into changing worker welfare and an assessment of whether these approaches are
informative for evaluating theories of rising wage inequality. In doing so, we critique
an existing literature which finds polarization, but more importantly, we caution against
over­generalizations made by many readers of this literature.
        The influential existing approach has focused on employment growth at the occupation
level. To this way of thinking, occupations serve several purposes: their average wages
stand in for either job quality or skill and their other characteristics convey information
about the nature of work. Many economists have found occupation­based employment
polarization--employment growth in high and low­paid occupations and relative decline
in middle-paid occupations--in the United States and other countries;2 only two studies
of the United States dissent.3 Sociologists, on the other hand, have found mixed evidence
for polarization in countries outside the United States, sometimes contesting the results
of studies by economists. Expansion in the share of high­wage occupations is found in
all high­income countries, but while in some countries a rising share of employment in
    1
      See for example Fukuyama (2012); New York Times (2015); Bloomberg (2016); Le Figaro (2016)
citing the International Labour Office (n.d.) study of Europe; Pew Research Center (2016); Financial
Times (2019) citing OECD (2019).
    2
      Levy and Murnane (1992); Acemo   glu (1999); Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003); Goos and Manning
(2007); Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008); Spitz­Oener (2008); Goos, Manning and Salomons (2009);
Autor (2010); Acemo   glu and Autor (2011); Kampelmann and Rycx (2011); Autor and Dorn (2013);
Goos, Manning and Salomons (2014); Autor (2015a,b); Coelli and Borland (2016); Foote and Ryan
(2015); Green and Sand (2015); Harrigan, Reshef and Toubal (2016); Cerina, Moro and Rendall (2017);
B´ar´any and Siegel (2018); Autor (2019). See also the study by sociologists Wright and Dwyer (2003).
Firpo, Fortin and Lemieux (2013) link tasks to wage inequality.
    3
      Lefter and Sand (2011); Mishel, Shierholz and Schmitt (2013).



                                                 1
low­wage occupations and a falling middle share together indicate polarization, sociolo-
gists classify other countries as experiencing occupational upgrading due to their falling
employment share of low­wage occupations.4
       While employment polarization is analyzed in some studies for its own sake or prin-
cipally to understand the evolution of tasks performed by workers, most research by
economists sets employment polarization in the context of rising wage inequality, and
some researchers directly investigate a possible connection with rising wage inequality.
Figure 1 shows that while the difference between log wages at the 90th percentile and
the median has been growing steadily since 1973, trends in the lower part of the distri-
bution have been less simple. The difference between the median and the 10th percentile
rose considerably in the 1980s, but has since stabilized at a level slightly below its 1987
peak. Acemoglu and Autor (2011) introduce a theoretical model to explain both this
particular pattern and employment polarization5 ; less formal discussions of the theory
appear in Autor (2015a,b). A common element of these accounts is that investments
in computerization and automation are complementary with workers in high­skill occu-
pations and raise their labor demand and wage, while reducing demand and wages for
workers in middle­skill occupations through the elimination of routine tasks, and increas-
ing the supply of workers in low­pay occupations as middle­skill workers crowd in to
those occupations. We believe the theory implies that the share of workers in low­wage
occupations should rise, ceteris paribus. Other researchers have understood polarization
to require only that the middle­wage occupation share have lower growth than the low
and high­wage occupation shares, and this distinction between an absolute and a relative
understanding of polarization will sometimes be important for interpreting our results.
       The theory does not unambiguously imply that employment polarization would lead
to the wage inequality patterns seen since 1990, in particular the stability or decline in
the 50/10 wage differential. On the one hand, the displacement of workers from middle­
wage occupations to low­wage occupations increases supply of low­wage workers; on
the other hand, demand for low­wage services may rise with the rising numbers of the
high­wage workers. Together, these shifts imply increased low­wage employment but
   4
     Oesch and Menes (2011); Oesch (2013); Murphy and Oesch (2018); Fernandez­Macias (2012); Hurley
and Fernandez­Macias (2008).
   5
     "Thus the introduction of new machines replacing middle skilled tasks in this framework provides
a possible formalization of the "routinization" hypothesis and a possible explanation for job and wage
polarization discussed in Section 2." (p.1141)



                                                  2
have ambiguous implications for wages. Nevertheless, early writing on U.S. polarization6
has been understood by many readers to imply that employment polarization provides
empirical support for a link between computerization and wage inequality,7 even though
the later literature is more circumspect.8
       However, the limitations of the occupation­based approach to job quality and wage
inequality are not widely appreciated. While occupations may provide reliable informa-
tion about tasks and the nature of work at a point in time, average occupation wages are
in general not appropriate proxies for individual wages, nor is the distribution of occu-
pations by average wage very informative about the distribution of workers' wages. This
is most immediately evident in the large amount of wage dispersion that exists within
detailed occupations, as emphasized by Mishel, Shierholz and Schmitt (2013). Even more
importantly, 86% of the increase in wage inequality from 1973­2018 is within detailed
occupations, as measured using the variance of log hourly wages in our sample from the
U.S. Current Population Survey (CPS).
       The weak mapping between occupation average wages and individual wage percentiles
is made clear by the striking observation that in the 1983 CPS, only the three lowest
paid of 330 detailed occupations have mean wages at or below the 10th percentile of
individual wages, and only the five lowest paid have mean wages below the 20th percentile.
Furthermore, middle­wage workers are spread very evenly across occupations ranked by
mean wage. Mean wages of occupations are therefore unhelpful for understanding changes
in wage inequality.
       We therefore turn to an approach to testing for employment polarization based on
   6
      For example, referring to the 1988­2006 period, Autor (2010, p.3) writes, "Wages both above and
below the median rose relative to the median. [...] This simultaneous polarization of U.S. employ-
ment and wage growth suggests an important theme, explored in detail below ­ labor demand appears
to be rising for both high­skill, high­wage jobs and for traditionally low­skill, low­wage jobs." Autor
and Dorn write, "So computerization is not reducing the quantity of jobs, but rather degrading the
quality of jobs for a significant subset of workers. Demand for highly educated workers who excel in
abstract tasks is robust, but the middle of the labor market, where the routine task-intensive jobs lie,
is sagging. Workers without college education therefore concentrate in manual task-intensive jobs like
food services, cleaning and security which are numerous but offer low wages, precarious job security
and few prospects for upward mobility. This bifurcation of job opportunities has contributed to the
historic rise in income inequality." https://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/08/24/how-technology-
wrecks-the-middle-class, accessed July 2, 2019.
    7
      See the literature reviews in Lacuesta and Izquierdo (2012), Oreopoulos and Petronijevic (2013),
Green and Sand (2015), and Cortes (2016).
    8
      For example, Autor (2015b) states that "Thus, while computerization has strongly contributed to
employment polarization, we would not generally expect these employment changes to culminate in wage
polarization except in tight labor markets" (p.146).


                                                   3
individual rather than occupation wages. We revive and improve a method fallen into
disuse, assigning workers to real hourly wage bins with time-invariant thresholds and
tracking over time the shares of workers in each.9 Employment polarization would con-
stitute a fall in the share in the middle wage bins and a rise in the share of workers in the
bottom as well as the top wage bin. We conduct our analysis for 1973­2018 using CPS
Merged Outgoing Rotation Group (MORG) and May samples. Our use of annual data
allows us to distinguish trends and business cycles and to capture accurately the timing
of longer-term patterns, unlike most of the previous literature which uses decadal census
data for years until 2000.
       We use the wage­bin approach in part because many readers appear to think this
method is equivalent to the prevailing occupation­based approach, or think it delivers
similar results.10 However, this is not the case. Over particular time periods, employ-
ment growth can and does occur disproportionately in high­wage jobs within low­wage
occupations, or low­wage jobs within high­wage occupations. In addition, inconsisten-
cies between the occupation and wage approaches could arise because harmonization of
changing occupation codes is necessarily imperfect, particularly over long periods of time.
Indeed, occupation codes change because the nature of occupations changes over time,
including through upskilling.11
       Grouping workers into four time­invariant bins defined only by workers' wages, we
do find a steady decline in the share of workers in the middle two wage groups, but
one that belies offsetting forces that vary over time and by gender, variously reflecting
either upward mobility (workers moving faster from the middle to the top than from the
bottom to the middle) or downward mobility (workers moving faster from the middle
to the bottom than from the top to the middle), but not employment polarization. The
business cycle clearly has a tendency to cause downward mobility in recessions and upward
   9
      Bluestone and Harrison (1988); Levy and Murnane (1992); also LoPalo and Orrenius (2015). Git-
tleman and Howell (1995) do similar analysis based on a multidimensional measure of job quality.
   10
      For example, Haskel at al. (2012) write without mentioning occupations: "The result is downward
pressure on wages and employment opportunities on moderately skilled workers, such that inequality
between them and their less­skilled counterparts no longer rises. Autor (2010b) discusses this `polar-
ization' of the U.S. labor market." Canon and Marifian (2013) write without mentioning occupations:
"...the economy has increased its demand for high-skilled (high­wage) workers and low­skilled (low­wage)
workers, while opportunities for middle­skilled (middle­wage) jobs have declined. The shift toward this
U­shaped employment distribution is known as job polarization."
   11
      See Levy, Murnane and Tyler (1995), and Spitz-Oener (2006) for Germany. In their analysis of wage
inequality, Gottschalk, Green and Sand (n.d.) grapple with the issue of the changing skills associated
with occupations.



                                                   4
mobility in recoveries and booms.12 However, the shares of workers in the top and bottom
groups generally move in opposite directions over the longer term as well, with the share
in the top group rising markedly and the share in the bottom falling slightly. The patterns
are very similar with ten wage bins rather than four.
       Long­run trends are very different by gender. After adjusting for the business cycle,
we see that women have experienced upward mobility since 1982, with the share in the
bottom wage group falling considerably, the middle two groups falling slightly, and the top
wage group rising considerably. The decline in the middle is thus a positive development
for female workers, reflecting both welfare improvements for individuals and composition
changes generated by the 1980s surge in labor force participation. Men experienced strong
downward mobility in the 1980s as the shares of the upper two wage groups both shrank.
However, men experienced mild upward mobility from 1992­2003, with a small increase
in the share in the top wage group at the expense of middle groups, and have experienced
little change since. The decline in the middle for men was thus deleterious in the 1980s
and beneficial in the later period.
       To understand these trends better, we perform Oaxaca decompositions of changes in
the shares of workers in wage bins over time. This allows us to search for any polarizing
factor that might be obscured by rising age and education and to examine the effect
of the changing composition of occupations. An alternative to investigating whether
generally improving worker­level variables are obscuring polarization is to use a measure
of polarization that is invariant to changes in the median wage. While such a measure
could be constructed within a wage­bin framework, we instead supplement our wage­bin
analysis with the Foster and Wolfson (2009) test for polarization based on changes in the
distance of workers' wages from the median.
       Our Oaxaca decompositions of year­to­year changes in wage bin shares do not identify
any polarizing factor for either men or women, nor is polarization uncovered when age and
education are held fixed over time. Furthermore, the decompositions (using either four or
ten wage bins) show that changes in occupation mix have worked towards reducing the
share of women in the bottom bin until 2001, with no subsequent effect, while having little
effect on the share of men in the bottom bin. Similarly, the Foster and Wolfson test for
polarization of the "increased spread" type shows that while above­median wages have
  12
     This is notwithstanding the fact that unskilled workers disproportionately exit employment in re-
cessions and disproportionately enter employment in booms.



                                                  5
been moving away from the median almost throughout the study period, below­median
wages have by comparison been almost stationary compared to the median.
   The slight downward trend in the share of workers with low wages could in principle
coexist with a growing employment share of low­wage occupations, growth which is pre-
dicted by the computerization and automation polarization theory and is found in the
U.S. empirical literature from 1989. We show that the share of low­wage workers in occu-
pations with low mean wages falls greatly with time, a factor which could be outweighing
an expanding employment share of low­wage occupations. However, we also show that the
share of employment in low­wage occupations is trending up only from 2002­2012, and
that the apparent earlier growth found in the literature is an artefact of an unbridgeable
change in occupation codes in 2000. The pattern does not change when we focus on the
service occupations at the heart of the Autor and Dorn (2013) investigation of rising em-
ployment in low­wage occupations. Furthermore, adding agricultural occupations to the
occupations studied in the U.S. literature yields a falling employment share of low­wage
occupations prior to 2000. The implied lack of occupation­based employment polariza-
tion prior to 2002 once the occupation code break is taken into account is consistent with
the findings of Lefter and Sand (2011) and Mishel, Shierholz and Schmitt (2013).
   The employment share of non­college workers in low­wage occupations is shrinking
throughout the 1973­2018 period and therefore does not contribute to growth in the low­
wage occupation share (and consequently to overall polarization). However, as noted by
Autor (2019), the share of non­college workers in low­wage occupations as a share of
non­college employment is rising: viewed in isolation, non­college workers are polarizing.
This hints at the possibility that underlying occupation­based employment polarization
is masked by human capital­driven occupational upgrading of workers (see Murphy and
Oesch 2018), something difficult to test. Barring a concealed polarization of this nature,
the late (post-2000) emergence of occupation­based polarization means it cannot be ex-
plained by computerization and automation, as hypothesized in the literature, nor linked
to rising wage inequality. Computerization and automation, and indeed offshoring and
increased trade, began well before 2002, as did the rise in wage inequality.
   Computerization and automation may be increasing wage inequality, but the hypoth-
esis cannot be studied through the lens of occupations and does not find support in the
study of employment polarization, however defined.




                                            6
2        Data
We use the merged outgoing rotation groups (MORGs) from the Current Population
Surveys (CPS) of 1979­2018 and the smaller May CPS samples from 1973­1979. We
retain imputed values following Card and DiNardo (2002), though this could affect the
estimated changes in return to union status (Hirsch and Macpherson 2003). We draw a
sample of workers aged 18­64 who are not self-employed, and compute hourly wages by
dividing weekly earnings by usual weekly hours; from 1994 we use hours worked last week
on all jobs where usual hours on the main job are reported to be variable. We adjust wages
to represent 2018 dollars by deflating with the CPI-U-RS (real wages grow slightly more
slowly using the CPI-U, but results are very similar); topcoded earnings are multiplied by
1.5. We drop wages below $2 in 2018 dollars or above $200 if usual weekly hours are less
than or equal to 15. We also drop workers with missing observations on age, education,
industry, occupation or state. For the Oaxaca decomposition only, which we perform for
1983­2018, we also drop workers with missing information on union status: since union
information is not available in all years prior to 1983, dropping these observations would
result in breaks in the series. The means of the main Oaxaca covariates for women and
men in selected years are given in Appendix Tables 1 and 2 (the Data Appendix explains
how we generated 34 harmonized industry codes).
       Because the heaping of wages at round numbers would otherwise cause sudden jumps
over time in the shares of workers in wage bins, we add some randomness to each wage.
We draw a random value ki from a standard normal distribution and multiply the wage by
0.2ki , or equivalently, add 0.2ki to the log wage. This acts to smooth the wage distribution
by dispersing the heaps of workers who report particular round­number nominal wages
like $10 per hour or $15 per hour. Without this randomness, inflation--combined with
the clustering of workers at fixed nominal wages--causes frequent discontinuous shifts in
employment shares.13
       Certain data issues will become salient below. One is independent of the specific
data set: occupation codes are redefined by the Census Bureau every ten years at the
time of the decennial census. For consistency with virtually the entire U.S. employment
polarization literature, we use the 330 detailed harmonized occupations on David Dorn's
  13
     We have experimented     with the amount of randomness to be added, and found 0.2ki to be the
smallest amount that serves   to prevent the discontinuous shifts. Previous authors using wage bins did
not adjust for heaping. We    have redrawn from the distribution each time we have updated the CPS
MORGs and have not found      the results to be sensitive.


                                                   7
website14 (though using updated codes kindly provided to us by Brad Hershbein and Elisa
Jacome for the years after 2010). However, the new codes of 1980 and 2000 constituted
such large breaks that even the Dorn harmonized codes leave large jumps in employment
for many occupations across these two code breaks. The 1980 codes were introduced to
the CPS in 1983, while for 2000­2002, occupations were coded in the CPS using both the
1990 and the 2000 codes. We take advantage of this overlap to extend the periods that
can be examined without a code break, and to correct jumps in employment shares: we
do not use the improved harmonizations proposed by Lefter and Sand (2011) and Shim
and Yang (2018).15
       Two further issues are specific to the CPS. The 1994 redesign resulted in workers being
shifted to better­paying occupations (Cohany et al. 1994), which means that analysis
using occupations in the CPS will have a break in 1993­1994. Furthermore, until 1989,
CPS earnings do not include tips, overtime and bonuses. Among bottom occupations,
this particularly affects waiters and waitresses, who prior to 1989 have the lowest hourly
wages in the CPS, but rank considerably higher beginning in 1989.


3        Methods
We employ three methodological approaches. The first is to assign workers to real wage
bins and calculate employment shares based only on individual wages, with no use made
of occupations or their average wages. We augment this approach by adjusting for the
business cycle and by performing Oaxaca decompositions of the changes in shares of
workers in each wage bin over time. The second approach follows Foster and Wolfson
(2009) but continues to use individual wages as the unit of analysis. The third approach
is to categorize workers based on the average wages of their occupations. In most of the
latter analysis, we adopt the methods of the existing polarization literature.
  14
    https://www.ddorn.net/data.htm, accessed 31 October 2018.
  15
    The aggregate codes, sometimes used in the U.S. polarization literature in addition to the detailed
codes, were changed in 2000 to reflect a new approach: "The major occupational groups of the new SOC
and the derivative 2002 Census Bureau occupational classification place more emphasis on the type of
work performed and less emphasis on skill or educational level" (Bowler et al. 2003).




                                                  8
3.1    Defining wage bins
We allocate each worker in each year to one of four wage bins, whose thresholds are
constant in real terms over time. We choose the thresholds that divide workers into
quartiles in 1979: in years other than 1979, shares sum to one but are not necessarily
equal. The same bins are used whether men and women are pooled or examined separately.
Workers in the bottom wage bin earn $11.71 per hour or less (in 2018 dollars), workers in
the lower middle group earn more than $11.71 and less than or equal to $17.05, workers
in the upper middle group earn between $17.05 and $25.25, while workers in the top
group earn more than $25.25. We show some results using ten groups based on 1979
deciles rather than quartiles (workers earn $8.90 or less in the bottom bin and more
than $35.08 in the top bin); unreported results using four groups based on 2007 quartiles
yielded similar results. The May samples and the MORG samples overlap for the years
1979­1982, yielding similar but not identical shares of workers in bins in those years. We
therefore normalize the May shares to be equal to the MORG shares in 1979.


3.2    Adjusting for the business cycle
The evolution of employment shares is affected by the business cycle in a way that could
obscure longer-run patterns. We therefore adjust time series for shares in each wage group
for the business cycle in several steps. We first regress each time series of 46 observations
on two lags of the unemployment rate, using a linear probability model. We then compute
the residuals and predict what the shares would have been in each year had the lagged
unemployment rates been at their 1979 values.


3.3    Oaxaca-Blinder decompositions
We perform Oaxaca-Blinder decompositions of the changes in shares of workers in bins
over time, based on linear regressions of the probability of a worker being in a given
bin in a given year. This informs us as to the role in any period of changing worker
characteristics compared to changing returns to characteristics. The base year is the
earlier of the pair of years. We use the Oaxaca command in Stata from Jann (2008),
which permits the contributions of individual covariates and their coefficients (returns)
to be computed. However, there is disagreement on how to calculate the contributions of
the individual coefficients, with Firpo, Fortin and Lemieux (2011) preferring a different

                                             9
method from Jann (2008). Given the lack of consensus, we do not report this part of the
decomposition. In the baseline case of four wage bins, we implement linear regressions of
the form


                             Ytk = Xt t
                                      k
                                        + t , k  {1, 2, 3, 4}, t  {0, 1}

where Ytk is the employment share in bin k and year t, Xt is a vector of covariates in year
t, and     t   is the error term. We then compute the terms in the following equation:



                    E (Ytk           k                              k
                         =1 ) - E (Yt=0 ) = [E (Xt=1 ) - E (Xt=0 )] t=1
                                            Changes in covariates across years
                                                      k      k
                                         + E (Xt=0 ) (t =1 - t=0 ) , k  1, 2, 3, 4.
                                            Changes in returns to covariates


       For the decompositions, we use the MORGs beginning in 1983, the first year in which
union information (important for men) is included in the MORGs (this fortuitously also
allows us to avoid the occupation code break across 1982­1983). We present tables with
decompositions (with standard errors) for 1983­1990, 1990­2008, and 2008­2018. We
select 1990, 2008 and 2018 because the position in the business cycle is similar at these
points.16 The results of the decomposition are affected by selection--into and out of
the labor force, and into and out of union membership, for example--and the estimated
returns are not necessarily causal. We include all characteristics including occupation
dummies. This has the advantage that the role of the changing occupational distribution
may be assessed in the light of the occupation­based literature. The disadvantage is that
for women particularly, movement to better­paying occupations is an outcome of interest
in its own right. We therefore also present decompositions without occupation.17
       We also construct graphs (without standard errors) based on Oaxaca decompositions
of changes in wage group shares between each adjacent pair of years for 1983­2018. These
adjacent­year plots allow a finer appreciation of the timing of various effects than do the
decompositions over longer periods. The main aim is to show how the share of workers
in a group would have evolved yearly from 1983 had only a single covariate evolved, with
all others held constant. For example, to show the effect of changing education, we plot
  16
     The decomposition using the 1980 May and the 1990 MORG is available on request.
  17
     Since country of birth is available only from 1994, we defer the study of immigration's role to further
research.


                                                     10
the 1983 predicted share for 1983, then add the contribution of changing education to the
1983­1984 change in group share and plot this for 1984, then add to this 1984 value the
contribution of changing education to the 1984­1985 change in group share and plot this
for 1985, and so on.


3.4       Foster­Wolfson measure of polarization
Foster and Wolfson (2009) propose a test of whether a distribution is polarizing in a
manner they call "increased spread". For each distribution of interest, the values (here,
wages) are first normalized by the median value, then the absolute value of the distance
of each wage from the median is calculated. Formally, a Foster-Wolfson curve is defined
by

                                             |Ft-1 (q ) - Ft-1 (0.5)|
                                 St (q ) =                            ,
                                                     Ft (0.5)
where Ft is the cumulative distribution function of wages in year t.
       To compare an earlier and a later distribution, the mean distances for each normalized
wage percentile are plotted against the percentiles, with polarization occurring if the
later distribution lies above the earlier distribution both to the left and the right of the
normalized median wage. This would imply that below­median wages are falling farther
from the median, while above­median wages are rising farther from the median.


3.5       Assessment of occupation­based employment polarization
To study employment changes by occupation, we follow the literature by dropping agri-
cultural occupations (though we test sensitivity to this), and we rank the remaining 323
occupations by mean wage.18 Papers such as Autor and Dorn (2013) rank occupations
based on the 1979 wage from the 1980 census. So as to rank based on the same occu-
pation codes, we rank based on 1983 wages. Because the literature including Autor and
Dorn (2013) weights hourly wages with annual hours, we weight with usual weekly hours
(annual hours are not available in the CPS MORGs and Mays), thus ranking occupations
by their wage bill divided by their total hours worked.
  18
     Autor and Dorn (2013) state they use 318 occupations. We are unsure which further occupations
they drop if any.




                                                   11
       In our simplest analysis, we plot the employment share over time of the lowest-paid
occupations, defined as those that cumulatively (based on the wage rankings) employ
10% of workers in 1983. We plot this employment share because of the focus on the
10th percentile wage in the wage inequality literature and also because the presence or
absence of polarization in the existing literature hinges on whether the share of this group
is rising or not, given the employment shares of high­wage occupations and middle­
wage occupations have clearly been rising and falling, respectively. In all rankings, the
large occupation of health and nursing aides is the highest ranked occupation with at
least some employment in the 10th occupation­based percentile. Since it is both rapidly
growing and particularly affected by government policy, we show shares with and without
this occupation.
       To follow the literature and explore occupation­based polarization fully, we then re-
duce the 323 non­agricultural occupations to 100 "percentiles" each containing one per-
cent of workers. Following the literature, this first entails ranking the occupations by
average wage. Second, the lowest-wage occupation is apportioned to the lowest percentile
bin. If that occupation falls short of one percent of total employment, then the second-
lowest-wage occupation is added to the same bin; otherwise, the remaining employment
share of the first occupation is apportioned to the second (and possibly subsequent) bins.
This continues until the employment share of each occupation has been mapped to the
100 percentile bins. We calculate changes in employment share by "percentile" for vari-
ous periods and estimate the relationship between the change in employment share and
occupation rank using a lowess regression (with a bandwith of 0.75, as in Autor and Dorn
2013). The final plots are of this relationship. Employment changes in large occupations
like secretaries and managers n.e.c. are divided among as many as four percentiles, and
even small occupations may span two percentiles: this tends to smooth the employment
changes by occupation.19


4        Is employment polarizing based on wage bins?
We begin the presentation of our results by assessing whether there is employment polar-
ization in our wage­bin framework. Next, we perform Oaxaca decompositions to search
  19
    Some papers using non­U.S. data have examined the more logical relationship between change in
employment share and occupation average log wage rather than the rank (Goos and Manning 2007,
Kampelmann and Rycx 2011). CPS results for the latter relationship are available from the authors.


                                               12
for factors that might be tending to polarize employment even if offsetting other factors
mean overall employment is not polarizing.


4.1       Wage bin analysis of pooled men and women
We depict in Figure 2 the shares of workers in each of the four wage groups from 1973­
2018; by construction a quarter of workers are in each group in 1979. The graph shows
a gradual decline in the share of the two middle groups, which is consistent with em-
ployment polarization. But in a departure from employment polarization, it does not
show simultaneous increases in the top and bottom group shares. The share of workers
in the top bin rises from 0.25 in 1979 (and a similar value in 1973) to 0.35 in 2018, while
the share of workers in the bottom wage bin declines from 0.25 in 1979 (and a similar
value in 1973) to an all­time low of 0.18 in 2018, after peaking at 0.30 in 1983­1985.
The occupation­based literature generally weights workers by their annual hours; we can
weight workers with their weekly hours and obtain a similar figure (Figure 3).20
       Short­run changes in the shares in the top and bottom are related to the business cycle:
during the recessions of the early 1980s and late 2000s, the share in the bottom group rises
and the share in the top group falls, while the opposite occurs in the expansion periods,
and especially during the boom of 1996­2001 and in the current expansion. Longer­run
trends are somewhat clearer when employment shares are adjusted for the business cycle
(Figure 4, not weighted by hours), though the adjustment is clearly not very successful
in the 2000s. With this adjustment, the share in the top bin trends strongly and fairly
steadily upwards over the 1973­2018 period. The share in the bottom bin ends the period
well below its initial value, with much of the decline occurring during the 1990s expansion.
The changes in top and bottom shares dwarf changes in the middle shares.
       The patterns we find are not very sensitive to the choice of number of wage bins.
Because workers are generally moving up through the wage bins rather than exhibiting
polarization or another more complex pattern, changes in shares are concentrated in the
top and bottom bins where inflows are not compensated by outflows or vice versa. Figure 5
shows that there is no long run polarization when using ten bins, though in this case there
is less decline in the share in the bottom bin. However, since we scrutinize the period
  20
     Our results differ from those of LoPalo and Orrenius (2015), who find a rise in the share in the
bottom between the pair of years 1979 and 2012. However, after deheaping the data, the authors find
results consistent with ours in the CPS using any deflator, and in the Census/ACS using any deflator
other than the CPI-W (personal communication).


                                                 13
from 2002­2012 more carefully below, it is worth noting that with ten bins, the share in
the top bin rises slightly over this period, which combined with the rise in the share of
the bottom in this period (independent of the number of bins) means that there is slight
employment polarization in these years. Some of the rise in the bottom in this period
(and of the steep decline since 2014) is likely to be a business­cycle effect, but the weak
recovery after the 2002 recession suggests a trend change.
       It is possible that steadily rising age and education, by pushing workers into higher
wage bins, is disguising underlying polarization within age­education cells. Accordingly,
we simulate in Figure 6 the evolution of the four wage bin shares holding age and education
fixed at their 1979 levels.21 This analysis implies that had age and education not risen,
the share of workers in the bottom bin would have risen considerably, while the share in
the upper two bins would have fallen, with no sign of polarization.
       The lack of polarization in our framework could be compatible with polarization in
the occupation framework. An easy way to see this is to consider the share of low­wage
occupation workers (employing 10% of workers, excluding health and nursing aides) who
are in the bottom wage bin. The upper line in Figure 7 shows that while in the early 1970s
almost 70% of low­wage occupation workers were in the bottom of our four wage bins, this
had fallen to 50% by 2018 (the series has been adjusted for breaks in 1983, 1994 and 2002
as described below). The lower line shows that the share of low­wage occupation workers
who are in the bottom of our ten wage bins peaked at 45% in 1988 and had fallen to little
more than 20% by 2018. These low shares presage our concerns below about the mapping
between occupation­based wage percentiles and individual­based wage percentiles, but
the point here is that rising wages within occupations could allow low­wage occupations
to expand even as the share of low­wage work declines.


4.2       Wage­bin analysis by gender
The patterns in the employment shares of workers shown in Figures 2­5 mask very different
patterns for men and women. For women, the wage shares plotted in Figure 8 suggest
that the principal development is that women are steadily moving up through the wage
groups, which continue to be defined based on the pooled male and female sample (the
series adjusted for the business cycle is in Figure A1). Figure 8 shows that until 2003, the
  21
     This is a partial­equilibrium exercise that likely does not accurately capture the true counterfactual
labor market with no change in age and education, but it may be illuminating nonetheless.


                                                    14
shares in the bottom and lower middle wage groups declined as the shares in the upper
middle and top groups rose, implying women moved from the lower two groups to the
upper two groups. However, female progress slowed from 2003, with a rise in the share in
the bottom bin until 2012 implying employment polarization over this interval.
   Men's patterns are quite different. In Figure 9, the effects of the business cycle on
the shares in the top and bottom wage groups are more marked than for women. The
share in the upper middle bin fell from 1973 through the early 2010s with little change
in the share in the lower middle. There appear to be three distinct periods for men
based on trends in the top and bottom shares: the 1980s, when men slid down through
the wage groups; 1992­2003, when there was a partial recovery with upward mobility
through the groups; and the period since 2003, with relatively little movement (see also
the business­cycle adjusted series in Appendix Figure A2). The different patterns over
time show that a decline in the middle class cannot be examined in isolation from the
larger context, and may be a positive or negative development for workers depending on
how other employment shares evolve. In none of these three phases is polarization evident
for men, which in the 2003­2012 period is due to the lack of rise in the share in the top
bin.


4.3    Oaxaca decompositions into characteristics and returns
It is interesting in its own right to analyze which factors are associated with changes
in the shares of workers in wage bins, and of particular interest here to study the role
of occupations and assess whether any factor is tending to polarize employment. To do
so, we perform Oaxaca decompositions of changes in employment shares into changes
in characteristics and their returns, presenting the results for certain longer periods and
their standard errors in panel A of Appendix Tables 3 and 4. We focus our discussion
on graphical results of the year­to­year decompositions (without standard errors). In
Figures 10 for women and 11 for men, we first plot the predicted shares of workers in
each wage bin for reference (in solid blue): note that the y-axis scales differ across graphs.
With green triangles, we plot the contributions of changes in characteristics by adding the
yearly contributions cumulatively to the 1983 share: this is how the shares would have
evolved if only the worker characteristics had changed. With red squares, we plot how
the shares would have changed had only the returns to characteristics changed.
   The figures show that improving characteristics have caused upward mobility, espe-

                                             15
cially for women, and no polarization. Improving characteristics have moved women
steadily up the wage groups, reducing the share in the lower two wage groups (especially
the bottom, which fell seven percentage points) and increasing the share in the upper two
(since 1993 the top only, with an increase of about nine percentage points). Improving
characteristics reduced the share of men in all three lower wage groups fairly steadily, in-
creasing the share in the top group by about five percentage points. Appendix Figures A3
and A4, which replicate the figures for decompositions without occupation as a charac-
teristic, show that the contribution of changes in characteristics is not very sensitive to
the inclusion of occupation, as its contribution comes to some extent at the expense of
increasing education.
   Fluctuations in the predicted employment shares are reflected in fluctuating returns
to characteristics for both men and women. For women (Figure 10), the trends in the
return to characteristics are similar to the trends in the characteristics, leading to upward
mobility through the wage bins. The same is not true for men (Figure 11). Changes in
returns to characteristics moved male workers from the upper middle bin to the lower
middle, while having little long­run effect on the share in the top and bottom bins over
the 1983­2018 period. For men, the surge in the share in the top bin and the post-1983
decline in the share in the bottom bin are thus driven entirely by improving characteristics.


4.4    Role of changes in specific characteristics
We next present yearly graphs with the more detailed contributions of specific charac-
teristics for 1983­2018 (results for longer periods are presented with standard errors in
panel B of Appendix Tables 3 and 4). We do not find any characteristic to have a polar-
izing effect (tending to increase the share of workers in the top and bottom bins), and we
do not find that shifts in the occupational composition of employment have increased the
share of workers in the bottom bin.
   Figures 12 and 13 report, for men and women separately, the contributions of specific
characteristics to the changes in employment shares (the results without occupation are
presented in Appendix Figures A3 and A4). These contributions are generally steady and
monotonic. For both men and women, the most influential characteristic is education,
whose increase caused upward mobility from the lower two to the upper two wage groups
(for women) and to the top wage group (for men). Increased education reduced the share
of women in the bottom group by about four percentage points and increased the share in

                                             16
the top by about five percentage points, while it reduced the share of men in the bottom
by about two percentage points and increased the share in the top by more than three
percentage points.
       For women, occupation is the second most influential characteristic, followed by age,
with other characteristics playing only minor roles. For men, age is almost as influen-
tial as education, with occupation somewhat less influential than for women, but other
characteristics are also important. Rising age and improving occupation quality are asso-
ciated with upward wage mobility for both genders, though the role of age ends around
2005. For men, deunionization is a powerful force for downward mobility if not as large in
absolute value as age and occupation effects, while changes in industrial composition are
also associated with downward wage mobility. Closer inspection of the occupation effects
shows that changes in occupation are initially associated with women moving from the
lower two bins to the upper two bins, but from roughly 2001 cease to be associated with
changes in the bottom bin and instead are associated with movement from the middle
bins to the top bin. For men, changing occupation has negligible effects on the share in
the bottom bin, and is always associated with mobility from the middle bins to the top
bins. Appendix Figures A7 and A8 show that occupation effects on the bottom bin are
qualitatively the same with ten wage bins.22


5        Is employment polarizing based on the Foster­Wolfson
         measure?
A different way of checking whether rising wages are obscuring polarization is to use a
measure of polarization that is invariant to the median wage. In Figure 14, we compare
the 1973 and 2018 wage distributions using the method proposed by Foster and Wolfson
(2009). By definition, a Foster­Wolfson curve equals zero at the 50th percentile since
the distance of the median wage from the median wage is always zero, while the (mean)
distance of other wage percentiles from the median is positive. Polarization would require
that the two arms of the 2018 distribution be above the two arms of the 1973 distribu-
tion except at the median. The figure shows that wages above the median have indeed
moved farther away from the median (the right arm pivots up from the median), and an
  22
     The presence of only small jumps in the plots for industry and occupation suggest the code harmo-
nizations are satisfactory in this context.


                                                 17
unreported, more detailed figure shows that there is no temporary reversal of this trend.
However, changes below the median are close to invisible at the scale of Figure 14. An
unreported figure at a finer scale shows a pivot upwards below the median between 1973
and 2018, with a partial reversal between 2012 and 2018, and changes between 1973 and
2012 that sometimes involve crossing curves. Though this strictly speaking implies an
upward pivot of both arms and hence polarization between 1973 and 2018, it is clear that
all meaningful movement involves the upper half of the distribution pulling away from
the median.


6       Occupation­based analysis
We turn now to the study of employment polarization and wage inequality through the
lens of occupations, first considering how informative occupation average wages can be
for individual­based wage inequality, then noting other problems with occupation­based
analysis, and finally synthesizing results from the individual and occupation­based anal-
ysis.


6.1     Suitability of occupations for studying wages
The ultimate objective of many papers on employment polarization is to explain the
causes of rising wage inequality, often represented by economists as the difference in log
wages at the 90th, 50th and 10th percentiles. However, Figure 15 shows that mean
occupation wages cannot capture movements in the bottom of the wage distribution:
only three of the 330 standardized occupations (including the agricultural occupations
dropped by the U.S. literature) have mean 1983 wages at or below the 10th percentile
of the individual wage distribution in 1983, and only five have mean wages below the
20th percentile of the individual wage distribution. Figure 16 shows that the problem
confronting the polarization literature is worse, since the literature groups workers into
percentiles based on their occupation and its mean wage: the bottom percentile is at
approximately the 10th percentile of the 1983 individual wage distribution while the
second-to-bottom percentile is at approximately the 20th percentile. Clearly, changes in
employment or wages by these occupation­based percentiles will at best reflect changes
in employment of low-wage workers only crudely.
    The problem is not merely that the bottom 20 percent of workers are represented

                                           18
by only two of 100 categories, however. Many workers in the bottom occupation­based
percentiles are not low-paid workers, as we saw in Figure 7. For example, only half of
workers in the bottom occupation­based percentile have wages in the bottom 10 percent of
the overall wage distribution. The lack of mapping between the two types of percentile is
even more clear when considering the middle of the distribution. Figure 17 shows the share
of workers in each occupation­based percentile who earn between the 40th percentile and
median of the overall wage distribution: the shares are remarkably uniform and therefore
low even in the middle (no percentile has a share of such workers over 17 percent). One
therefore cannot think of the middle occupation­based percentiles as mapping to middle-
wage workers. Goos and Manning (2007) address this problem in their simulation of
the effect of British occupation­based employment polarization on wage inequality by
allowing for a distribution of wages within occupation which they hold fixed as occupation
employment shares evolve. We are not aware of a similar simulation for the United States,
and we do not view occupation mean wages alone as an appropriate lens through which
to study wage inequality.


6.2      Is employment really polarizing based on occupations?
Despite the unsuitability of occupations as a means of studying wage inequality, it is
worth pointing out that even on its own terms, occupation­based analysis does not show
employment polarization except in the 2002­2012 period. In this section, we use the CPS
to investigate the prior census­based results best summarized by Figure 18, from Autor
(2015a). Employment shares rise for both the top and bottom occupations in the 1989­
1999 period and in the 2007­2012 period (the post­1999 data come from the American
Community Survey), and the share in the bottom occupations also rises in the 1999­2007
period. There does not appear to be polarization in the 1979­1989 period: although
employment share falls more around the 20th percentile of the occupation distribution
than at the bottom, the fall for all except the very lowest percentile is instead indicative
of occupational upgrading (workers moving up the occupational ladder), as noted by
Mishel, Shierholz and Schmidt (2013). By contrast, Autor (2015a) interprets this pattern
as polarization.23
      If occupation­based polarization began around 1989, the timing could be consistent
with a slightly delayed influence of computerization and automation, factors which may
 23
      In Autor (2010), the employment share at the bottom falls as much as in the middle in 1989­1999.


                                                  19
also have been behind the 1990s productivity boom. There is no disagreement that the
employment share of high­wage occupations has been rising steadily over time, so a simple
way of testing for polarization is simply to plot an annual time series of the employment
share of bottom occupations to see if and when it rises. In Figure 19, we plot the raw
employment shares of the low­wage occupations cumulatively employing 10% of workers,
without ("baseline") and with health and nursing aides, as well the employment share
of the subset of occupations considered service occupations by Autor and Dorn (2013),
without health and nursing aides. We choose the bottom 10% because when the share of
low­wage occupations rises in the existing literature, the rise is seen for the bottom 10%
(see Figure 18). These series are not adjusted for occupation code breaks in 1983 and
2000, nor for the 1994 CPS redesign. The main effect of the 2000 code break is obvious in
the figure: it causes low­wage occupations to expand. This could lie behind the apparent
rise in low­wage employment for 1989­1999 in Autor (2015a), since in the Census data,
observations for 1999 use the new 2000 codes.
       To see this more clearly, we adjust the series for the breaks. For the 1982­1983
and 1993­1994 breaks, we assume the growth in employment share is the average of the
preceding and succeeding pairs of years. We normalize the 2000­2002 overlapping shares
to be equal in 2002. Close scrutiny of the overlapping years 2000­2002 in Figure 19 shows
that the change in occupation codes also led to higher employment growth (in addition to
a higher level), but we do not attempt to adjust for this. All three adjusted series, plotted
in Figure 20, indicate that there was no trend in low­wage occupation employment share
until about 2002, then growth until about 2012. We also plot the employment share using
the slightly different set of bottom 10 percentile occupations from Autor and Dorn (2013),
without health and nursing aides which in their data as in ours straddle the 10th percentile.
The difference between this series and the baseline is small. When we allow the bottom
10% of workers to be based on occupations including those in agriculture, (excluding
health and nursing aides), there is a clear downward trend in low­wage occupation share
through 1999. The subset of occupations defined as service occupations by Autor and
Dorn (2013) have a rise in employment share in the early 1980s, then no change until
growth resumes in about 2001. This figure shows that employment polarization--which
requires growth in the bottom employment share--could not have occurred before 2001.24
  24
     The service occupation series may appear to contradict Figure 3 in Autor and Dorn (2013), which
shows an increase in low­wage service­occupation employment share for 1979­1989, a period without
a serious occupation code break. When the definition of low­wage occupation workers is expanded to


                                                20
    To assess the full employment polarization picture and make the same point in a
different way, we focus in Figure 21 on the 1989­1999 period which so clearly shows
polarization in Autor (2015a). We first plot the raw 1989­1999 curve from the CPS
(purple triangles); this shows employment decline at the bottom. However, when we
adjust for the 1994 redesign, simply by assuming there are no genuine changes in 1993­
1994 (Appendix Figure A9 suggests this is likely to be approximately true, since there
is almost no change in 1992­1993 and 1994­1995) and subtracting the apparent changes,
growth at the bottom is slightly positive (solid gold line). This curve represents our
preferred implementation of the occupation­based approach using CPS data.
    However, this curve is qualitatively different from that of Autor (2015a), and further
adjustments are necessary to reconcile the two. Accordingly, we extend the period covered
by the analysis to 2000 without crossing a code break, which makes almost no difference
to the curve (blue x's). Finally, we also plot the curve for the same period but inten-
tionally using the new occupation codes in 2000 used in the census­based analysis: now
there is considerable growth in employment shares of bottom occupations (as well as top
occupations), similar to the 1989­1999 curve in Autor (2015) (red plus signs). Although
we use our own occupation ordering in the figure, the results change very little if we use
the Autor and Dorn (2013) occupation ordering (results not reported). Polarization in
1989­1999, which would require an increase in the employment share of the bottom group,
is an artefact of the code break.
    To complete the analysis, we show in Figure 22 the curves for 2000­2010 and 2011­
2018.25 There is clear polarization in the earlier period, and no polarization in the later
period, consistent with our series on the share of employment due to low­wage occupa-
tions. Figure 23 shows the evolution for the entire 1983­2018 period, contrasting the fully
adjusted curve with the curve not adjusted for the occupation code break.
    The final series of interest, plotted in Figure 24, are for low­wage occupation women
and men separately as a share of employment, and the corresponding shares for college
and non­college workers. The shares of women and non­college are falling over time. For
women, the decline ends around 2000, and in a mechanical sense it is this that leads to the
be comparable with Autor and Dorn (occupations representing 20% of workers rather than 10% as in
Figure 19), this share does have a slight upward trend from 1973­1991. However, the trend is larger by a
factor of two in Autor and Dorn due to the unusually low share in 1979 (figure available from the authors
upon request).
   25
      We avoid plotting 2010­2011 because of the transition from Dorn to Hershbein and Jacome occupa-
tion codes, which implies a change in the number of occupations.


                                                   21
increase in the low­wage occupation share after that point, since the share of men grows
steadily until 2012, when it plateaus and then declines. Low­wage occupation non­college
workers (some college or less) decline slightly over time as a share of employment, while
their college counterparts' share rises from close to zero in 1973 to about one percent
in 2018. On the other hand, as pointed out by Autor (2019), non­college workers are
polarizing when studied in isolation (results not shown), which may indicate that un-
derlying occupation­based employment polarization is masked by human capital­driven
occupational upgrading of workers. This cannot plausibly be investigated by predicting
the evolution of the occupation distribution with age and education fixed, however: it
is unlikely that the employment decline in low­wage occupations caused by rising hu-
man capital occurs at the rate implied by the cross­sectional correlation between human
capital and occupation.


6.3    Synthesis of wage bin and occupation analysis of low­wage
       jobs
We can synthesize by period the major patterns outlined by our wage bin and occupation
analyses. Prior to 2002, the share of employment that is in low­paid occupations is stable,
the result of exiting women being replaced by entering men. Women's exits tend to reduce
the share of workers in the bottom wage bin (as shown by the effect of occupations in
the Oaxaca decomposition), while men's entry has little effect on the share of men in the
bottom wage bin because few of these entrants earned bottom bin wages (at most 22% of
men in low­wage occupations were in the bottom of four wage bins, and at most 10% in the
bottom of ten wage bins over 1973­2018). The share of workers in the bottom wage bin is
further reduced by wage increases for women in the lowest­paid occupations, due in part
to rising age and education, and in part to changes in returns to characteristics. Men's
wages in the lowest occupations do not increase, because rising age and education are offset
by declining unionization and changing industry, and wages are not boosted by changing
returns to characteristics, whose effects seem to be principally cyclical throughout the
study period.
   Employment in low­paid occupations grows from about 2002 to 2012, due to a stalling
of women's progression into higher occupations and continued entry of men. The share
of workers in the bottom wage bin also grows at this time. The stalling of women's oc-


                                            22
cupational upgrading means that changing occupations are no longer associated with a
falling share of women in the bottom wage bin, while at around the same time, age ceases
to reduce the share of women (and men) in the bottom wage bin. The boost provided by
changes in characteristics thus weakens just as changes in returns begin to increase rather
than decrease the share of women in the bottom wage bin, and also as occupation codes
change in a way that may have increased apparent low­wage occupation growth. The
net result is that the trend downwards in the share of women in the bottom ends and is
replaced by cycles (a related trend may be the plateauing of women's labor force partic-
ipation, not studied here). For men, the favorable effects of returns to characteristics in
the 1990s boom switch to become unfavorable, with changes in characteristics continuing
to have little effect, leaving patterns in the share in the bottom wage bin qualitatively
similar to those for women.
    Finally, from 2012, the share of workers in low­paid occupations plateaus and then
falls, reversing most of the 2002­2012 increase. The reversal is less marked if the booming
health and nursing aides are included: the exceptional growth in health and nursing aides
reflects not only an aging population, but also the introduction in 2000 of more favorable
Medicare payments for home health care (Wu 2019). The shrinking employment share
of low­wage occupations combined with the rising wages within these occupations (see
Figure 7) are consistent with this period also corresponding to a large fall in the share
of workers in the bottom wage bin. The Oaxaca decompositions indicate that the most
powerful force from 2012 is changing in returns to characteristics, affecting both men and
women, and surely including a strong business cycle component.


7     Conclusion
We re­examine whether U.S. workers are increasingly concentrated in both low and high­
wage jobs, a phenomenon known as employment polarization. We depart from most
previous literature, which equates a job with an occupation, by instead considering jobs
at the individual level. By assigning workers in the CPS to real hourly wage bins with
time-invariant thresholds and tracking over time the shares of workers in each, we find a
steady decline since 1973 in the share of workers earning middle wages, consistent with
occupation­based analysis. However, we find that both over the business cycle and the
longer run, the shares of workers in the top and bottom bins move in opposite directions,


                                            23
inconsistent with employment polarization.
   The slight downward trend in the share of workers with low wages could in princi-
ple coexist with the growing employment share of low­wage occupations found in the
literature: we show that the share of low­wage occupation workers with low wages falls
greatly with time. However, we also show that the share of employment in low­wage
occupations is trending up only from 2002­2012, and that the apparent earlier growth
found in the literature is an artefact of unbridgeable changes in occupation codes. The
late emergence of occupation­based polarization is inconsistent with the explanation that
computerization and automation have caused both employment polarization and rising
wage inequality, unless underlying occupation­based employment polarization in earlier
periods was masked by human capital­driven occupational upgrading of workers.
   We demonstrate that even absent breaks in occupation codes, occupation mean wages
are unsuitable for the analysis of wage inequality: most of the increase in wage inequality
is within and not between occupation; occupation mean wages do not capture the bottom
of the individual wage distribution; and middle­wage workers are distributed widely across
occupations. Computerization and automation may be increasing wage inequality, but the
hypothesis cannot be studied through the lens of occupations and does not find support
in our analysis.




                                             24
References
 [1] Acemo  glu, Daron. 1999. "Changes in Unemployment and Wage Inequality: An Alter-
     native Theory and Some Evidence." American Economic Review, 89(5): 1259­1278.
 [2] Acemo  glu, Daron and David Autor. 2011. "Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Impli-
     cations for Employment and Earnings". In David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds.,
     Handbook of Labor Economics, 4th Edition Elsevier North Holland, 1043­1171.
 [3] Autor, David H. 2010. "The Polarization of Job Opportunities in the U.S. Labor
     Market: Implications for Employment and Earnings". Brookings Institution re-
     port. https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-polarization-of-job-opportunities-in-
     the-u-s-labor-market-implications-for-employment-and-earnings/, accessed 15 April
     2019.
 [4] Autor, David H. 2015a. "Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? The History and
     Future of Workplace Automation". Journal of Economics Perspectives, 29(3): 3­30.
 [5] Autor, David H. 2015b. "Polanyi's Paradox and the Shape of Employment Growth".
     In Reevaluating Labor Market Dynamics, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: Eco-
     nomic Policy Proceedings 29­177.
 [6] Autor, David. 2019. "Work of the Past, Work of the Future". American Economic
     Review Papers and Proceedings, 109: 1­32
 [7] Autor, David H. and David Dorn. 2013. "The Growth of the Low­Skill Service Jobs
     and the Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market". American Economic Review, 103(5):
     1553­1597.
 [8] Autor,     David     H.     and    David  Dorn.    2013.   "How     Technology
     Wrecks the Middle Class". New York Times Blog,                    August 24.
     https://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/08/24/how-technology-wrecks-the-
     middle-class, accessed July 2, 2019.
 [9] Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. "Trends in U.S.
     Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists." Review of Economics and Statistics,
     90(2): 300­323.
[10] Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. "The Skill Content
     of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 118(4): 1279­1333.
[11] B´
      ar´
        any, Zs´
               ofia and Christian Siegel. 2018. "Job Polarization and Structural Change".
     American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(1): 57­89.
[12] Bloomberg       (2016).    "Decline  of    the     U.S.    Middle       Class".
     https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2016-03-28/americans-struggle-to-
     see-themselves-as-middle-class

                                           25
[13] Bluestone, Barry and Bennett Harrison. 1988. "The Growth of Low­Wage Employ-
     ment 1963­1986". American Economic Review, 78(2): 124­128.

[14] Bowler, Mary, Randy E. Ilg, Stephen Miller, Ed Robison and Anne Polivka. 2003.
     "Revisions to the Current Population Survey Effective in January 2003." Bureau
     of Labor Statistics Report https://www.bls.gov/cps/rvcps03.pdf, accessed 22 March
     2019.

[15] Canon, Maria E. and Elise Marifian. 2013. "Job Polarization Leaves Middle-Skilled
     Workers Out in the Cold." https://www.stlouisfed.org/publications/regional-
     economist/january-2013/job-polarization-leaves-middleskilled-workers-out-in-the-
     cold, accessed 31 October 2018.

[16] Card, David and John E. DiNardo. 2002. "Skill­Biased Technological Change and
     Rising Wage Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles." Journal of Labor Economics,
     20(4): 733­783.

[17] Cerina, Fabio, Alessio Moro and Michelle Petersen Rendall. 2017. "The Role of Gen-
     der in Employment Polarization". University of Zurich working paper.

[18] Coelli, Michael and Jeff Borland. 2016. "Job Polarisation and Earnings Inequality in
     Australia". Economic Record, 92 (296): 1­27.

[19] Cohany, Sharon R., Anne E. Polivka, and Jennifer M. Rothgeb. 1994. "Revisions in
     the current population survey effective January 1994." Employment and Earnings,
     41(2), February: 13­37.

[20] Cortes, Guido Matias. 2016. "Where Have the Middle­Wage Workers Gone? A Study
     of Polarization Using Panel Data". Journal of Labor Economics, 34(1): 63­105.

[21] Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux. 2011. "Decomposition Meth-
     ods in Economics". In David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds., Handbook of Labor
     Economics, 4th Edition Elsevier North Holland, pp. 1-102.

[22] Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux. 2013. "Occupational Tasks
     and Changes in the Wage Structure". University of British Columbia working paper.

[23] Foote, Christopher L. and Richard W. Ryan. 2015. "Labor Market Polarization Over
     the Business Cycle". NBER Macroeconomics Annual , 29(1): 371­413.

[24] Fernandez­Macias, Enrique. 2012. "Job polarization in Europe? Changes in the
     employment structure and job quality, 1995-2007". Work and Occupation, 39(2):
     157-182.

[25] Fernandez­Macias, Enrique and John Hurley. 2008. "More and better jobs: Patterns
     of employment expansion in Europe". ERM Report 2008.



                                           26
[26] Financial Times. 2019. "Rich nations' middle classes in `rocky waters' as in-
     comes flatline." 10 April 2019, https://www.ft.com/content/628f89f8-5b68-11e9-
     9dde-7aedca0a081a, accessed 13 April 2019.

[27] Foster, James E. and Michael C. Wolfson. 2009. "Polarization and the Decline of
     the Middle Class: Canada and the U.S.". Oxford Poverty and Human Development
     Initiative Working Paper No. 31.

[28] Fukuyama, Francis. 2012. "Can Liberal Democracy Survive the Decline of the Middle
     Class?" Foreign Affairs.

[29] Gittleman, Maury B. and David R. Howell. 1995. "Changes in the Structure and
     Quality of Jobs in the United States: Effects by Race and Gender, 1973­1990".
     Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 48(3): 420­440.

[30] Goos, Maarten and Alan Manning. 2007. "Lousy and Lovely Jobs: the Rising Polar-
     ization of Work in Britain." Review of Economics and Statistics, 89: 118­133.

[31] Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning and Anna Salomons. 2009. "The Polarization of the
     European Labor Market". American Economic Review, 99(2): 58­63.

[32] Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning and Anna Salomons. 2014. "Explaining Job Polariza-
     tion: Routine­Biased Technological Change and Offshoring". American Economic
     Review, 104(8): 2509­2526.

[33] Gottschalk, Peter, David A. Green and Benjamin M. Sand. n.d. "Taking Selection
     to Task: Bounds on Trends in Occupational Task Prices for the U.S., 1984­2013".
     University of British Columbia working paper.

[34] Green, David A. and Benjamin M. Sand. 2015. "Has the Canadian Labour Market
     Polarized?" Canadian Journal of Economics, 48(2): 612-646.

[35] Harrigan, James, Ariell Reshef and Farid Toubal. "The March of the Techies: Tech-
     nology, Trade, and Job Polarization in France, 1994-2007". NBER Working Paper
     22110.

[36] Haskel, Jonathan, Robert Z. Lawrence, Edward E. Leamer, and Matthew J. Slaugh-
     ter. 2012. " Globalization and U.S. Wages: Modifying Classic Theory to Explain
     Recent Facts". Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(2): 119-140.

[37] Hirsch, Barry T. and David A. Macpherson. 2003 "Union Membership and Coverage
     Database from the Current Population Survey: Note". Industrial and Labor Relations
     Review 56(2): 349­354.

[38] International Labour Office. n.d. "Long Term Trends in the World of Work: Ef-
     fects on Inequality and Middle Income Groups". www.ilo.org/brussels/press/press-
     releases/WCMS 455739/lang­en/index.htm, accessed 31 August 2016.

                                          27
[39] Jann, Ben. 2008. "The Blinder­Oaxaca decomposition for linear regression models".
     Stata Journal 8(4): 453-479.

[40] Kampelmann, Stephan and Fran¸cois Rycx. 2011. "Task­Biased Changes of Employ-
     ment and Remuneration: The Case of Occupations". IZA Discussion Paper No. 5470.

[41] Le Figaro (2016). "Une nouvelle ´  etude confirme le d´    eclin de la classe
     moyenne en Europe". http://www.lefigaro.fr/conjoncture/2016/03/02/20002-
     20160302ARTFIG00142-une-nouvelle-etude-confirme-le-declin-de-la-classe-moyenne-
     en-europe.php

[42] Lefter, Alexandru M. and Benjamin M. Sand. 2011. "Job Polarization in the U.S.:
     A Reassessment of the Evidence from the 1980s and 1990s". University of St. Gallen
     Discussion Paper 2011­03.

[43] Levy, Frank and Richard J. Murnane. 1992. "U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings
     Inequality: A Review of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations". Journal of
     Economic Literature, 30(3): 1333­1381.

[44] Levy, Frank, Richard Murnane and John Tyler. 1995. "Are More of College Graduates
     Really Taking High School Jobs? A Reconsideration of the Evidence". Monthly Labor
     Review, 118(12): 18­27.

[45] LoPalo, Melissa and Pia M. Orrenius. 2015. "Employment Growth and Labor Market
     Polarization in the US and Texas". In Pia M. Orrenius, Jes´
                                                               us Ca~
                                                                    nas and Michael
     Weiss eds. Ten­Gallon Economy: Sizing Up Economic Growth in Texas, Berlin:
     Springer Verlag.

[46] Mishel, Lawrence, Heidi Shierholz and John Schmitt. 2013. "Don't Blame the Robots:
     Assessing the Job Polarization Explanation of Growing Wage Inequality". Economic
     Policy Institute working paper.

[47] Murphy, Emily C. and Daniel Oesch. 2018. "Is employment polarisation inevitable?
     Occupational change in Ireland and Switzerland, 1970-2010". Work, Employment,
     and Society, 32 (6): 1099­1117.

[48] New York Times (2015). "The Shrinking American                   Middle    Class".
     http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/01/25/upshot/
     shrinking-middle-class.html

[49] Oesch, Daniel. 2013. Occupational change in Europe: How technology and education
     transform the job structure. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.

[50] Oesch, Daniel and Jorge Rodriguez Menes. 2011. "Upgrading or polarization? Oc-
     cupational change in Britain, Germany, Spain and Switzerland, 1990-2008". Socio-
     Economic Review, 9: 503­531.


                                          28
[51] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 2019. Under
     Pressure ­ The Squeezed Middle Class. OECD: Paris.

[52] Pew Research Center (2016). "The American middle class loses ground nationally".
     http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2016/05/11/1-the-american-middle-class-loses-
     ground-nationally/

[53] Shim, Myungkyu and Hee­Seung Yang. 2018. "New stylized facts on occupational
     employment and their implications: Evidence from consistent employment data".
     Economic Modelling, 59: 402­415.

[54] Spitz­Oener, Alexandra. 2006. "Technical Change, Job Tasks, and Rising Educa-
     tional Demands: Looking outside the Wage Structure". Journal of Labor Economics,
     24(2): 235­270.

[55] Spitz­Oener, Alexandra. 2008. "The Returns to Pencil Use Revisited". Industrial and
     Labor Relations Review, 61(4): 502­517.

[56] Wright, Eric Olin and Rachel E. Dwyer. 2003. "The patterns of job expansions in the
     USA: a comparison of the 1960s and 1990s". Socio­Economic Review, 1: 289­325.

[57] Wu, Bingxiao. 2019. "Entry regulation and the effect of public reporting: Evidence
     from Home Health Compare". Health Economics. 28: 492­516.




                                          29
Data Appendix: Harmonization of industry codes
The basis for the harmonization of the industry codes is the aggregate industry codes in
the NBER MORG extracts. The NBER itself combines the 1970, 1980 and 1990 codes
to generate 48 harmonized aggregate codes, leaving the main task the harmonization of
this set of codes with the 2000 aggregate codes. Our general approach is to make the
later codes conform to the earlier codes, but we do make some changes to the earlier
codes. We reassign those in the 1970­1990 agricultural services category (which does
not exist in the 2000 codes) based on their detailed industry code to other professional
services (veterinary services), business services (landscaping and horticultural services)
or agriculture (other agricultural services). We also split the 1970­1990 retail trade and
food services category into two (retail trade, food services). The largest set of changes
to the 2000 codes involve the professional and technical services and administrative and
support services categories, which crudely correspond to other professional services and
business services respectively. However, we reassign specialized design services, computer
systems design and related, management, scientific and technical consulting, and adver-
tising and related services from professional and technical services to business services;
the aggregate category of membership associations and organizations to other professional
services; rental and leasing services from rental/leasing to business services (except video
leasing, which is assigned to arts and entertainment); data processing from other informa-
tion services to business services; travel services from administrative and support services
to transportation. We also change the 2000 codes so as to move librarians from other
information services to educational services. We merge the 2000 categories (and in some
cases 1970­1990 categores) of agriculture and forestry; beverage and tobacco production;
petroleum/coal and mining; primary, fabricated and not specified metals; furniture and
wood; paper and printing, textiles, apparel and leather; aircrafts and parts, motor vehicles
and parts, and transportation equipment; toys/amusements/sporting goods, professional
and photographic equipment, miscellaneous manufacturing; accomodation and personal
and laundry services; broadcasting, telecommunications, internet publishing and broad-
casting and internet services and data provision; paper/printing and publishing; electrical
machinery production and computer and electronics production. Some of these merges
are done because the more detailed categories are small.




                                            30
                                         Figure 1: Summary inequality measures, 1973­2018

                             .9                                                                     .9

                            .85                                                  90-50              .85

                             .8                                                                     .8
  Difference in log wages




                            .75                                                                     .75
                                                                                 50-10
                             .7                                                                     .7

                            .65                                                                     .65

                             .6                                                                     .6




                                  1975     1980   1985   1990   1995    2000   2005   2010   2015


Note: Difference between 90th and median log hourly wages (90­50) and median and
10th percentile wages (50­10), weighted by weekly hours work. Non­self employed
workers 18­64 without missing values for covariates used elsewhere in the paper, but
including imputed values.

Source: CPS MORGs 1979­2018 and CPS Mays 1973­1979.




                                                                31
                 Figure 2: Shares of workers in four wage bins, 1973­2018

   .36                                                                              .36

   .34                                                                              .34

   .32                                                      Top                     .32

    .3                                                                              .3

   .28                                                                              .28

   .26                                                                              .26
                                                       Upper middle
   .24                                                                              .24

   .22                                                                              .22
                                                      Bottom       Lower middle
    .2                                                                              .2

   .18                                                                              .18
          1975     1980    1985    1990    1995    2000     2005      2010   2015


Note: Real wage bin thresholds are defined based on 1979 quartiles.




                                           32
  Figure 3: Shares of workers in four wage bins, weighted by worker hours, 1973­2018

   .36                                                                             .36
                                                             Top
   .34                                                                             .34

   .32                                                                             .32

    .3                                                                             .3

   .28                                                                             .28

   .26                                                                             .26
                                                         Upper middle
   .24                                                                             .24

   .22                                                                             .22

    .2                                                Bottom       Lower middle    .2

   .18                                                                             .18
          1975    1980    1985    1990    1995    2000     2005     2010    2015

Note: Real wage bin thresholds are defined based on 1979 quartiles.




                                          33
         Figure 4: Shares of workers adjusted for the business cycle, 1973­2018

   .36                                                                            .36

   .34                                                                            .34

   .32                                                                            .32

    .3                                                                            .3
                            Bottom
   .28                                                                            .28
                              Top
   .26                                                                            .26
                         Upper middle
   .24                                                                            .24

   .22                                                                            .22
                         Lower middle
    .2                                                                            .2

   .18                                                                            .18
          1975    1980    1985      1990   1995    2000    2005    2010    2015


Note: Real wage bin thresholds are defined based on 1979 quartiles.




                                           34
                 Figure 5: Shares of workers in ten wage bins, 1973­2018

    .2                                                                            .2

                                                       Top



                          Bottom
   .15                                                                            .15




                                                     Second top

    .1                                                                            .1

                          Third bottom
                                                   Second bottom


   .05                                                                            .05
          1975     1980    1985    1990    1995    2000      2005   2010   2015


Note: Real wage bin thresholds are defined based on 1979 deciles.




                                           35
       Figure 6: Shares of workers in wage bins; age and education fixed at 1979

 .35                                                                               .35




  .3                                                                               .3
                                                            Bottom



                                                          Lower middle
 .25                                                                               .25
                                                               Top




  .2                                                     Upper middle              .2

       1975    1980    1985    1990    1995    2000     2005         2010   2015

Note: Real wage bin thresholds are defined based on 1979 quartiles.




                                          36
               Figure 7: Share of workers in low­wage occupations who are in bottom wage bin


                                     .7                                                                      .7
  Share workers in bottom wage bin




                                                                                           Based on 4 bins
                                     .6                                                                      .6



                                     .5                                                                      .5



                                     .4                                                                      .4


                                                                                       Based on 10 bins
                                     .3                                                                      .3



                                     .2                                                                      .2
                                          1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005     2010   2015


Notes: Occupations are ranked based on 1983 average wages and the bottom­paid oc-
cupations are those occupying 10% of workers, excluding health and nursing aides. The
bottom wage bin is based either on quartiles or deciles in 1979. To harmonize breaks
due to the 1994 CPS redesign and the new occupation codes in 1983, the 1993­1994 and
1982­1983 growths are the average of prior and subsequent pairs of years; to harmonize
across the 2000 occupation code break, the 2002 level with the new codes is normalized
to equal the 2002 level with the old codes.




                                                                      37
                 Figure 8: Shares of women in four wage bins, 1973­2018

   .45     Bottom                                                                .45


    .4                                                                           .4


   .35                                                                           .35
         Lower middle
    .3                                                                           .3


   .25                                                                           .25
         Upper middle

    .2                                                                           .2


   .15                                                                           .15
            Top
    .1                                                                           .1

          1975      1980   1985    1990   1995    2000    2005    2010    2015


Note: Real wage bin thresholds are defined based on 1979 quartiles for pooled women
and men.




                                          38
                  Figure 9: Shares of men in four wage bins, 1973­2018

    .4                                                                          .4

            Top
   .35                                                                          .35



    .3                                                                          .3


         Upper middle
   .25                                                                          .25
         Lower middle


    .2                                                                          .2



   .15     Bottom                                                               .15
          1975      1980   1985    1990   1995    2000    2005    2010   2015


Note: Real wage bin thresholds are defined based on 1979 quartiles for pooled women
and men.




                                          39
            Figure 10: Predicted shares and their components 1983­2018 ­ women

                         P(Bottom)                                        P(Lower middle)
     .4                                                  .28
                                                         .27
    .35
                                                         .26

     .3                                                  .25
                                                         .24
    .25                                                  .23
          1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                     P(Upper middle)                                            P(Top)
    .24                                                   .3

    .23                                                  .25

    .22                                                   .2

    .21                                                  .15

     .2                                                   .1
          1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                                    P hat                Betas                   X's

Note: Oaxaca decomposition based on education, age, state, union status, industry and
occupation.




                                                    40
             Figure 11: Predicted shares and their components 1983­2018 ­ men

                         P(Bottom)                                        P(Lower middle)
    .24
                                                         .22
    .22                                                  .21

     .2                                                   .2

    .18                                                  .19

    .16                                                  .18
          1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                     P(Upper middle)                                            P(Top)
    .26                                                   .4
    .25                                                  .38
    .24                                                  .36
    .23
                                                         .34
    .22
                                                         .32
          1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                                    P hat                Betas                   X's

Note: Oaxaca decomposition based on education, age, state, union status, industry and
occupation.




                                                    41
                Figure 12: Contributions of individual X's 1983­2018 ­ women

                         P(Bottom)                                            P(Lower middle)
    .41
                                                            .275
     .4
                                                             .27
    .39
    .38                                                     .265

    .37                                                      .26

    .36                                                     .255
          1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                  1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                      P(Upper middle)                                              P(Top)
    .215                                                    .18

                                                            .16
     .21
                                                            .14
    .205
                                                            .12

      .2                                                     .1
           1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                            Education                     Age                           Industry
                            States                        Occupation                    Union

Note: Oaxaca decomposition based on education, age, state, union status, industry and
occupation.




                                                     42
                  Figure 13: Contributions of individual X's 1983­2018 ­ men

                         P(Bottom)                                            P(Lower middle)
    .23
                                                            .205
    .22
                                                              .2
    .21                                                     .195
     .2                                                      .19
    .19                                                     .185
          1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                  1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                      P(Upper middle)                                              P(Top)
     .26                                                    .38

    .255                                                    .36

     .25                                                    .34

    .245                                                    .32
           1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                            Education                     Age                           Industry
                            States                        Occupation                    Union

Note: Oaxaca decomposition based on education, age, state, union status, industry and
occupation.




                                                     43
                                                     Figure 14: Foster and Wolfson (2009) test for polarization

                                             6
Distance from median as fraction of median




                                             5


                                             4


                                             3


                                             2


                                             1


                                             0
                                                 1   10      20      30        40       50      60       70   80   90   100
                                                                          Percentile of wage distribution

                                                                                  1973               2018




                                                                                  44
                                                                   Figure 15: Mean wages by occupation

                                            50
Mean hourly 1983 wage of occupation $2018




                                            40
                                                 90th percentile

                                            30
                                                 80th percentile
                                                 70th percentile
                                            20   60th percentile
                                                 50th percentile
                                                 40
                                                 30
                                                 20
                                            10   10




                                            0
                                                 1         50         100        150        200       250    300   350
                                                                      Occupations ranked by mean 1983 wage

Note: Horizontal lines refer to percentiles of the wage distribution. 330 occupations.




                                                                                   45
                                                                              Figure 16: Mean wages by occupational wage percentile
Mean hourly 1983 wage workers in occupation percentile $2017




                                                               50



                                                               40
                                                                        90th percentile


                                                                        80th percentile
                                                                        70th percentile
                                                               20       60th percentile
                                                                        50th percentile
                                                                     40
                                                                     30
                                                                     20
                                                               10   10




                                                               0
                                                                    0                20               40               60             80      100
                                                                                   Percentile of 1983 distribution of mean occupation wages

Note: Horizontal lines refer to percentiles of the wage distribution. 330 occupations.




                                                                                                         46
Figure 17: Share of occupational wage percentile which is workers in fourth wage decile

                           .2




                          .15
Share workers in decile




                           .1




                          .05




                           0
                                0     20               40               60             80      100
                                    Percentile of 1983 distribution of mean occupation wages

Note: 330 occupations.




                                                          47
Embargoed until presentation time of 9:30 a.m. Mountain Daylight Time, Friday, August 22, 2014


                                                                           Figure 7.
    Smoothed Employment Changes by Occupational Skill Percentile, 1979 ­ 2012

                                                           Smoothed Employment Changes by Skill Percentile
                                                Figure 18: Employment polarization
                                                                         Among All asWorkers
                                                                                      depicted in Autor (2015)
                                       .2
      100 x Change in Employment Share
               0       -.1 .1




                                            0                20            40             60           80               100
                                                    Skill Percentile (Ranked by Occupation's 1979 Mean Log Wage)

                                                      1979-1989          1989-1999           1999-2007           2007-2012


   Source: Autor (2015a).
                                                                                                  
   Source:  1980,  1990  and  2000  Census  IPUMS  files;  American  Community  Survey  
   combined  file  2006  ­  2008,  American  Community  Survey  2012.  The  figure  plots  
   changes  in  employment  shares  by  1980  occupational  skill  percentile  rank  using  a  
   locally  weighted  smoothing  regression  (bandwidth  0.8  with  100  observations),  where  
   skill  percentiles  are  measured  as  the  employment-weighted  percentile  rank  of  an  
   occupation's  mean  log  wage  in  the  Census  IPUMS  1980  5  percent  extract.  
   Employment  in  each  occupation  is  calculated  using  workers'  hours  of  annual  labor  
   supply  times  the  Census  sampling  weights.  Consistent  occupation  codes  for  Census  
   years  1980,  1990,  and  2000,  and  2008  are  from  Autor  and  Dorn  (2013).  
                                                                             48
                              Figure 19: Shares of workers in lowest­paid occupations, 1973­2018

                        .13                                                                           .13
                                                                                  With health aides

                        .12                                                                           .12

                        .11                                                                           .11
  Share of employment




                         .1                                                            Baseline       .1

                        .09                                                                           .09

                        .08                                                                           .08

                        .07                                               Service occs without health .07

                        .06                                                                           .06

                        .05                                                                           .05
                                1975    1980   1985    1990   1995    2000    2005   2010    2015


Note: The lowest­paid occupations are the bottom­ranked occupations by wage which
employ 10% of workers in 1983. Service occupations are a subset of this group, defined
as in Autor and Dorn (2013). The vertical lines indicate the occupation code break in
1983 and the CPS redesign in 1994.




                                                              49
Figure 20: Shares of workers in lowest­paid occupations, adjusted for series breaks, 1973­
2018

                         .13                                                                       .13
                                                                            With health aides
                         .12                                                                       .12

                         .11                                                    With agriculture   .11
   Share of employment




                          .1                                                                       .1
                                                                                   Baseline
                         .09                                                                       .09
                                                                                Using AD occs
                         .08                                                                       .08

                         .07                                                                       .07
                                                                     Service occs without health
                         .06                                                                       .06

                         .05                                                                       .05

                         .04                                                                       .04
                               1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005    2010    2015


Note: The lowest­paid occupations are the bottom­ranked occupations by wage which
employ 10% of workers in 1983. Service occupations are a subset of this group. "AD
occs" refers to occupations as ordered in Autor and Dorn (2013) based on annual earnings
in the 1980 Census.




                                                           50
Figure 21: Change in employment share by occupation 1989­1999: reconciliation of CPS
with the literature

                                     .35

                                       .3
  Change in employment share x 100




                                     .25

                                       .2

                                     .15

                                       .1       1989-2000 redesign-adjusted, occupation code break

                                                     1989-1999 redesign-adjusted
                                     .05
                                                          1989-2000 redesign-adjusted
                                       0

                                     -.05
                                            1989-1999
                                      -.1
                                            1        10      20     30       40      50     60      70    80    90   100
                                                             Percentile of 1983 non-farm occupation mean wage

Note: Adjustment for the 1994 CPS redesign consists of setting employment changes to
zero in 1993­1994.




                                                                              51
  Figure 22: Change in employment share by occupation, 2000­2010 and 2011­2018

                                   .35

                                     .3
Change in employment share x 100




                                   .25

                                     .2
                                              2000-2010
                                   .15

                                     .1

                                   .05

                                     0

                                   -.05
                                              2011-2018
                                    -.1
                                          1      10       20     30       40      50     60      70    80    90   100
                                                          Percentile of 1983 non-farm occupation mean wage




                                                                          52
                                           Figure 23: Change in employment share by occupation, 1983­2018

                                     .8

                                     .7

                                     .6
  Change in employment share x 100




                                     .5

                                     .4

                                     .3

                                     .2         Adjusted for redesign only

                                     .1

                                      0

                                     -.1

                                     -.2       Adjusted for redesign and occupation code break
                                     -.3
                                           1       10      20      30       40      50     60      70     80   90   100
                                                            Percentile of 1983 non-farm occupation mean wage

Note: Adjustment for the 1994 CPS redesign and 2000 occupation code break consists of
setting employment changes to zero in 1993­1994 and 2002­2003.




                                                                              53
Figure 24: Shares of subgroups of workers in lowest­paid occupations adjusted for series
breaks, 1973­2018

                        .09                                                                  .09
                                                                               Non-college

                        .08                                                                  .08

                        .07                                                                  .07
  Share of employment




                                                                                Women
                        .06                                                                  .06

                        .05                                                                  .05

                        .04                                                       Men        .04

                        .03                                                                  .03

                        .02                                                                  .02
                                                                                 College
                        .01                                                                  .01

                         0                                                                   0
                              1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015


Note: The lowest­paid occupations are those employing 10% of workers in 1983. Women,
men, college and non­college are subsets of this group.




                                                          54
          Figure A1: Shares of women adjusted for business cycle, 1973­2018

   .45        Bottom                                                            .45

    .4                                                                          .4

   .35                                                                          .35
         Lower middle

    .3                                                                          .3

   .25                                                                          .25
         Upper middle
    .2                                                                          .2

   .15                                                                          .15
             Top
    .1                                                                          .1


          1975     1980   1985   1990    1995    2000    2005    2010   2015


Note: Real wage bin thresholds are defined based on 1979 quartiles for pooled women
and men.




                                         55
           Figure A2: Shares of men adjusted for business cycle, 1973­2018

    .4                                                                          .4


             Top
   .35                                                                          .35



    .3      Upper middle                                                        .3



   .25                                                                          .25
          Lower middle


    .2                                                                          .2
             Bottom


   .15                                                                          .15
         1975      1980    1985   1990   1995    2000    2005    2010    2015


Note: Real wage bin thresholds are defined based on 1979 quartiles for pooled women
and men.




                                         56
Figure A3: Predicted shares and their components without occupation 1983­2018 ­
women

                         P(Bottom)                                        P(Lower middle)
     .4                                                  .28
                                                         .27
    .35
                                                         .26

     .3                                                  .25
                                                         .24
    .25                                                  .23
          1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                     P(Upper Middle)                                            P(Top)
    .24                                                   .3

    .23                                                  .25

    .22                                                   .2
    .21                                                  .15
     .2
                                                          .1
          1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                                    P hat                Betas                   X's

Note: Oaxaca decomposition based on education, age, state, union status, and industry.




                                                    57
Figure A4: Predicted shares and their components without occupation 1983­2018 ­ men

                         P(Bottom)                                        P(Lower middle)
    .24                                                  .24

    .22                                                  .22

     .2                                                   .2

    .18                                                  .18

    .16                                                  .16
          1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                     P(Upper Middle)                                            P(Top)
    .26                                                   .4
    .25                                                  .38
    .24                                                  .36

    .23                                                  .34

    .22                                                  .32

          1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                                    P hat                Betas                   X's

Note: Oaxaca decomposition based on education, age, state, union status, and industry.




                                                    58
  Figure A5: Contributions of individual X's without occupation 1983­2018 ­ women

                         P(Bottom)                                         P(Lower middle)
                                                          .28
     .4

    .38                                                   .27

    .36                                                   .26

    .34                                                   .25

    .32                                                   .24
          1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015               1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                      P(Upper Middle)                                            P(Top)
     .22                                                   .2

    .215                                                  .18

     .21                                                  .16

    .205                                                  .14

      .2                                                  .12

           1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                               Education                  Age                     Industry
                               States                     Union

Note: Oaxaca decomposition based on education, age, state, union status, and industry.




                                                     59
   Figure A6: Contributions of individual X's without occupation 1983­2018 ­ men

                         P(Bottom)                                         P(Lower middle)
                                                          .21
    .22
    .21                                                    .2
     .2                                                   .19
    .19
                                                          .18
    .18
    .17                                                   .17
          1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015               1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                      P(Upper Middle)                                            P(Top)
    .258                                                   .4
    .256
                                                          .38
    .254
    .252                                                  .36

     .25                                                  .34
    .248
                                                          .32
           1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


                               Education                  Age                     Industry
                               States                     Union

Note: Oaxaca decomposition based on education, age, state, union status, and industry.




                                                     60
  Figure A7: Contributions of individual X's 1983­2018 bottom of ten bins ­ women

   .205


      .2


   .195


    .19


   .185


    .18

           1980   1985      1990      1995      2000      2005      2010        2015

                          Education             Age                        Industry
                          States                Occupation                 Union


Note: Oaxaca decomposition based on education, age, state, union status, and industry.




                                          61
    Figure A8: Contributions of individual X's 1983­2018 bottom of ten bins ­ men

   .205


      .2


   .195


    .19


   .185


    .18

           1980   1985      1990      1995      2000      2005      2010        2015

                          Education             Age                        Industry
                          States                Occupation                 Union


Note: Oaxaca decomposition based on education, age, state, union status, and industry.




                                          62
Figure A9: Changes in employment share by occupation percentile for pairs of years in
1990s

                                       .3
  Change in employment share x 100




                                     .25
                                       .2
                                     .15
                                       .1
                                     .05
                                       0
                                     -.05
                                      -.1
                                            1   10   20     30       40      50     60      70    80    90   100
                                                     Percentile of 1983 non-farm occupation mean wage

                                                                 1989-1990              1990-1991
                                                                 1991-1992              1992-1993
                                                                 1993-1994              1994-1995
                                                                 1995-1996              1996-1997




                                                                     63
                                                  Appendix Table 1: Means of age, education and union status

                                                        Women                                                           Men
                                1973       1983          1990         2008        2018         1973            1983     1990        2008        2018
     Age 18-20                    0.103      0.079        0.067        0.048       0.043         0.076        0.069       0.064       0.047       0.041
     Age 21-24                    0.144      0.134        0.105        0.089       0.089         0.125        0.125       0.106       0.089       0.085
     Age 25-29                    0.134      0.163        0.151        0.120       0.129         0.156        0.164       0.158       0.128       0.133
     Age 30-34                    0.100      0.142        0.151        0.108       0.118         0.129        0.149       0.158       0.119       0.127
     Age 35-39                    0.097      0.122        0.141        0.116       0.115         0.101        0.124       0.141       0.124       0.120
     Age 40-44                    0.099      0.101        0.130        0.121       0.106         0.102        0.099       0.122       0.123       0.109
     Age 45-49                    0.101      0.081        0.097        0.131       0.112         0.098        0.081       0.090       0.127       0.110
     Age 50-54                    0.097      0.073        0.070        0.120       0.110         0.092        0.077       0.070       0.110       0.104
     Age 55-64                    0.125      0.106        0.089        0.148       0.180         0.120        0.112       0.091       0.135       0.171
     8 years school or fewer      0.096      0.042        0.033        0.020       0.018         0.140        0.071       0.060       0.038       0.029
     9-12 years school            0.155      0.092        0.075        0.041       0.030         0.164        0.111       0.097       0.060       0.042
     12 years school              0.473      0.455        0.422        0.280       0.237         0.381        0.388       0.387       0.321       0.306
     13-15 years school           0.145      0.217        0.243        0.327       0.305         0.156        0.197       0.211       0.276       0.272




64
     16 years school              0.089      0.121        0.143        0.224       0.262         0.090        0.131       0.144       0.203       0.231
     Over 16 years school         0.043      0.073        0.084        0.109       0.149         0.070        0.101       0.101       0.101       0.121
     Union member                 0.147      0.152        0.129        0.117       0.101         0.327        0.255       0.197       0.137       0.113
     Union coverage               0.000      0.035        0.024        0.014       0.013         0.000        0.031       0.021       0.012       0.011
     Not member or covered        0.853      0.813        0.847        0.868       0.886         0.673        0.714       0.782       0.851       0.876
     N                         15,344     76,135       84,629       81,173      71,927       22,055       88,100      90,770      82,769      74,527
                                                         Appendix Table 2: Means of industries

                                                         Women                                                     Men
                                    1973       1983       1990         2008       2018       1973       1983       1990       2008       2018
     Agriculture/forestry             0.005      0.005      0.004        0.004      0.005      0.018      0.019      0.015      0.013      0.014
     Mining/petroleum/coal            0.003      0.005      0.003        0.002      0.002      0.019      0.019      0.013      0.012      0.011
     Construction                     0.009      0.010      0.010        0.013      0.013      0.104      0.089      0.095      0.112      0.109
     Furniture/wood                   0.008      0.005      0.006        0.004      0.000      0.021      0.018      0.020      0.011      0.003
     Non-metallic minerals            0.005      0.003      0.003        0.002      0.001      0.011      0.009      0.009      0.006      0.006
     Metals                           0.015      0.010      0.008        0.005      0.004      0.061      0.035      0.031      0.021      0.019
     Machinery except electrical      0.013      0.014      0.012        0.004      0.004      0.041      0.039      0.034      0.015      0.013
     Electrical machinery             0.031      0.023      0.017        0.011      0.007      0.029      0.026      0.023      0.020      0.015
     Transportation equipment         0.010      0.011      0.012        0.009      0.009      0.044      0.039      0.037      0.027      0.027
     Miscellaneous manufacturing      0.014      0.012      0.011        0.008      0.008      0.011      0.013      0.012      0.011      0.013
     Food/beverage/tobacco            0.016      0.014      0.013        0.011      0.012      0.029      0.025      0.023      0.018      0.018
     Textile/apparel/leather          0.060      0.036      0.025        0.006      0.004      0.020      0.014      0.012      0.004      0.004
     Paper/printing                   0.020      0.020      0.020        0.011      0.007      0.031      0.029      0.028      0.016      0.011
     Chemicals                        0.007      0.009      0.008        0.007      0.008      0.018      0.018      0.017      0.012      0.013
     Plastics/rubber                  0.007      0.006      0.005        0.003      0.002      0.010      0.010      0.009      0.006      0.005
     Transportation/warehousing       0.015      0.021      0.026        0.026      0.028      0.053      0.061      0.063      0.068      0.067




65
     Broadcasting/communication       0.019      0.017      0.015        0.012      0.008      0.014      0.017      0.015      0.019      0.016
     Utilities/waste management       0.005      0.007      0.006        0.005      0.006      0.025      0.026      0.023      0.020      0.020
     Wholesale trade                  0.023      0.026      0.024        0.018      0.015      0.049      0.056      0.052      0.039      0.033
     Retail trade                     0.128      0.125      0.124        0.115      0.109      0.102      0.098      0.102      0.111      0.108
     Finance                          0.037      0.048      0.046        0.043      0.037      0.015      0.020      0.021      0.028      0.029
     Insurance/real estate            0.035      0.042      0.046        0.039      0.039      0.023      0.026      0.028      0.024      0.028
     Private households               0.032      0.018      0.013        0.011      0.010      0.001      0.003      0.002      0.001      0.001
     Business services                0.021      0.032      0.045        0.044      0.051      0.018      0.035      0.049      0.064      0.079
     Repair                           0.003      0.002      0.002        0.003      0.003      0.016      0.015      0.017      0.019      0.020
     Personal services                0.032      0.029      0.033        0.030      0.032      0.010      0.014      0.017      0.015      0.014
     Arts/entertainment               0.006      0.009      0.010        0.019      0.020      0.008      0.011      0.011      0.022      0.023
     Hospitals                        0.082      0.086      0.077        0.079      0.081      0.017      0.022      0.020      0.022      0.024
     Healthcare except hospitals      0.049      0.065      0.073        0.107      0.120      0.006      0.008      0.010      0.022      0.026
     Educational services             0.153      0.126      0.124        0.148      0.142      0.059      0.060      0.055      0.057      0.059
     Social assistance                0.019      0.024      0.030        0.035      0.036      0.010      0.006      0.007      0.006      0.006
     Other professional services      0.023      0.035      0.043        0.059      0.063      0.018      0.029      0.031      0.049      0.054
     Public administration            0.043      0.048      0.050        0.050      0.050      0.072      0.060      0.059      0.056      0.056
     Food services                    0.051      0.058      0.056        0.061      0.067      0.018      0.033      0.039      0.052      0.055
     N                             15,344     76,135     84,629       81,173     71,927     22,055     88,100     90,770     82,769     74,527
    Appendix Table 3: Oaxaca decomposition of women's share in top and bottom wage groups

                        1983-1990                    1990-2008                    2008-2018
                  Bottom         Top           Bottom         Top           Bottom         Top
                    (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
Panel A
P                 -0.719***      0.744***      -0.450***      0.536***     -0.299***      0.247***
                   (0.035)       (0.025)        (0.013)       (0.011)       (0.022)       (0.023)
                  -0.388***      0.453***      -0.231***      0.231***     -0.192***      -0.004
                   (0.030)       (0.023)        (0.013)       (0.012)       (0.020)       (0.020)
X                 -0.332***      0.292***      -0.219***      0.306***     -0.128***      0.251***
                   (0.020)       (0.015)        (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.012)       (0.014)
Panel B
 Age              -0.108***      0.072***      -0.061***       0.064***     -0.005        -0.010**
                   (0.006)       (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.003)
 Education        -0.113***      0.101***      -0.133***       0.149***    -0.106***      0.183***
                   (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.004)        (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.006)
 Industry          0.014**       -0.012**       0.015***      -0.018***     0.008**      -0.014***
                   (0.007)       (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)
 Union             0.056***     -0.029***       0.007***      -0.006***     0.009***     -0.010***
                   (0.004)       (0.003)        (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)
 State             -0.004         -0.000         0.002*       -0.005***      0.000         -0.001
                   (0.004)       (0.003)        (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)
 Occupation       -0.177***      0.160***      -0.050***       0.121***    -0.024***      0.103***
                   (0.011)       (0.010)        (0.007)        (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.008)
Observations              160,764                       165,802                    153,100

Note: Contributions in percentage points per year. Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.1,** p<0.05,
***
    p<0.01.




                                      66
     Appendix Table 4: Oaxaca decomposition of men's share in top and bottom wage groups

                        1983-1990                    1990-2008                    2008-2018
                  Bottom         Top           Bottom         Top           Bottom         Top
                    (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
Panel A
P                 0.076**       -0.068**       -0.165***      0.288***     -0.089***      0.135***
                  (0.028)        (0.032)        (0.011)       (0.013)       (0.022)       (0.027)
                  0.067***      -0.103***      -0.064***      0.064***     -0.052**       0.012***
                  (0.024)        (0.028)        (0.011)       (0.013)       (0.020)       (0.024)
X                  0.008          0.035*       -0.100***      0.223***     -0.037**        0.124
                  (0.016)        (0.019)        (0.008)       (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.016)
Panel B
 Age              -0.082***      0.073***      -0.068***       0.102***    -0.017***        0.009
                   (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.005)
 Education        -0.050***      0.060***      -0.070***       0.102***    -0.066***      0.123***
                   (0.004)       (0.006)        (0.003)        (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.006)
 Industry          0.039***     -0.029***       0.019***      -0.015***     0.021***     -0.023***
                   (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.003)        (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.005)
 Union             0.104***     -0.116***       0.024***      -0.045***     0.013***     -0.028***
                   (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.003)
 State             -0.004        0.013***        0.002*        -0.004**     -0.001         -0.001
                   (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.001)        (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.002)
 Occupation         0.001        0.030**        -0.008         0.082***     0.013**       0.044***
                   (0.008)       (0.011)        (0.005)        (0.007)      (0.006)       (0.009)
Observations              178,870                       173,539                    158,934

Note: Contributions in percentage points per year. Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.1,** p<0.05,
***
    p<0.01.




                                      67
