                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          FROM LEARNING TO DOING:
          DIFFUSION OF AGRICULTURAL INNOVATIONS IN GUINEA-BISSAU

                                      Rute Martins Caeiro

                                      Working Paper 26065
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26065


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




I am grateful for helpful suggestions from André Moreira, Inês Vilela, Julia Seither, Paulo Santos
and Pedro Vicente. I would like to thank Pedro Santos, Patrícia Maridalho and the VIDA team for
their cooperation and support. I wish to acknowledge the financial support provided by European
Union and Camões-Instituto da Cooperação e da Língua, through the project "Kopoti pa cudji no
futuro". This work was funded by Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (UID/
ECO/00124/2013 and Social Sciences DataLab, Project 22209), POR Lisboa (LISBOA-01-0145-
FEDER-007722 and Social Sciences DataLab, Project 22209) and POR Norte (Social Sciences
DataLab, Project 22209). I would also like to acknowledge FCT for the PhD Scholarship PD/
BD/105725/2014. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Rute Martins Caeiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
From Learning to Doing: Diffusion of Agricultural Innovations in Guinea-Bissau
Rute Martins Caeiro
NBER Working Paper No. 26065
July 2019
JEL No. O13,O31,O33,Q16

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the role of social networks in the diffusion of knowledge and adoption of
cultivation techniques, from trainees to the wider community, in the context of an extension
project in Guinea-Bissau. In order to test for social learning, we exploit a detailed census of
households and social connections across different dimensions. More precisely, we make use of a
village photo directory in order to obtain a comprehensive and fully mapped social network
dataset. We find evidence that agricultural information spreads across networks from project
participants to non-participants, with different networks having different importance. The most
relevant connection is found to be between the network of people from which individuals would
`borrow money'. We are also able to disentangle the relative importance of weak and strong ties:
in our context, weak ties are as important in the diffusion of agricultural knowledge as strong ties.
Despite positive diffusion effects in knowledge, we found limited evidence of network effects in
adoption behavior. Finally, using longitudinal network data, we document improvements in the
network position of treated farmers over time.


Rute Martins Caeiro
Nova School of Business and Economics
Nova Sbe Rua da Holanda 1
Carcavelos
Portugal
rute.m.caeiro@novasbe.pt
1 Introduction

Agricultural development through productivity improvements is often promoted as an effective means
to reduce poverty amongst Africa's low-income population, for whom agriculture represents the main
source of employment and livelihood. Despite some gains in recent years, agricultural productivity in
the continent, and in sub-Saharan Africa in particular, remains low, lagging well behind the rest of the
world. Although agricultural technologies are available that could significantly boost productivity,
those have not yet been widely adopted in the region. Low access to extension services and to reliable
information are among the most frequently mentioned barriers to technology adoption.


Agriculture development interventions aiming to increase agricultural productivity and yields have the
potential to impact technology adoption beyond project participants, since it is expected that trained
farmers will disseminate the techniques to the rest of the community. If true, social interactions may
play a key role in mitigating information constraints and disseminating improved technologies.


This paper analyzes the role of social networks in the diffusion process of improved knowledge and,
ultimately, adoption of cultivation techniques introduced by an agricultural extension project in Guinea-
Bissau. The project focused on horticultural production and improved cultivation practices, with the
aim of increasing food security and decreasing vulnerability through the diversification of crops and
improvements in production practices.


We take advantage of this randomized intervention to study the diffusion of improved techniques from
project participants to the wider community in one village in Guinea-Bissau. In particular, we test for
spillover effects in terms of both knowledge and adoption of production practices over two agricultural
seasons. In order to understand the mechanism through which both learning and adoption may occur,
we collected a census of both households and their social relations across four dimensions ­ `kinship',
`regular chatting', `agricultural advice' and `borrowing money' ­ allowing us to test for the relative
importance of different channels. Our dataset contains two rounds of network data. We collected
network data by first asking farmers to list their network contacts. Then, in a second stage, we used a
photo directory as a visual aid to help respondents recall additional network links. This elicitation
method allows us to capture results in a more detailed and fully mapped social network and an intuitive
identification of farmers' weak ties ­ those who are mentioned only after visualizing the photo directory.
Our results suggest that information externalities from the project participants to the rest of the
community exist. Individuals with a link to a trained farmer experience increases in agricultural
knowledge. Testing for the different information channels, not all network groups contribute equally
for the diffusion of information. We find stronger network effects for those peers with links to farmers


                                                                                                        2
from whom they could ask for money in times of need. In contrast, we find evidence of a decrease in
information exchange through a farmers kinship network. Furthermore, exploiting our measure of link
strength, weak social links appear to be as relevant as strong links in the diffusion of information.
Despite positive effects in knowledge, we found only limited evidence of social effects on adoption.
Finally, we document network changes as a result of the intervention. In particular, we find evidence
that the treatment led to an improvement in the network position of treatment farmers, with treated
farmers becoming more central in the village social structure.


This paper relates to the literature on diffusion of information, technologies and behavior within social
networks. Diffusion effects along social networks have been documented in a variety of settings,
including health prevention (Oster and Thornton, 2012; Godlonton and Thornton, 2012; Apouey and
Picone, 2014), educational outcomes (Bobonis and Finan, 2009; Fafchamps and Mo, 2017), financial
decisions (Duflo and Saez, 2003; Cai, Janvry and Sadoulet, 2015; Banerjee et al., 2013), and agricultural
practices (Foster and Rosenzweig, 1995; Munshi, 2004; Bandiera and Rasul, 2006; Conley and Udry,
2010; Van den Broeck and Dercon, 2011).


Our paper is closer in spirit to previous works on agricultural technology diffusion within social
networks. Within that, Foster and Rosenzweig, (1995) was one of the early studies to investigate the
effects of social learning in agriculture. In a study of adoption of high-yielding varieties in India, the
authors found evidence of learning externalities not just via mimicking behavior, but through farmers
learning from other farmers' experience. More recently, Bandiera and Rasul (2006) studied the adoption
of sunflower seeds in Mozambique and provided further evidence of positive peer effects on adoption
decisions. In a seminal paper, Conley and Udry (2010), were among the first to study peer-effects on
agricultural technology adoption using explicit social network data. Focusing on pineapple producers
in Ghana, they identified knowledge flows by asking farmers whether they had gone to a random
selection of farmers in the village for agricultural advice. They also found evidence of farmers learning
from one another, aligning their use of fertilizers with that of their most successful peers.


Although those and several other studies have found evidence of positive peer effects in technology
adoption, unfortunately results have not always been as encouraging. Research has also shown that
diffusion of knowledge and practices can be limited in some settings (Fafchamps and Quinn, 2016;
Fafchamps and Söderbom, 2014) or non-existent (Duflo, Kremer and Robinson, 2011). And in some
contexts, social network effects may even generate perverse outcomes, for example, creating incentives
for delaying adoption and free-riding on the experimentation of others (Foster and Rosenzweig, 1995;
Bandiera and Rasul, 2006; Maertens, 2017), or making technology adoption less likely altogether
(Miguel and Kremer, 2007).


                                                                                                        3
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides the context of the study setting.
Section 3 describes the setting of the horticultural production project. Section 4 describes the data
collection, and the network and outcome measures employed. In Section 5 we outline the estimation
strategy. Section 6 presents the econometric results. Finally, in Section 7 we conclude.


2 Context

Guinea-Bissau, a country in West Africa with a population of approximately 1.8 million, is one of the
poorest countries in the world, with a GDP per capita of 1450$PPP and 67 percent of its population
living on less than $1.90 per day.1 Agriculture is key to Guinea-Bissau's economy: it accounts for 69
percent of GDP and represents the primary source of income for 85 percent of its population. The
agriculture sector is dominated by cashew nut production for export, by rice production for
consumption, and by horticulture production on a smaller scale.2 Rice is the main staple crop in the
country and is widely grown, but rice productivity has remained relatively low.3 Low productivity can
be explained by several constraints faced by the agricultural sector ranging from erratic weather, scarce
inputs and extension services, and weakened infrastructure. Years of poor harvest or shocks to cashew
prices can leave subsistence farmers in a particularly vulnerable situation, as was the case in 2012, when
a combination of poor cashew harvest, lower export prices and political instability led to a rise in food
insecurity.4 As for the horticultural sector, production has steadily increased, from 26,381 tons in 2005
to 33,420 tons in 2014.5 In the Guinea-Bissau - Country' Economic Memorandum (2015), the World
Bank identified horticulture as one of the agricultural sectors with greatest economic potential, and as
a potential source of alternative income for rural households that would allow them to mitigate the risks
posed by relying on a single cash crop.


The setting for this study was the village of Suzana, in the northwest region of Guinea-Bissau (Figure
1). Suzana is a rural village, with 354 households spread across 8 neighborhoods. The majority of
households in Suzana are from the Felupe ethnic group, and most of the individuals in the village are
subsistence farmers. As in other regions of the country, rice is the main crop, and cashew is produced
on a smaller scale. Horticultural production is relatively scarce and is almost exclusively a female
activity. Furthermore, there are no agriculture extension services in the region.




1
  World Development Indicators (2017), World Bank.
2
  See World Bank (2015).
3
  In 2014 rice productivity in Guinea-Bissau was 15.6 thousand hectograms per hectare, well below the average
African level of 25.9 (FAOSTAT Database).
4
  See World Food Program (2013).
5
  FAOSTAT Database.

                                                                                                            4
3 Agricultural intervention

In 2015, the international NGO `VIDA' introduced an agricultural production project providing
agricultural technical training and inputs to farmers in 6 villages of Guinea-Bissau, including Suzana.
The project included training sessions on horticultural cultivation techniques, creation and management
of farmers associations, and on the logistics of the supply chain to local markets. This study focuses
specifically on the horticultural production component of the project. We take advantage of this
intervention in order to study the diffusion effects of cultivation practices from the project participants
to the rest of the community in the village of Suzana. In what follows we briefly describe the
horticultural production component of the project and the selection of the project participants.


3.1 Horticultural production training

The horticultural production element of the intervention included three modules on cultivation
techniques, which took place between November 2015 and February 2016, before the 2016 agricultural
season (which runs from March to mid-July). The modules included a mix of theoretical and practical
training sessions focusing mainly on improved production techniques. The training covered practices
such as land preparation, irrigation, staking, pruning, soil enrichment, spacing, mulch, seed selection,
nursery preparation and management, pest and disease management, organic pesticides, and post-
harvesting handling. Although some of those practices were already familiar to farmers, most were
newly introduced by the project.


3.2 Project participants

Project participants were selected by the female village leaders, who provided a list of progressive
female farmers interested in participating in the intervention. That list of potential participants made up
the sample of a randomized impact evaluation conducted on the project. Those were then randomly
allocated to either the control or treatment group, with blocks being formed at the level of the village
before randomization. In addition, female village leaders also attended the program. Results of the
impact evaluation are not the main scope of this paper, but they are briefly addressed in the next
sections. As mentioned in the previous section, this paper focuses only on the village of Suzana, where
35 farmers were assigned to the treatment group and participated in the project, while another 41
constituted the control group. As such those 76 individuals constitute the experimental subjects within
Suzana village.




                                                                                                         5
4 Measurement and data

We conducted two round of data collection, and each round included both a village census and a
household survey. Survey respondents were the individuals responsible for the households' horticulture
production - usually the female head of the household. The village census conducted includes questions
on demographic characteristics, horticultural production patterns during the previous agricultural
season, and household asset ownership. During the collection of the census data for first round of
surveys, an enumerator took a photo of each respondent in order to compile a photo album of the village
which was then used for the household survey. The household survey collected data on the individuals'
network links, on horticultural production patterns during the previous agricultural season, and on
practical horticultural knowledge and adoption.


The first village census took place in February and March 2016 and included all 354 households in the
village. This was followed by the household survey and network data collection which took place
between August and September of 2016, directly following the 2016 agricultural season. Regarding the
second round of data collection, the census and second survey took place in November 2017, after the
2017 agricultural season. In the data collection points following the first survey, we were able to track
over 90% of the initial respondents (345 in the second survey and 339 in the subsequent two out the
354 households). All data collection activities took place after the horticultural training intervention
described in the previous section.


4.1 Network measures

During the household survey, which followed each of the census data collections, we collected data on
each household's social network structure. Respondents were asked about all their social links in
different contexts. This approach allows us to obtain a complete network map. Because the collection
of such data is cumbersome and fraught with limitations, we proceeded in two steps.


We elicited the individuals' social links along four dimensions: i) kinship network, which is defined as
individuals with whom the respondent has a kinship tie; ii) chatting network, which includes individuals
the respondent regularly chats with; iii) agricultural advice network, which contains individuals the
respondent would go to for agricultural advice; and iv) money-borrowing network, defined as the set of
individuals the respondent could ask for money in times of need. The same set of four network questions
were repeated to the respondent in the same order for each of the neighborhoods located in the village.
With eight neighborhoods, respondents thus answered each set of network questions eight times. The
order of the neighborhoods presented to each individual varied randomly.


                                                                                                       6
The network links were collected through survey questions in a two-step procedure. We first asked
farmers to name all individuals with whom they had a network link according to our four different
social dimensions. This was done using an open question ­ i.e., not imposing a limit on the number of
links the individual could list. This method might tend to capture only the individual's strong links, as
those closer to the respondent are more likely to be named while those with whom the respondent
interacts less frequently are more easily forgotten, i.e. a respondents weaker social links (Maertens and
Barrett, 2012, Brewer, 2000).


To address this concern, we implemented a second step, where we used the village photo album
collected during the first survey to prompt respondents and determine whether the respondent had any
additional links not named previously ­ this provides a way that is both feasible and intuitive of
identifying weak (and easily forgotten) links. The village photo album was organized by neighborhood,
included the photo of one person per household (the household representative), and depicted all the
households in the village.


To be more concrete, and using the kinship network as an example, we first elicited the kinship
relationships from "memory" by asking: "Who are your family members that live in the neighborhood
of «Catama» but outside of your household residence?" In the second step we asked the respondents to
go through the photos of that neighborhood and asked: "Do you have any other family member living
in the neighborhood of «Catama»?" This procedure was then replicated for the chatting network, which
elicited the individuals with whom the respondent talked to on a regular basis (at least once a week).
Again, this was followed by the agricultural advice network which elicited the individuals that the
respondent would go to for agricultural advice. Lastly, the fourth network dimension was the borrowing
money network which elicited the individuals that the respondent could ask for money in times of need.


For the latter two network dimensions, namely agriculture advice and borrowing money, we further
recorded what we refer to as the effective link. While the statements above are phrased in such a way
as to elicit the potential link (who would you go to), we also collect the effective link (who did you go
to). In what follows, unless otherwise stated, agricultural advice and borrowing money refers to the
network of potential links.


By eliciting the social networks in this manner we are implicitly capturing the strength of ties between
individuals, since links elicited from "memory" are more likely to capture strong ties, while the
remaining links prompted from the village photo album would more likely capture weak ties. In what
follows, we define strong ties as the links provided from "memory", and weak ties as the links identified


                                                                                                       7
when aided by the photo album. Appendix A provides additional discussion and robustness checks on
the measures of tie strength.


Finally, in addition to the aforementioned measurements, we also collected data on group membership,
such as religious or self-help groups, as well as neighboring plots through GPS coordinates. In the
results that follow we focus on the first four network variables described: kinship, regular chatting,
agricultural advice and borrowing money.


4.2 Outcome measures

In our analysis of spillover effects we focus mainly on two outcome variables of interest: knowledge
and adoption of agricultural practices. A list of 10 survey questions on production practices, based on
the topics covered during the horticultural training, was used to measure the adoption of improved
practices. These were then followed by 10 survey questions designed to measure the respondents'
knowledge with respect to those same practices. Practices covered included land preparation, irrigation,
nursery management, spacing, mulch, soil enrichment, pruning, staking, pest management and crop
rotation. The practice adoption questions focused on whether respondents had adopted the
aforementioned practices in the previous agricultural season, which had just finished. The practice
knowledge questions tested respondents' knowledge on either how to apply the practice or their
benefits. Responses to the two sets of questions were then used to construct two indices, one for
production practice adoption and one for production practice knowledge, as the simple average of the
z-scores for the relevant survey questions.6 Table 1 provides a description of this variables.


                                          < Table 1 around here >


As for the analysis of network changes, we focus on network centrality measures. To be more specific,
we computed centrality measures in terms of in degree, out degree, betweenness and closeness centrality
for the different network dimensions. Degree centrality captures how connected a farmer is.
Betweenness describes the importance of an individual in connecting other farmers. Finally, closeness
centrality captures how close an individual is to all other farmers in the network.7 All centrality
measures were standardized and therefore range between zero and one.


6
  The z-scores were computed by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of the impact
evaluation control group. Following Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) if an individual has a response to at least
one of the 11 survey questions, then any missing value for the other variables are imputed by the group mean.
7
  In degree refers to the number of farmers the respondent mentioned as network partner, while out degree is the
number of farmers that mentioned the respondent as a network partner. Betweenness is the number of shortest
paths between farmers that pass through the individual. Closeness is calculated as the inverse of the distance
between the individual an any other farmer.

                                                                                                              8
5 Estimation strategy

We start our analysis by estimating the treatment effects for the outcomes of interest in the impact
evaluation sample (progressive farmers). Given the random assignment of the treatment, the average
treatment effects of the agriculture training program can be estimated using the specification:


                                      =  +  +  ,                                                 (1)


where  represents the outcome variable of interest for individual  at time .  is a binary variable
which takes the value of one if the individual was assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise.


The above specification can also be estimated using individual control variables:


                                   =  +  +  +  ,                                                 (2)


where        is a vector of individual and household characteristics, such as age, years of education,
religion dummies, marital status, and household assets.


Average treatment effects are not the primary focus of this paper, however. Instead, we are interested
in estimating the diffusion effects of the training program. Our village contains both progressive farmers
(those selected to participate and which may be allocated a treatment or control status) and non-
progressive farmers (the remaining farmers from the village population). We are interested in testing
whether the knowledge and adoption behavior of non-progressive farmers is affected by the number of
treated (progressive) farmers in their social networks. Our identification strategy uses the
experimentally-induced variation in the number of treated farmers, conditional on the number of peer
progressive farmers. We conduct a household level analysis employing the following specification:


                        =  +   +   +  +  +  ,                                                    (3)


where,       is the number of links with treated individuals, and          are the number links with all
progressive farmers in individual  ´s social network at time 0 (the first round of network data collection).
The inclusion of  ensures that the estimation of  is not driven by the overall size of an individuals'
network. Hence,  captures the experimentally-induce variation in the number of treated peers. In
addition,      is a vector of individual and household characteristics, which include gender, years of
education, marital status, religion, ethnic group, whether the household produced horticultural crops in
the previous year, and household assets.              captures the average individual and household

                                                                                                          9
characteristics of individuals  ´s network members, which allows us to control for the fixed
characteristics of the other farmers in the network.  includes the proportion of female respondents,
average years of education, proportion of married respondents, proportion of animists, proportion of
respondents from the main ethnic group, proportion of households that produced horticultural crops in
the previous year and household assets in individuals  ´s network. The above specification was also
expanded to analyze the effect of strong and weak links with treated individuals:


                 =  +              +           +   +  +  +  ,                                   (4)


where,      and       refer to the number of strong and weak links with treated individuals in  ´s social
network, respectively.


Next, we test diffusion of knowledge and adoption at the dyadic level. We follow the approach
employed in Fafchamps and Söderbom (2014) and test for similarity of outcomes between progressive
and non-progressive farmers. We take the directed dyad as the unit of observation, in which the direction
of the link is taken into account, i.e. node  is linked to node  only if  reported  as a network partner.
Note that since we are considering the direction of the link, a link from node  to node  is not the same
as a link from node  to node  . Given that we are interested in estimating the influence of the treated
nodes on the non-progressive nodes we exclude directed links reported by progressive nodes from the
analysis. We estimate the following specification:


         | -  | =  +               +         +  ( -  ) +   +                   +  ,             (5)


where our outcome of interest is the absolute difference between  and  .  represents the outcome
variable of interest for node  when  is non-progressive and  refers to the outcome variable of a
progressive farmer ().         is a binary variable that captures the existing links between a non-
progressive and progressive farmer. It takes the value of one if  is non-progressive and  is treated, and
zero if  is non-progressive and  is a control farmer.  takes negative values if dyads between non-
progressive and treated farmers have more similar outcomes than dyads between non-progressive and
control farmers.      is a vector of variables describing the relation between  and , including whether
the respondents have the same religion, belong to the same ethnic group have the same gender and the
geographical distance between them.           and       captures the individual and household level
characteristics of  and , such as years of education, household assets, marital status and whether the
household produced horticultural crops in the previous year. We follow Fafchamps and Gubert (2007)
and include characteristics of the individuals in differences and in sums. This approach allows to control


                                                                                                       10
for the effects of the differences in characteristics of the nodes, as well as the combined effect of the
characteristics in the outcome of interest.


The above dyadic level specification was also expanded to analyze the effect of strong and weak links
with treated individuals:


  | -  | =  +                +           +         +  ( -  ) +   +                   +      ,,   (6)


where,      and      are binary variables that capture existing links between a non-progressive and a
progressive node, and the link is characterized as either strong or weak, respectively.


All coefficients are estimated under the OLS framework. We estimate robust standard errors in all
regressions, except for the estimations in a dyadic framework where, following Cameron, Gelbach, and
Miller (2011), we use two-way cluster-robust standard errors, clustered at both  and .


6 Econometric results

We divide the analysis of econometric results into four parts. First, we present balance tests and
descriptive statistics for the progressive and non-progressive farmers. We then move on to the analysis
of the training program' effects on treated versus control progressive farmers. Third, we present the
analysis of the network effects of the agriculture training program, using both household-level and
dyadic specifications. Furthermore, we make use of our data in order to test for social learning across
different network dimensions: kinship, regular chatting, agricultural advice and borrowing money.
Lastly, document possible network changes as a result of the intervention.


6.1 Descriptive statistics

In this section we present descriptive statistics for the sample of respondents from the village of Suzana.
The sample includes 76 progressive farmers split into 35 treated and 41 control individuals, and 271
non-progressive farmers remaining in the rest of the population (seven village leaders that attended the
training were excluded from the analysis). Balance tests between the treatment and control groups are
reported in the first two columns of Table 2. The last two columns present the descriptive statistics for
non-progressive respondents and differences relative to the progressive. Table 2 is split into basic
demographics, religion and ethnicity, occupation and network centrality variables. Figures 3 provide a
visual representation of the network links among 54 households from one of the neighborhoods in the



                                                                                                        11
village. The networks of kinship, regular chatting, agricultural advice and borrowing money are
depicted in Figure 3a, 3b, 3c and 3d, respectively.


                                        < Tables 2 around here >


As expected, given the randomization procedure, we do not find any statistically significant difference
between the treated and control groups of the progressive farmers. Looking at the demographic
variables in Table 2, non-progressive respondents on average are approximately 54 years old and have
2 years of education. 86 percent of the non-progressive respondents are women, animism is the
predominant religion, followed by catholicism, and the majority of individuals (87 percent) belong to
the Felupe ethnic group. In terms of occupation, most of the individuals are farmers. Progressive farmers
are younger, more likely to be married and catholic, and more central than the rest of the village.


6.2 Treatment effects

This section presents the results of the impact evaluation training program. Our two main outcomes of
interest are the index of production practices knowledge and the index of production practices adoption
described in section 4.2. Table 3 displays the estimates of treatment effects for each outcome of interest,
specifications (1) and (2).


                                        < Table 3 around here >


The treatment is estimated to have led to an increase in knowledge of 0.198- 0.288 standard deviations,
in both time periods. There is also a clear positive and statistically significant effect of 0.200-0.264
standard deviations of the treatment on our measure of adoption. These results suggest that the treatment
had the desired effect of increasing knowledge of agricultural practices in the treatment group which
translated into an increase in adoption of those same practices.


6.3 Social network effects

We now turn to our analysis of the influence of social networks on farmers' knowledge and adoption
of cultivation practices. We begin by employing the household level specification (3) and (4). For each
outcome we present the results for five network variables, our four classifications of interest (kinship,
regular chatting, agricultural advice and borrowing money) and `all' links which refers to the union of
all networks and thus, having a network link in any of the four dimensions. Tables 4 present the network



                                                                                                        12
effects on knowledge and adoption of practices for the household level analysis. Table 4a and 4b
displays the short-run results, while Tables 4c and 4d focus on the medium-run results.


                                        < Tables 4 around here >


As shown in Table 4a, the network effect differs considerably across network dimensions and link
strength. On the one hand, we observe positive and statistically significant knowledge spillover effects
in the regular chatting and borrowing money networks. These effects represent an improvement of
0.117-0.199 standard deviations in the z-score of an individual's knowledge index, statistically
significant at the 1 percent level. This represents a positive spillover effect on the non-progressive
farmers with positive knowledge spillovers for each additional progressive farmer in an individual's
network which receives the treatment.


Both strong and weak links seem to be significant and there is no statistically difference between them.
On the other hand, having a treated farmer in the kinship or agricultural advice network does not seem
to translate to improvements in knowledge for the non-progressive population. The only exception is
when we consider the link strength in the kinship network where weak links with treated farmers
increase knowledge by 0.097 standard deviations, statistically significant at the 1 percent level.


In Table 4b we present the short-run results of network effects on practice adoptions. Looking at the
table, we find only limited evidence of network effects in terms of an individual's adoption index. The
links with treated individuals does not seem to have any statistically significant effect on agricultural
adoption, except in for effects coming through the borrowing money network. This represents a 0.094
standard deviation increase in adoption, significant at 5 percent level.


We now focus our attention to the medium-run (two agricultural seasons after the treatment) with results
presented in Tables 4c and 4d. Looking at Table 4c we can see that the diffusion of knowledge persisted
over time in the borrowing money network, representing and improvement of 0.223 standard deviations
in knowledge, statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Different than before, we also observe
positive effects among agricultural advice peers and no effect in the regular chatting network. It is also
worth noting the negative effect in the kinship network. Kin-treated farmers seem to reduce knowledge
of their non-progressive kin members by 0.087 standard deviations, statistically significant at 10 percent
level. One possible channel for this effect has to do with labor specialization among family members
as a result of the treatment. From anecdotal evidences we know that extended family members help
each other work in their plots in time intensive periods of the agricultural season, such as planting and
harvesting. If treated farmers are perceived as having more knowledgeable agricultural practices
because of the treatment, they may informally take on a larger share of the extended family's

                                                                                                       13
agricultural practices. Since kinship-based networks may have the strongest sense of trust between
links, family members may choose to focus on other activities if they know they have a connection with
a progressive farmer which received agricultural training. Consistent with this channel, in the larger
impact evaluation conducted on this intervention we observe that trust within the family strengthens as
a result of the treatment.


Finally, in Table 4d we document medium-run network effects in adoption. As before, we observe only
limited diffusion of adoption through the network, with positive and statistically significant effects only
observed in the agricultural advice network. These results, however, should be interpreted with caution,
since the treatment might have changed the structure of the agricultural advice network. We address
this potential network changes in the subsequent section.


Next, we test for knowledge and adoption similarities between non-progressive and progressive farmers
in a dyadic framework. More specifically, we explore whether non-progressive farmers are more likely
to know and adopt more similar practices as theirs treated peer farmers, in comparison to the control
peer farmer. Our outcome of interest is the absolute difference between the progressive and non-
progressive farmer's outcomes. Note that, if information and adoption diffuse from treated to non-
progressive farmers, we would observe more similarities in outcomes between non-progressive and
treated when comparing to non-progressive and control, and thus implying a negative coefficient in our
variable of interest. We do this in a dyadic framework by employing specification (5) and (6).


                                        < Table 5 around here >


Results for the short and medium-run outcomes are presented in Table 5. In line with the previous
results, in the short-run, we observe the diffusion of knowledge in the regular chatting and borrowing
money networks. Both of those effects are statistically significant at conventional levels. In addition,
we also document diffusion effects in the agricultural advice, marginally significant at 10 percent level.
When we extend our analysis to the medium-run, the coefficients for links with treated kin farmers is
positive and statistically significant at the 1 percent level. This result provides robustness to the
conclusion that having a kin-treated farmer seems to reduce knowledge of their non-progressive kin
members. We do not find statistically significant results on the agriculture advice and borrowing money
networks, even though, in line with previous results, point estimates are negative. As for the adoption
outcome, we do not observe statistically significant effects in either time period.


Overall, the results described in this section are consistent with social effects existing in knowledge,
although these differ considerably across network dimensions. However, despite the existence of


                                                                                                        14
positive externalities in knowledge, we have found limited evidence of social effects on adoption
behavior.


6.4 Network change

Finally, we test for possible changes in the network structure as a result of the intervention. In particular,
we focus on the sample of progressive farmer's and estimate average treatment effects in four network
centrality measures ­ in degree, out degree, betweenness and closeness. We present the results for the
different network variables of interest: kinship, regular chatting, potential and effective (real)
agricultural advice, and potential and effective (real) borrowing money. Tables 6 present estimates of
the treatment effects employing specifications (1) and (2). Tables 6a and 6b display the short- and
medium-run results, respectively.


                                         < Tables 6 around here >


We do not find any statistically significant difference in the networks of kinship, regular chatting, and
potential and real borrowing money. Given that the treatment was focused on agriculture production,
these results are unsurprising, and we thus focus on the effects of the real and potential agricultural
advice networks. Looking at the short-run results in Table 6a, we observe that the treatment led to an
increase in the in degree centrality for both the potential and effective agricultural advice network. This
corresponds to an improvement of 0.008 and 0.004, respectively, statistically significant at 10 percent
level in the preferred specification employing controls. Note that the inclusion of controls can help us
in face of limited statistical power in our sample.


Moreover, in the effective agricultural advice network, betweenness and closeness centrality was found
to increase by 0.004 and 0.008 in the treatment group. These effects are statistically significant at
conventional levels. Lastly, to a certain extent, this improvement in network centrality seem to have
persistent over time. In Table 6b we observe that treatment effects in the in degree centrality remained
positive and statistically significant in the medium run, while betweenness centrality improved by 0.003
in the potential agricultural advice network.


Taken together, these results suggest that the treatment led to an improvement in the agriculture'
network position of treated farmers.


7 Concluding remarks


                                                                                                           15
This paper analyzes the role of social networks in the diffusion of cultivation techniques introduced by
an agricultural project in Guinea-Bissau. In particular, we study the diffusion of knowledge and
adoption of improved techniques from project participants to the rest of the community. To do so, we
collected detailed census and network data in the village of Suzana and made use of a network elicitation
mechanism that allowed us to obtain a comprehensive network map and a characterization of the
strength of network ties. In addition, we elicited network membership across four different network
dimensions (kinship, regular chatting, agricultural advice, borrowing money), allowing us to examine
the role of each in knowledge and adoption diffusion.


Having established that the agricultural project increased knowledge and adoption of practices in project
participants, we went on to investigate the prevalence of spillover effects to the rest of the community.
Our results indicate that knowledge externalities do exist, particularly for those peers with links to
farmers from whom they could ask for money in times of need. However, we find only limited
evidences of network effects in adoption behavior. Furthermore, using our measures of link strength,
we have found that weak social links ­ which conventional network measurements tend to fail to capture
appropriately ­ appear to be as important as strong links in the dissemination of agricultural knowledge.
This result highlights that weak ties can also be valuable sources of new information. Finally, our results
show that the treatment led to an improvement in the network position of treatment farmers.




                                                                                                        16
References


Apouey, B., and G. Picone. 2014. "Social Interactions and Malaria Preventive Behaviors in Sub-
     Saharan Africa." Health Economics 23(9):994­1012.
Bandiera, O., and I. Rasul. 2006. "Social Networks and Technology Adoption in Northern
     Mozambique." The Economic Journal 116(514):869­902.
Banerjee, A., A.G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M.O. Jackson. 2013. "The Diffusion of
     Microfinance." Science 341(6144):1236498­1236498.
Bobonis, G.J., and F. Finan. 2009. "Neighborhood Peer Effects in Secondary School Enrollment
     Decisions." Review of Economics and Statistics 91(4):695­716.
Van den Broeck, K., and S. Dercon. 2011. "Information Flows and Social Externalities in a Tanzanian
     Banana Growing Village." Journal of Development Studies 47(2):231­252.
Cai, J., A. de Janvry, and E. Sadoulet. 2015. "Social Networks and the Decision to Insure." American
     Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7(2):81­108.
Conley, T.G., and C.R. Udry. 2010. "Learning about a New Technology: Pineapple in Ghana."
     American Economic Review 100(1):35­69.
Duflo, E., M. Kremer, and J. Robinson. 2011. "Nudging Farmers to Use Fertilizer: Theory and
     Experimental Evidence from Kenya." American Economic Review 101(6):2350­2390.
Duflo, E., and E. Saez. 2003. "The Role of Information and Social Interactions in Retirement Plan
     Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment." Quarterly Journal of Economics
     118(3):815­842.
Fafchamps, M., and F. Gubert. 2007. "Risk Sharing and Network Formation." American Economic
     Review 97:75­79.
Fafchamps, M., and D. Mo. 2017. "Peer effects in computer assisted learning: evidence from a
     randomized experiment." Experimental Economics:1­28.
Fafchamps, M., and S. Quinn. 2016. "Networks and Manufacturing Firms in Africa: Results from a
     Randomized Field Experiment." The World Bank Economic Review:lhw057.
Fafchamps, M., and M. Söderbom. 2014. "Network Proximity and Business Practices in African
     Manufacturing." The World Bank Economic Review 28(1):99­129.
Foster, A.D., and M.R. Rosenzweig. 1995. "Learning by Doing and Learning from Others: Human
     Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture." Journal of Political Economy 103(6):1176­1209.
Godlonton, S., and R. Thornton. 2012. "Peer effects in learning HIV results." Journal of Development
     Economics 97(1):118­129.
Kremer, M., and E. Miguel. 2007. "The Illusion of Sustainability." The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 122(3):1007­1065.
Maertens, A. 2017. "Who Cares What Others Think (or Do)? Social Learning and Social Pressures in


                                                                                                    17
     Cotton Farming in India." American Journal of Agricultural Economics 99(4):988­1007.
Munshi, K. 2004. "Social Learning in a Heterogeneous Population:Technology Diffusion in the
     Indian Green Revolution." Journal of Development Economics 73(1):185­213.
Oster, E., and R. Thornton. 2012. "Determinants of Technology Adoption: Peer Effects in Menstrual
     Cup Take-Up." Journal of the European Economic Association 10(6):1263­1293.




                                                                                                18
Table 1: Production techniques
    technique                  knowledege                                              adoption
                      Best use for the stover and straws after land
  Land preparation                                                    Use of stover and straws after land preparation
                                       preparation
                     Advantages of early morning or late afternoon
     Irrigation                                                                     Time of irrigation
                                       watering

Nursery Management   Best way to protect the nursery from sunlight                  Sunlight protection

      Spacing                Ideal spacing between onions                     Spacing between onion plants

       Mulch                     Advantages of mulch                                Practice of mulch

  Soil enrichment        Awareness of different soil fertilizers              Use of organic soil fertilizers

      Pruning                    Advantages of pruning                             Practice of pruning

      Staking                   Crops that need staking                             Practice of staking

  Pest and disease
                           Awareness of organic pesticides                      Use of organic pesticides
   management

   Crop rotation              Awareness of crop rotation                         Practice of crop rotation




                                                                                                                        19
Table 2: Individual characteristics - differences across treatment, control and non-progressive groups
                                                                           difference to treatment              non-       difference to progressive
                                                        control
                                                                                    group                    progressive             group
basic demographics                                                                   2.955                                        -13.038***
                                   age                   39.439                                                 53.795
                                                                                    (2.559)                                         (1.600)
                                                                                                                                   0.130***
                                 female                                                                          0.857
                                                                                                                                    (0.025)
                                                                                     0.235                                           0.136
                           years of education            2.000                                                   1.971
                                                                                    (0.633)                                         (0.369)
                                                                                      0.014                                        0.301***
                                 married                 0.780                                                    0.485
                                                                                     (0.096)                                        (0.056)
religion and                                                                          0.148                                          0.110*
ethnicity                        catholic                 0.293                                                   0.250
                                                                                     (0.112)                                        (0.062)
                                                                                      -0.085                                         -0.089
                                 animist                  0.585                                                   0.636
                                                                                     (0.117)                                        (0.065)
                                                                                      0.019                                        0.092***
                                  felupe                  0.951                                                   0.868
                                                                                     (0.045)                                        (0.031)
occupation                                                                            -0.049                                       0.158***
                                 farmer                   0.902                                                   0.722
                                                                                     (0.077)                                        (0.047)
                                                                                      0.074                                         -0.076*
                             stays at home                0.073                                                   0.183
                                                                                     (0.074)                                        (0.043)
                                                                                      -0.024                                         -0.006
                                 vendor                   0.024                                                   0.019
                                                                                     (0.024)                                        (0.016)
 network centrality                                                                   0.012                                        0.049***
                                in degree                 0.176                                                   0.133
                                                                                     (0.019)                                        (0.010)
                                                                                      0.016                                        0.059***
                               out degree                 0.180                                                   0.128
                                                                                     (0.019)                                        (0.010)
                                                                                      0.001                                        0.002***
                              betweenness                 0.003                                                   0.002
                                                                                     (0.001)                                        (0.000)
                                                                                      0.009                                        0.028***
                                closeness                 0.585                                                   0.561
                                                                                     (0.008)                                        (0.004)
Note: Standard errors reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                                                       20
Table 3: Treatment effect - Knowledge and adoption of production practices
                                                                    short-run                                                   medium-run

        dependent variable ------>                 knowledge                          adoption                 knowledge                           adoption

                                                 (1)          (2)               (3)              (4)         (5)          (6)                (7)              (8)
                        coefficient              0.198*        0.214*           0.254*** 0.262***          0.288*** 0.264***              0.200*      0.201*
       treatment
                        standard error           (0.116)       (0.113)           (0.095)    (0.096)         (0.091)      (0.089)          (0.121)     (0.122)
       mean dep. variable (control)               0.000         0.000             0.000      0.000           0.000        0.000            0.000       0.000
           r-squared adjusted                     0.022         0.021             0.069      0.043           0.022        0.021            0.021       0.034
          number of observations                   75             75               75         75               75           75               75          75
                    year                          2 016         2 016             2 016      2 016           2 017        2 017            2 017       2 017
                  controls                         no            yes               no         yes              no           yes              no         yes
Note: All regressions are OLS. The unit of observation is the individual. Non-experimental households are excluded from the observations. The dependent
variables are an average of z-scores. 'treatment' is a dummy equal to one if the individual was assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. Controls are
individual and household characteristics, which include years of education, marital status, religion, ethnic group and household assets. Robust standard errors
reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                                                                    21
Table 4a: Knowledge of production practices
dependent variable ------>                                                                  knowledge

   network variable ------>                   all                      kinship           regular chatting        agricultural advice        borrowing money
                                      (1)             (2)        (3)             (4)     (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
                                     0.049                     0.062                   0.117***                   0.055                    0.199**
       links with treated
                                    (0.033)                    (0.040)                 (0.043)                   (0.048)                   (0.081)
                                                     0.015                   0.006                  0.115**                    0.044                   0.202**
   strong links with treated
                                                    (0.034)                 (0.050)                 (0.052)                   (0.051)                   (0.086)
                                                    0.076***                0.097**                0.119***                    0.107                    0.185*
   weak links with treated
                                                    (0.024)                 (0.040)                 (0.045)                   (0.081)                   (0.107)
                                     0.002           0.003     -0.032        -0.021     -0.032       -0.032      -0.013       -0.016      -0.114**     -0.114**
    links with experimental
                                    (0.021)         (0.019)    (0.030)      (0.030)    (0.025)      (0.025)      (0.044)      (0.045)      (0.055)      (0.055)
      mean dep. Variable            -0.658           -0.658    -0.658        -0.658     -0.658       -0.658      -0.658       -0.658       -0.658       -0.658
         F-stat p-value                              0.077                   0.023                   0.923                     0.402                     0.867
      r-squared adjusted             0.341           0.356     0.323         0.334      0.353        0.350        0.466        0.464        0.337        0.334
    number of observations            260             260       260           260        260          260          260          260          260          260
              year                   2 016           2 016     2 016         2 016      2 016        2 016        2 016        2 016        2 016        2 016
            controls                 yes           yes           yes          yes         yes         yes          yes         yes           yes          yes
Note: All regressions are OLS. The unit of observation is the household. Experimental households are excluded from the observations. The dependent variable
is an average of z-scores. Controls are demographic characteristics and average demographic characteristics in the network. Demographic characteristics
include include gender, years of education, marital status, religion, ethnic group, whether the household produced horticultural crops in the previous year, and
household assets. Average demographic characteristics in the network include proportion of female respondents, average years of education, proportion of
married respondents, proportion of animists, proportion of respondents from the main ethnic group, proportion of households that produced horticultural crops in
the previous year and household assets in the network. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant
at 1%.




                                                                                                                                                                     22
Table 4b: Adoption of production practices
dependent variable ------>                                                                     adoption

   network variable ------>                   all                     kinship            regular chatting        agricultural advice        borrowing money
                                      (1)             (2)       (3)             (4)      (5)              (6)      (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
                                    -0.012                    0.010                     -0.014                   -0.034                    0.094**
       links with treated
                                    (0.024)                   (0.028)                  (0.034)                   (0.058)                   (0.047)
                                                    0.006                   -0.000                    0.019                   -0.038                   0.104**
   strong links with treated
                                                    (0.025)                (0.034)                   (0.040)                  (0.060)                   (0.051)
                                                    -0.015                  0.017                    -0.041                   -0.015                     0.058
   weak links with treated
                                                    (0.021)                (0.030)                   (0.037)                  (0.080)                   (0.065)
                                     0.024          0.020     0.015         0.017       0.014         0.010      0.069*       0.068*       -0.042       -0.042
    links with experimental
                                    (0.017)         (0.016)   (0.021)      (0.022)     (0.022)       (0.021)     (0.040)      (0.040)      (0.037)      (0.037)
      mean dep. variable            -0.773          -0.773    -0.773        -0.773      -0.773       -0.773      -0.773       -0.773       -0.773       -0.773
         F-stat p-value                             0.432                   0.520                     0.128                    0.762                     0.488
      r-squared adjusted             0.574          0.356     0.587         0.585       0.577         0.580       0.610        0.608        0.576        0.575
    number of observations            263            260       263           263         263           263         263          263          263          263
              year                   2 016          2 016     2 016         2 016       2 016         2 016       2 016        2 016        2 016        2 016
            controls                 yes           yes           yes          yes         yes         yes          yes         yes           yes          yes
Note: All regressions are OLS. The unit of observation is the household. Experimental households are excluded from the observations. The dependent variable
is an average of z-scores. Controls are demographic characteristics and average demographic characteristics in the network. Demographic characteristics
include include gender, years of education, marital status, religion, ethnic group, whether the household produced horticultural crops in the previous year, and
household assets. Average demographic characteristics in the network include proportion of female respondents, average years of education, proportion of
married respondents, proportion of animists, proportion of respondents from the main ethnic group, proportion of households that produced horticultural crops in
the previous year and household assets in the network. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant
at 1%.




                                                                                                                                                                     23
Table 4c: Knowledge of production practices
dependent variable ------>                                                                  knowledge

   network variable ------>                   all                     kinship            regular chatting        agricultural advice        borrowing money
                                      (1)             (2)       (3)             (4)      (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
                                    -0.046                    -0.087*                   0.065                    0.114**                   0.223**
       links with treated
                                    (0.040)                   (0.049)                  (0.059)                   (0.056)                   (0.093)
                                                    0.002                  -0.106*                   0.072                    0.102*                   0.219**
   strong links with treated
                                                    (0.038)                (0.057)                  (0.074)                   (0.057)                   (0.098)
                                                    0.005                   -0.076                   0.059                    0.164*                    0.240*
   weak links with treated
                                                    (0.034)                (0.054)                  (0.057)                   (0.096)                   (0.131)
                                    0.061**         0.039     0.101***     0.105***     0.004        0.003       -0.005       -0.007       -0.050       -0.051
    links with experimental
                                    (0.026)         (0.025)   (0.037)      (0.036)     (0.035)      (0.035)      (0.057)      (0.057)      (0.072)      (0.072)
      mean dep. variable            -0.818          -0.658     -0.658       -0.658      -0.658       -0.658      -0.658       -0.658       -0.658       -0.658
         F-stat p-value                             0.937                   0.564                    0.830                     0.498                     0.862
      r-squared adjusted             0.280          0.272      0.296        0.294       0.298        0.294        0.305        0.302        0.306        0.302
    number of observations            247            247        247          247         247          247          247          247          247          247
              year                   2 017          2 017      2 017        2 017       2 017        2 017        2 017        2 017        2 017        2 017
            controls                 yes           yes           yes          yes         yes         yes          yes         yes           yes          yes
Note: All regressions are OLS. The unit of observation is the household. Experimental households are excluded from the observations. The dependent variable
is an average of z-scores. Controls are demographic characteristics and average demographic characteristics in the network. Demographic characteristics
include include gender, years of education, marital status, religion, ethnic group, whether the household produced horticultural crops in the previous year, and
household assets. Average demographic characteristics in the network include proportion of female respondents, average years of education, proportion of
married respondents, proportion of animists, proportion of respondents from the main ethnic group, proportion of households that produced horticultural crops in
the previous year and household assets in the network. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant
at 1%.




                                                                                                                                                                     24
Table 4d: Adoption of production practices
dependent variable ------>                                                                     adoption

   network variable ------>                   all                     kinship            regular chatting        agricultural advice        borrowing money
                                      (1)             (2)       (3)             (4)      (5)              (6)      (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
                                     0.008                    -0.015                    0.048                   0.140***                    0.016
       links with treated
                                    (0.026)                   (0.029)                  (0.035)                   (0.038)                   (0.047)
                                                    0.011                   -0.044                    0.039                  0.145***                    0.007
   strong links with treated
                                                    (0.025)                (0.035)                   (0.039)                  (0.039)                   (0.047)
                                                    0.030                   0.001                     0.056                    0.120                     0.047
   weak links with treated
                                                    (0.023)                (0.031)                   (0.039)                  (0.077)                   (0.093)
                                     0.020          0.014     0.036*       0.042**      0.010         0.010       0.007        0.008        0.027        0.027
    links with experimental
                                    (0.018)         (0.017)   (0.021)      (0.020)     (0.022)       (0.022)     (0.038)      (0.039)      (0.037)      (0.037)
      mean dep. variable            -0.753          -0.773    -0.773        -0.773      -0.773       -0.773      -0.773       -0.773       -0.773       -0.773
         F-stat p-value                             0.539                   0.139                     0.659                    0.750                     0.663
      r-squared adjusted             0.379          0.383     0.379         0.383       0.387         0.385       0.441        0.608        0.393        0.391
    number of observations            247            247       247           247         247           247         247          263          247          247
              year                   2 017          2 017     2 017         2 017       2 017         2 017       2 017        2 017        2 017        2 017
            controls                 yes           yes           yes          yes         yes         yes          yes         yes           yes          yes
Note: All regressions are OLS. The unit of observation is the household. Experimental households are excluded from the observations. The dependent variable
is an average of z-scores. Controls are demographic characteristics and average demographic characteristics in the network. Demographic characteristics
include include gender, years of education, marital status, religion, ethnic group, whether the household produced horticultural crops in the previous year, and
household assets. Average demographic characteristics in the network include proportion of female respondents, average years of education, proportion of
married respondents, proportion of animists, proportion of respondents from the main ethnic group, proportion of households that produced horticultural crops in
the previous year and household assets in the network. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant
at 1%.




                                                                                                                                                                     25
Table 5: Knowledge and adoption of production practices
                                                             short-run                                        medium-run

       dependent variable ------>               knowledge                   adoption              knowledge                   adoption

              network variable                 (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)
                                             -0.050                  0.053                   0.118***                  0.043
                     links with treated
                                             (0.045)                (0.052)                   (0.043)                 (0.068)
                     strong links with                   -0.017                   0.043                    0.058                    0.014
      all
                         treated                         (0.038)                 (0.046)                  (0.037)                  (0.052)
                                                        -0.110**                  0.039                    0.069                    0.005
                  weak links with treated
                                                         (0.044)                 (0.046)                  (0.055)                  (0.056)
   mean dep. Variable (control dyad)         0.978       0.978       1.006        1.006        0.973       0.973       0.935        0.935
                       F-stat p-value                    0.043                    0.916                    0.876                    0.823
                    r-squared adjusted       0.295       0.297       0.529        0.529        0.205       0.203       0.228        0.227
                  number of observations     3 358       3 358       3 369        3 369        3 193       3 193       3 193        3 193
                                             -0.052                  0.064                   0.177***                  0.065
                     links with treated
                                             (0.051)                (0.056)                   (0.048)                 (0.071)
                     strong links with                    0.001                   0.088                  0.170***                   0.096
    kinship
                         treated                         (0.053)                 (0.057)                  (0.052)                  (0.075)
                                                         -0.107*                  0.040                  0.184***                   0.033
                  weak links with treated
                                                         (0.061)                 (0.060)                  (0.069)                  (0.076)
   mean dep. Variable (control dyad)         1.022        1.022      1.019        1.019        1.010       1.010       0.959        0.959
                     F-stat p-value                       0.026                   0.176                    0.850                    0.197
                  r-squared adjusted         0.290        0.292      0.517        0.518        0.196       0.196       0.221        0.222
                  number of observations     2 283       2 283       2 292        2 292        2 184       2 184       2 184        2 184
                                            -0.107**                 0.046                     0.052                   0.002
                     links with treated
                                             (0.050)                (0.054)                   (0.051)                 (0.064)
   regular           strong links with                   -0.087*                  0.034                    0.056                   -0.012
   chatting              treated                         (0.053)                 (0.055)                  (0.056)                  (0.063)
                                                        -0.147**                  0.072                    0.043                    0.031
                  weak links with treated
                                                         (0.064)                 (0.069)                  (0.084)                  (0.076)
   mean dep. Variable (control dyad)         0.941       0.941       1.033        1.033        0.922       0.922       0.935        0.935
                       F-stat p-value                    0.301                    0.504                    0.889                    0.371
                    r-squared adjusted       0.284       0.285       0.505        0.506        0.212       0.212       0.222        0.223
                  number of observations     1 480       1 480       1 485        1 485        1 389       1 389       1 389        1 389
                                             -0.103*                -0.070                    -0.047                  -0.044
                     links with treated
                                             (0.059)                (0.066)                   (0.074)                 (0.077)
  agricultural       strong links with                   -0.075                  -0.074                   -0.039                   -0.022
    advice               treated                         (0.057)                 (0.068)                  (0.073)                  (0.084)
                                                        -0.185**                 -0.058                   -0.071                   -0.109
                  weak links with treated
                                                         (0.087)                 (0.095)                  (0.119)                  (0.099)
   mean dep. Variable (control dyad)         0.684        0.684      0.727        0.727        0.683       0.683       0.795        0.795
                     F-stat p-value                       0.106                   0.847                    0.759                    0.388
                  r-squared adjusted         0.183        0.186      0.462        0.462        0.200       0.200       0.204        0.206
                  number of observations      476         476        476           476          463         463        463           463
                                            -0.194***                0.062                    -0.115                   0.033
                     links with treated
                                             (0.068)                (0.069)                   (0.079)                 (0.091)
  borrowing          strong links with                  -0.202***                 0.030                    -0.085                   0.049
   money                 treated                          (0.074)                (0.074)                  (0.082)                  (0.097)
                                                         -0.164**                0.183**                  -0.228*                  -0.028
                  weak links with treated
                                                          (0.077)                (0.089)                  (0.120)                  (0.105)
   mean dep. Variable (control dyad)         1.105         1.105     1.072        1.072        1.049        1.049      0.964        0.964
                     F-stat p-value                        0.628                  0.058                     0.204                   0.417
                  r-squared adjusted         0.328         0.328     0.563        0.566        0.275        0.277      0.284        0.285
                  number of observations      514         514         516          516          493         493         493          493
                          year               2 016       2 016       2 016        2 016        2 017       2 017       2 017        2 017
                            controls              yes         yes          yes     yes           yes          yes        yes        yes
Note: All regressions are OLS. The unit of observation is the directed dyad. Observatios with directed links from progressive farmers nodes
are not included. The dependent variable is an average of z-scores. Controls include characteristics of the dyad and of both nodes. Dyad
controls include whether the respondents have the same religion, belong to the same ethnic group, have the same gender and the geographical
distance between them. Node controls are individual and household characteristics, which include years of education, household assets,
marital status and whether the household produced horticultural crops in the previous year. Two-way cluster-robust standard errors reported
                                                                                                                                              26
in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 6a: Treatment effect - Short-run Network change
  dependent variable ------>          out degree                in degree               betweenness               closeness

      network variable              (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)       (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
                                   0.002        0.008       0.010        0.014      -0.000        0.001       0.007        0.008
           kinship
                                  (0.016)      (0.014)     (0.015)      (0.017)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.011)      (0.007)
mean dep. variable (control)       0.126        0.126       0.122        0.122       0.004        0.004       0.523        0.523
   r-squared adjusted             -0.013        0.099      -0.008        0.069      -0.013       -0.015      -0.009        0.686
                                   0.004        0.012       0.003        0.008       0.001        0.002       0.004        0.010
       regular chatting
                                  (0.015)      (0.014)     (0.009)      (0.011)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.007)      (0.007)
mean dep. variable (control)       0.077        0.077       0.083        0.083       0.005        0.005       0.526        0.526
   r-squared adjusted             -0.013        0.193      -0.012       -0.082      -0.009        0.093      -0.008        0.047
                                  -0.002        0.002       0.008       0.008*       0.002        0.003       0.004        0.005
potential agricultural advice
                                  (0.006)      (0.007)     (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.005)
mean dep. variable (control)       0.030        0.030       0.029        0.029       0.006         0.006       0.319        0.319
   r-squared adjusted             -0.013       -0.051       0.020        0.076      -0.007        -0.022     -0.006        -0.056
                                   0.002        0.003       0.004       0.004*      0.004*       0.004**     0.007**      0.008**
   real agricultural advice
                                  (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.004)      (0.004)
mean dep. variable (control)       0.009        0.009       0.010        0.010       0.003         0.003       0.193        0.193
   r-squared adjusted             -0.006        0.021       0.017        0.131       0.041         0.143       0.032        0.037
                                  -0.006       -0.004       0.003        0.003       0.000         0.001     -0.008        -0.007
 potential borrowing money
                                  (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.009)      (0.010)
mean dep. variable (control)       0.029        0.029       0.028        0.028       0.007         0.007       0.409        0.409
   r-squared adjusted              0.010        0.054      -0.009       -0.048      -0.013       -0.074       -0.004        0.027
                                   0.003        0.003       0.001        0.001       0.003         0.002       0.001        0.000
    real borrowing money
                                  (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.009)      (0.010)
 mean dep. variable (control)       0.004         0.004         0.006        0.006        0.001       0.001          0.191   0.191
      r-squared adjusted            0.014        -0.059        -0.006       -0.028        0.025       0.088         -0.014  -0.017
   number of observations             75           75            75           75           75           75             75     75
             year                   2 016         2 016         2 016        2 016        2 016       2 016          2 016   2 016
           controls                   no           yes           no           yes          no           yes            no     yes
Note: All regressions are OLS. The unit of observation is the individual. Non-experimental households are excluded from the
observations. 'treatment' is a dummy equal to one if the individual was assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. Controls
are individual and household characteristics, which include years of education, marital status, religion, ethnic group and household
assets. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
                                                                                                                                       27
Table 6b: Treatment effect - Medium-run Network change
  dependent variable ------>          out degree                in degree               betweenness               closeness

      network variable              (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)       (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
                                  -0.005       -0.002      -0.004        0.006       0.000        0.000       0.002        0.004
           kinship
                                  (0.015)      (0.016)     (0.015)      (0.015)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.010)      (0.006)
mean dep. variable (control)       0.113        0.065       0.125        0.051       0.003        0.008       0.510        0.365
   r-squared adjusted             -0.012        0.058      -0.013        0.101      -0.013        0.054      -0.013        0.595
                                   0.005        0.009       0.006        0.011       0.001        0.001       0.004        0.007
       regular chatting
                                  (0.010)      (0.011)     (0.010)      (0.011)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.005)      (0.006)
mean dep. variable (control)       0.071        0.128       0.078        0.053       0.004        0.006       0.502        0.509
   r-squared adjusted             -0.011        0.000      -0.007       -0.080      -0.002       -0.075      -0.007       -0.067
                                   0.002        0.005       0.015       0.017*       0.003       0.003*       0.005        0.009
potential agricultural advice
                                  (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.006)      (0.007)
mean dep. variable (control)       0.033        0.053       0.040       -0.057       0.005       -0.004       0.368        0.330
   r-squared adjusted             -0.011       -0.005       0.020        0.136       0.024        0.021      -0.004        0.072
                                   0.000        0.002      0.004*       0.004*       0.001        0.002       0.006        0.008
   real agricultural advice
                                  (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.005)      (0.006)
mean dep. variable (control)       0.008        0.016       0.006       -0.013       0.001       -0.006       0.176        0.164
   r-squared adjusted             -0.014       -0.024       0.030        0.163       0.017        0.024       0.004       -0.030
                                  -0.001       -0.000      -0.003       -0.001       0.001        0.000      -0.004       -0.003
 potential borrowing money
                                  (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.007)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.009)      (0.009)
mean dep. variable (control)       0.031        0.057       0.039        0.009       0.005        0.012       0.416        0.374
   r-squared adjusted             -0.013        0.029      -0.011       -0.058      -0.008       -0.046      -0.011        0.189
                                  -0.000        0.000      -0.000       -0.001      -0.001       -0.000      -0.003       -0.006
    real borrowing money
                                  (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.009)      (0.009)
 mean dep. variable (control)       0.004        0.008         0.006         0.004        0.002       0.006          0.188  0.188
      r-squared adjusted           -0.013        0.091        -0.012        -0.087       -0.001       0.277         -0.012  0.031
   number of observations             75           75            75           75           75           75             75    75
             year                   2 017        2 017         2 017         2 017        2 017       2 017          2 017  2 017
           controls                   no          yes            no           yes          no           yes            no    yes
Note: All regressions are OLS. The unit of observation is the individual. Non-experimental households are excluded from the
observations. 'treatment' is a dummy equal to one if the individual was assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise. Controls
are individual and household characteristics, which include years of education, marital status, religion, ethnic group and household
assets. Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
                                                                                                                                       28
Figure 1: Map of Guinea Bissau




                                 29
                              Figure 3a: Illustration of a kinship network

Note: Visual representation of the kinship links among 54 households from one of the neighborhoods in
the village. Each node represents a household. Treated households are depicted as red nodes, while non-
treated households are represented as blue nodes. The lines between nodes indicate the existence of a link
and the direction of the link is illustrated by the arrow. Grey lines represent weak links and black lines
represent strong links.




                          Figure 3b: Illustration of a regular chatting network

Note: Visual representation of the regular chatting links among 54 households from one of the
neighborhoods in the village. Each node represents a household. Treated households are depicted as red
nodes, while non-treated households are represented as blue nodes. The lines between nodes indicate the
existence of a link and the direction of the link is illustrated by the arrow. Grey lines represent weak links
and black lines represent strong links.

                                                                                                           30
                       Figure 3c: Illustration of an agricultural advice network

Note: Visual representation of the agricultural advice links among 54 households from one of the
neighborhoods in the village. Each node represents a household. Treated households are depicted as red
nodes, while non-treated households are represented as blue nodes. The lines between nodes indicate the
existence of a link and the direction of the link is illustrated by the arrow. Grey lines represent weak links
and black lines represent strong links.




                        Figure 3d: Illustration of a borrowing money network

Note: Visual representation of the borrowing money links among 54 households from one of the
neighborhoods in the village. Each node represents a household. Treated households are depicted as red
nodes, while non-treated households are represented as blue nodes. The lines between nodes indicate the
existence of a link and the direction of the link is illustrated by the arrow. Grey lines represent weak links
and black lines represent strong links.


                                                                                                           31
Appendix A

This appendix expands on our measure of tie strength presented in Section 3.1. As mentioned in
the main text, recall-based elicitation methods of collecting network data might result in only
capturing the individual's strongest ties. Given our elicitation method, we believe that the links
elicited from memory would tend to capture stronger ties, while further links elicited with the
album visual aid would more likely represent weak ones. According to Granovetter, 1973, in his
seminal paper, "the strength of a tie is a (probably linear) combination of the amount of time, the
emotional intensity, the intimacy (mutual confiding), and the reciprocal services which
characterize the tie". In practice, different proxies have been used in order to characterize tie
strength, such as reciprocity of the link and the number of mutual friends (Gee, Jones and Burke,
2017). As a robustness check, we test the relationship between our measure of tie strength and
some of those proxies.


We follow a dyadic approach, using the directed dyad as the unit of observation. In this case the
dyad is a pair of linked nodes and the directionality of the link is taken into account.10 We estimate
the following specification in a dyadic framework:


                    =  +  +   +   -  +   +  +  ,                                                   (1)


where  are the proxies for tie strength between nodes  and : link reciprocity and the proportion
of mutual ties. Link reciprocity is a binary variable, taking the value of one if there is a reciprocal
relationship between nodes  and , i.e. if both named the other as a network partner., and of zero
if the relationship is unilateral, i.e. if node  named node  as a network partner, but not the other
way around. The proportion of mutual ties of nodes  and  is the number of network partners
common to  and  divided by the total number of network partners of both  and .  is a binary
network variable that captures tie strength for directed links. It takes the value of one if the link
was elicited from memory (strong link), and of zero if it was elicited with the album visual aid
(weak link).         is a vector of variables describing the characteristics of the dyad, including
whether nodes  and  have the same religion, belong to the same ethnic group, are of the same
gender, and the geographical distance between them.  and  are vectors of individual and
household level characteristics of  and , such as years of education, household assets, marital
status, and whether the household produced horticultural crops in the previous year. We follow
Fafchamps and Gubert (2007) and include the characteristics of the individual and household-


10
     Household  is linked to household , if household  named household  as a network partner.

                                                                                                    32
level characteristics as simple differences and in sums. By including the regressors in this manner
we are able to account for the effects of the differences in characteristics of the nodes, as well as
the combined effect of those characteristics. All estimations are OLS and we use two-way cluster-
robust standard errors, clustered at both  and , following Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011).


We present the results for the aforementioned specifications in Tables A1.


                                     < Table A1 around here >


As we can see from Table A1 having a strong kinship link in our measure is associated with a 3.7
percentage point increase in link reciprocity, and a 0.028 increase in the proportion of mutual ties.
Both results are statistically significant at the 1 percent level. As for the network of regular
chatting, a strong regular chatting link has a positive and statistically significant correlation with
link reciprocity and mutual ties. These represent a 10 percentage points increase on link
reciprocity and a 0.041 increase in the proportion of mutual ties. Regarding the network of
agricultural advice, we see similar results in link reciprocity: a strong agricultural advice link
increases the probability of the link being reciprocal by 4.5 percentage points, statistically
significant at the 1 percent level. However, there is no statistically significant effect on the
proportion of mutual ties. Lastly, in line with the results found before, a strong borrowing money
link is associated with a 3.9 percentage point increase in link reciprocity and a 0.034 increase in
the proportion of mutual ties between the nodes.


Overall, there is a positive correlation between strong links and link reciprocity for all network
variables. Similar results arise using the proportion of mutual ties instead of reciprocity: having a
strong link in any network category is generally associated with a higher proportion of mutual
ties relative to weak links. The sole exception are agricultural advice links, for which coefficients
are not significant. These results support our network definition of tie strength, i.e. that links
recalled from memory are more likely to be strong than links recalled using the visual aid.




                                                                                                   33
Table A1: Link strength
                                                  strong regular     strong agricultural   strong borrowing
network variable ------>   strong kinship link
                                                   chatting link         advice link          money link
   dependent variable              (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)
                                0.037***            0.100***              0.045***             0.039***
    link reciprocity
                                (0.012)              (0.011)               (0.016)              (0.015)
      mean dep. Variable         0.312                0.132                 0.074                0.083
      r-squared adjusted         0.021                0.040                0.029                 0.030
                                0.028***            0.041***               0.006               0.034***
       mutual ties
                                (0.004)              (0.005)               (0.011)              (0.011)
      mean dep. Variable         0.295                0.267                0.421                 0.388
      r-squared adjusted         0.050                0.105                0.129                 0.132
 number of observations          12 571               7 604                2 010                 2 665
        controls                  yes                  yes                  yes                   yes
Note: All regressions are OLS. The dependent variables link reciprocity and regular chatting are binary.
The dependent variable proportion of mutual ties is the number of mutual ties divided by the total number
of ties in both i and j. Controls include characteristics of the dyad and of both nodes. Dyad controls include
whether the respondents have the same religion, belong to the same ethnic group, have the same gender and
the geographical distance between them. Node controls are individual and household characteristics, which
include years of education, household assets, marital status and whether the household produced
horticultural crops in the previous year. Two-way cluster-robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                          34
