                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                MEASUREMENT ERROR MECHANISMS MATTER:
AGRICULTURAL INTENSIFICATION WITH FARMER MISPERCEPTIONS AND MISREPORTING

                                        Kibrom A. Abay
                                           Leah Bevis
                                      Christopher B. Barrett

                                       Working Paper 26066
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26066


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2019




  Seniority of authorship is shared equally. This paper benefited from comments by Marc
  Bellemare, Brian Dillon, Annemie Maertens, Derek Headey, Stein Holden, Emilia Tjernström,
  and NBER/AFDB conference attendees. Any remaining errors are solely our experience. The
  views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2019 by Kibrom A. Abay, Leah Bevis, and Christopher B. Barrett. All rights reserved. Short
  sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
  provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measurement Error Mechanisms Matter: Agricultural Intensification with Farmer Misperceptions
and Misreporting
Kibrom A. Abay, Leah Bevis, and Christopher B. Barrett
NBER Working Paper No. 26066
July 2019
JEL No. C18,O13,O55

                                          ABSTRACT

The mechanism(s) that generate measurement error matter to inference. Survey measurement
error is typically thought to represent simple misreporting correctable through improved
measurement. But errors might also or alternatively reflect respondent misperceptions that
materially affect the respondent decisions under study. We show analytically that these alternate
data generating processes imply different appropriate regression specifications and have distinct
effects on the bias in parameter estimates. We introduce a simple empirical technique to generate
unbiased estimates under more general conditions and to apportion measurement error between
misreporting and misperceptions in measurement error when one has both self-reported and
objectively-measured observations of the same explanatory variable. We then apply these
techniques to the longstanding question of agricultural intensification: do farmers increase input
application rates per unit area as the size of the plots they cultivate decreases? Using nationally
representative data from four sub-Saharan African countries, we find strong evidence that
measurement error in plot size reflects a mixture of farmer misreporting and misperceptions. The
results matter to inference around the intensification hypothesis and call into question whether
more objective, precise measures are always preferable when estimating behavioral parameters.


Kibrom A. Abay                                                   Christopher B. Barrett
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI)             Cornell University
Cairo                                                            340D Warren Hall
Egypt                                                            Ithaca, NY 14853
K.Abay@cgiar.org                                                 cbb2@cornell.edu

Leah Bevis
Ohio State University
329 Ag Admin Building
2120 Fyffe Road
Columbus, Ohio 43210
bevis.16@osu.edu
1        Introduction
Applied economists rely heavily on survey data to study decision-making. Yet survey
data often include measurement error (Judge and Schechter, 2009). Most of the
measurement error literature assumes that survey respondents know and base decisions
upon the true value of an explanatory variable that they misreport.1 When that
assumption holds, measurement error in self-reported survey data is remediable through
improved data collection or (sometimes) by statistical correction.

Yet a vast behavioral economics literature finds that people routinely misperceive actual
conditions ­ about others' behaviors, relative prices, social norms, the probability of
stochastic events, etc. ­ and act upon those systematic biases, mistaken beliefs, or
misperceptions (Tversky and Kahneman, 1973; Kahneman and Tversky, 1984; Angner
and Loewenstein, 2012). If respondents accurately report their misperceptions, rather
than misreporting their true beliefs, then it is less clear how to address measurement
error. The appropriate regression specification will then depend on whether one wants
to make inferences about (potentially misinformed) choices, about the statistical
relationship between objectively measured variables, or both. In making inferences
about economic hypotheses that revolve around human choices, researchers might easily
over-correct for measurement error statistically, or inappropriately substitute an
objective measure for the subjective measure that a respondent believes and reports,
and on which she acts.

Of course, analysts typically have no way of distinguishing misreporting from
misperceptions in survey data. The mechanism(s) generating measurement error in
survey data nonetheless matter to econometric inference on a wide range of issues. For
example, parents may know and act in accord with the exact age of their child and
knowingly misreport a simple, rounded number ­ e.g., 2 years, rather than, say, 20
months ­ with important consequences for inferences about child anthropometric status
(Larsen, Headey and Masters, 2019). Or perhaps they do not know the child's true age,
with potential consequences for medication dosing and growth monitoring. Similarly,
measurement error in the hours laborers report working could lead to `division bias' in
wage elasticity estimates, as Borjas (1980) demonstrates. Self-reported hours might,
however, reflect salaried workers' mistaken beliefs about the true hours they work, and
thereby provide better information regarding behavioral responses to changes in pay.

In this paper we explore analytically the implications of using subjective variables with
measurement error (generated by either respondent misreporting or misperceptions)
versus objectively measured variables (that may or may not represent respondent
perceptions). We also develop an estimable parameter to decompose measurement error
between these two mechanisms, misreporting and misperceptions. In this way, our
paper is similar to that of Corno and De Paula (2019), who attempt to estimate the
effect of risky behavior while working with two imperfect measures of risky behavior.
Our goal is also somewhat similar to Cohen (2019), who seeks to estimate an
"unbiased" association between farm size and farm productivity by instrumenting for
one measure of farm size with another. However, both of these papers assume that
measurement error reflects misreporting only, providing no signal about perceptions.
1
    Bound et al. (2001) offers an excellent review of the measurement error literature.



                                                      1
We apply our insights and methods to a longstanding topic attracting newfound
attention: agricultural intensification in Africa. Rising population densities and low
levels of agricultural productivity, especially in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), have brought
renewed attention to agricultural productivity in poor countries (Gollin, Lagokos and
Waugh, 2013; Adamopoulos and Restuccia, 2014; Van Ittersum et al., 2016), to
agricultural factor allocation (Restuccia and Santaeulalia-Llopis, 2017; Gollin and Udry,
2019), and to the agricultural intensification hypothesis first articulated by Boserup
(1965). This hypothesis maintains that poor farmers will intensify modern input use in
order to compensate for shrinking land size, thus thwarting Malthusian predictions
(Binswanger-Mkhize and Savastano, 2017; Holden, 2018). While rural populations
decline in the rest of the world, they continue to rise in SSA, even in many
land-constrained countries that have little or no surplus agricultural land to bring into
cultivation (Jayne, Chamberlin and Headey, 2014; Headey and Jayne, 2014). Average
farm and plot sizes are therefore declining and expected to continue to shrink for many
years. Agricultural intensification is therefore critical to SSA countries' ability to
sustain current welfare, as well as to support structural transformation and economic
development (Gollin, Parente and Rogerson, 2002; Bustos, Caprettini and Ponticelli,
2016). And scholars recognize that measurement error may confound analysis of
agricultural productivity (Carletto, Savastano and Zezza, 2013; Gollin, Lagokos and
Waugh, 2013; Desiere and Jolliffe, 2018; Gollin and Udry, 2019).

Relatively low aggregate rates of input intensity across SSA suggest to many observers
that intensification is not occurring, although input use rates are relatively high in large
parts of some of the most densely populated SSA countries, such as Ethiopia, Malawi,
or Nigeria (Sheahan and Barrett, 2017). Several recent studies fail to find evidence of
intensification in SSA agriculture, with no statistically significant relationship between
individual landholdings and input intensity (Holden and Yohannes, 2002;
Binswanger-Mkhize and Savastano, 2017). Others find support for the intensification
hypothesis (Pender and Gebremedhin, 2007; Headey, Dereje and Taffesse, 2014;
Josephson, Ricker-Gilbert and Florax, 2014; Ricker-Gilbert, Jumbe and Chamberlin,
2014). Still other papers contain more nuanced findings: a positive relationship between
population density and intensification over lower population density ranges and a
reversal thereafter (Jayne and Muyanga, 2012), or increased cropping intensity but no
increase in fertilizer or irrigation use (Headey and Jayne, 2014).

Virtually all studies on agricultural input intensification use farmer self-reported land
size survey data, which is now known to suffer systematic measurement error (Carletto,
Savastano and Zezza, 2013; Holden and Fisher, 2013; Carletto, Gourlay and Winters,
2015). Indeed, several recent studies on the farm size-productivity relationship in SSA
find strong evidence that what appears as intensification ­ manifest as an inverse
size-productivity relationship ­ seems merely an artifact of non-classical measurement
error (NCME) in plot size, crop output, or both (Desiere and Jolliffe, 2018; Gourlay,
Kilic and Lobell, 2017; Abay et al., 2018). NCME in plot size must then also affect the
estimated relationship between area and input intensity, although this possibility has
not yet been addressed. Moreover, the recent literature on measurement error and farm
productivity in SSA ­ like the broader literature on measurement error in economics ­
assumes that farmers know and base farm management decisions upon true plot size, so
that measurement error in self-reported survey data is merely an econometric obstacle


                                             2
to overcome through improved data collection using geographic positioning systems
(GPS), satellite-based remote sensing, and other reasonably new methods.

In this paper we propose three distinct data generating processes behind measurement
error in farmer-reported plot size and analytically derive the biases these imply for
agricultural intensification parameter estimates. The first data generating process
assumes that farmers know their plot size, but misreport it when surveyed, just as a
parent might know her child's true age but round the value when responding to survey
enumerators (Larsen, Headey and Masters, 2019). Measurement error might follow a
simple regression to the mean pattern (Carletto, Gourlay and Winters, 2015), or a focal
point bunching process, or one where respondents report their best (but almost surely
inaccurate) predictions of the true regressor value (Hyslop and Imbens, 2001). The
econometric implications of misreporting are quite similar regardless of precisely which
of these underlying mechanisms holds: downward bias on the true intensification
parameter when one uses farmer-reported plot size, versus an unbiased estimate of the
intensification parameter when one uses instead objective, GPS-measured plot size.
Importantly, due to `division bias' (Borjas, 1980), this downward bias exists even when
measurement error is classical, i.e., uncorrelated with true plot size.

Under the second data generating process, `measurement error' in plot size solely reflects
farmers' misperceptions, which guide true, observed behavior. That is, farmers may
misperceive plot size and make input intensity decisions accordingly, with implications
for efficiency. Such a process is consistent with a range of recent observations. Farmers
adjust their inputs according to perceived crop variety, even when those perceptions are
wrong (Wossen et al., 2018), or invest in inputs according to climactic predictions, even
when those predictions are incorrect (Rosenzweig and Udry, 2014). As we show, the
econometric implications of measurement error based purely on misperception differ
from those of measurement error that reflects only misreporting. When measurement
error arises from misperceptions, the estimated intensification parameter is an unbiased
representation of the farmer's decision process only when one uses farmer (mis)reported
plot size, or when also one controls for measurement error while using GPS-measured
plot size. While the statistical association between biophysical input intensity and plot
size can be unbiasedly estimated using GPS-measured plot size, this association
represents a downwardly biased estimate of the farmer's intensification choice parameter
when measurement error is negatively correlated with true plot size, as is generally
observed and true in our data. Unlike in the misreporting case, however, no downward
bias exists under classical measurement error.

Our third data generating process allows plot size measurement error to reflect both
farmer misperceptions and misreporting. In this hybrid case, one must control for both
GPS-measured plot size and measurement error in order to recover the farmer's
intensification choice parameter. This specification also permits recovery of a novel
parameter that reflects the proportion of total measurement error arising from
conventional misreporting (a mere econometric challenge to be corrected) versus
misperceptions (that truly affect farmer choices). This measurement error composition
parameter matters to interpretation of the intensification parameter estimate. Since
analysts cannot know ex ante the mechanism generating observed measurement error,
this seems the most prudent approach to follow. We show that the measurement error
mechanism matters materially to conclusions about agricultural intensification in SSA.

                                            3
To illustrate these concepts and estimate the agricultural intensification parameter
empirically, we employ nationally representative survey data from four SSA countries ­
Ethiopia, Malawi, Tanzania and Uganda ­ that include both farmer self-reports and
objective, GPS measures of plot size. For each country, we study the intensity with
which farmers apply the most commonly used inputs observed in the data: fertilizer,
improved seed, labor, and pesticides. We test the intensification and misperceptions
hypotheses for each input in each country. Consistent with the Boserupian
intensification hypothesis, input intensity is indeed inversely associated with plot size in
all four countries, regardless of whether measurement error represents misreporting,
misperception, or a combination of the two. But the magnitudes of the intensification
choice parameter differ significantly depending on the nature of measurement error.

Furthermore, conditional on true, GPS-measured plot size, measurement error in
self-reported plot size is significantly, positively associated with input intensity for
virtually all input-country combinations.2 This indicates that measurement error in plot
size at least partly reflects farmers' misperceptions of the land area they manage, which
then affect input use decisions. The measurement error composition parameter
estimates suggest that misreporting and misperceptions both arise, in roughly equal
parts, for most country-input combinations. This finding implies that the use of
objective (e.g., GPS) measures to `correct' for measurement error in self-reported plot
size generates an unbiased estimate of the statistical relationship between plot size and
input intensity, but such corrections can bias downwards estimates of the choice
parameters that guide farmer production decisions, exaggerating the magnitude of the
true (negative) intensification parameter. Meanwhile, farmer misperceptions of plot size
seem to drive input allocation, with implications for the efficiency of input allocation
and for agricultural productivity. The finding that measurement error represents a
hybrid of misperceptions and misreporting, with consequences for estimates of key
behavioral parameters, likely applies to a wide range of empirical economics questions.

The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we explore three plausible
data generating processes behind observed measurement error in plot size, and examine
the implications of each scenario for estimates of the input use­plot size gradient that
defines Boserupian intensification. Appendix A holds full derivations for all analytical
results. Section 3 lays out an estimation strategy informed by our analytical findings.
Section 4 summarizes the four nationally representative panel datasets we use. Section
5 reports our results, Appendix B holds additional results, and Section 6 concludes.


2        Two-sided Measurement Error With
         Misreporting, Misperceptions, or Both
For many years, the most common method to explore the Boserupian intensification
hypothesis was to study agricultural input intensity as a function of self-reported (log)
plot size, X . More recently, analysts generally prefer to use a more objective measure of
(log) plot size, X  ­ collected by the survey enumeration team using a GPS or a
compass and rope ­ so as to avoid the systematic measurement error that plagues
self-reported area measures. To be more precise, the older literature often estimates
2
    Bevis and Barrett (2018) note a similar relationship in a different dataset from Uganda.


                                                      4
equation 1, where input intensity (the log of input use, Y, per unit self-reported area,
X , expressed as log differences), as a linear function of log self-reported area X :3
    Y - X =  oX +                                                                                       (1)

Under equation 1, the Boserupian intensification parameter of interest is  o and the
Boserupian hypothesis implies rejection of the zero null hypothesis in favor of  o < 0.
Given the voluminous evidence that self-reported plot size differs systematically from
GPS-measured plot size, recent papers tend to assume that (log) self-reported land size,
X, is measured with error, and instead estimate equation 2, using true, GPS-measured
(log) plot size X  on both the left-hand size and the right-hand side:
    Y - X  =  X  +                                                                                      (2)

Following the standard representation of measurement error (Bound, Brown and
Mathiowetz, 2001), log self-reported land size, X, is assumed to be a combination of
true log plot size, X  , and measurement error, v , also expressed in logarithmic form, as
given in equation 3.4
    X = X + v                                                                                           (3)

Note that the measurement error enters on both sides of equation 1, which differs in
important ways from the one-sided, classical measurement error model familiar from
textbooks, as Borjas (1980) and Abay et al. (2018) explain.5

The intensification parameter represents a statistical association, with the potential for
causal interpretation only if  or are uncorrelated with X or X  , respectively. In this
analytical section, we explicitly assume that  and are both orthogonal to X , and thus
to both X  and v . In our empirical application, below, we add household fixed effects
and plot-level controls to make this assumption more plausible. It certainly remains
possible, however, that omitted, relevant variables bias our estimated intensification
parameters, on which more later.

We document below three measurement error scenarios. The first assumes, as is
standard in the literature, that farmers misreport plot size while acting on accurate
private knowledge (or predictions) of true plot size. In the second scenario, farmers
misperceive their plot size and allocate inputs accordingly. In this case measurement
error perfectly reflects misperception rather than misreporting. In the third scenario,
farmers both misperceive and misreport plot size. We show that the appropriate
regression specification to recover the intensification parameter of interest differs under
each of these three scenarios. We also develop a simple test to establish the degree to
which measurement error arises from misreporting versus from misperceptions.
3
  In this analytical section we use a simple bivariate regression so as to simplify the math as much as
  possible and make the core intuition clear. The multivariate generalization is reasonably straightforward.
  The empirical section uses a more general, multivariate regression framework.
4
  This functional form implies multiplicative error in the non-log version.
5
  In this analytical section, we abstract from the possibility of non-classical measurement error in Y,
  largely for the practical reason that objective measures of input applications remain infeasible and
  unavailable in most settings, certainly in the SSA agriculture data we study. In the empirical section
  below, however, we offer a robustness check on the possibility that NCME in farmer-reported input
  volumes biases the intensification parameter estimates of interest.

                                                     5
2.1     Scenario 1: Misreporting
Assume that farmers have perfect information on plot size, and thus base the
intensification decision on true (log) plot size, X  , as in equation 2. In responding to
the survey, however, they (mis)report (log) land size with error, v , as in equation 3.
Several previous studies have found measurement error in self-reported plot size is
correlated with true plot area (Carletto et al. 2013; Carletto et al. 2015; Gourlay et al.
2017; Bevis and Barrett, 2018; Abay et al., 2018). This form of NCME in observed plot
size can be easily represented as:

    v = X  +                                                                                            (4)

where  is assumed orthogonal to X  and from equation 2. Combining equations 3
and 4 provides the following representation of NCME.

    X = (1 + )X  +                                                                                      (5)

Equation 5 nests classical measurement error, which occurs when  = 0. If  < 0 then
this specification encompasses both regression-to-the-mean and focal-point-bunching
processes commonly observed in self-reported data and found in our data.

Because equation 2 reflects the true, data-generating process and bypasses the NCME
problem, estimation of equation 2 yields an unbiased estimation of the intensification
parameter,   , which reflects both the decision-making process of the farmer and also
the statistical association between input intensity and plot size. Estimation of equation
1, however, will result in the intensification parameter estimate,  o , in equation 6. This
derivation and all subsequent derivations are detailed in Appendix A.6


                Cov (X  , X  + v ) Cov (v, X  + v )               Cov (v, X )
    o =                   
                                  -        
                                                    =   - (  + 1)                                       (6)
                 Var (X + v )       Var (X + v )                   Var (X )

The first term within brackets reflects the bias that enters through the right-hand side
of the regression equation, and leads to attenuation bias under classical measurement
error, as is well-known (Bound, Brown and Mathiowetz, 2001; Gibson and Kim, 2010).
                                                                       (X  )
That is, when Cov (X  , v ) =  = 0, this first term reduces to   VarVar (X )
                                                                               . The second
term within brackets represents the bias arising through the dependent variable, which
creates downward bias even under classical measurement error; the labor supply
literature refers to this as `division bias' (Borjas, 1980).7 We can alternatively derive
bias as in the rightmost expression, which implies that if -1 <   < 0 as consistent
with the Boserupian intensification hypothesis, then plot size measurement error creates
downward bias when Cov (v, X ) > 0, and creates upward bias when Cov (v, X ) < 0.
6
  We report results both in terms of Cov (v, X ) and of Cov (v, X  ), as appropriate to the mechanism. The
  Cov (v, X  ) framing is the more familiar measurement error representation, while Cov (v, X ) reflects the
  misperceptions hypothesis, which implicitly treats the true, objective measure X  as the mis-measured
  variable from the behavioral perspective.
7
  Borjas' (1980) `division bias' refers to a slightly different situation in which measurement error in the
  dependent variable (hours worked) also enters the denominator of the independent variable (hourly
  wage rate). The inverse labor supply function would take the same form as the intensification equation
  we estimate. So the two are directly analogous.

                                                     6
One cannot in general sign Cov (v, X ). But given the typical empirical finding that
Cov (v, X  ) < 0, if -Cov (v, X  ) > (<) Var (v ), then Cov (v, X ) < (>) 0. Bias only
disappears in the knife edge case where -Cov (v, X  ) = Var (v ), making Cov (v, X ) = 0.

Other measurement error processes can also lead to misreporting, with similar results.
In Appendix A, we outline a second such process, in which survey respondents report
their best estimate of a key explanatory variable (e.g., plot size) based in part on
information regarding a proxy closely correlated with the dependent variable (Hyslop
and Imbens, 2001). In this context, farmers accurately perceive plot size but report it
based on an exactly known quantity of inputs applied. The prediction error with
respect to X  leads to slight differences in structural parameters but still yields
equation 6 under this alternative form of respondent misreporting. Thus, when any of
several respondent misreporting mechanisms give rise to measurement error, a spurious
negative relationship could lead to mistaken inference that Boserupian intensification
exists even if it does not, or might bias the intensification estimate.

2.2        Scenario 2: Misperceptions
Now we relax the assumption that farmers have and act upon perfect information on
plot size. Instead, we assume that farmers misperceive plot size, make the intensification
decision based on these (mistaken) beliefs, and precisely report that misperceived plot
size in the survey data. More specifically, farmers mistakenly perceive (log) plot size as
X and equation 1 accurately reflects their intensification decision. Equation 2 only
reflects the statistical association ­ i.e., the true biophysical relationship ­ between true
input intensity and true (GPS-measured) plot size; it no longer reflects the farmer's
decision-making process. Equation 3 is again assumed to capture the general form of
farmer misperceptions, inclusive of the measurement error in self-reported plot size.

In this scenario, we remain agnostic about the data generating process behind farmer
misperceptions, except to allow that misperception v may be correlated with true plot
size X  , as in the reduced form relationships in scenario 1 (equation 4) and as we find
in the data. These relationships describe the well-documented empirical pattern of
regression-to-the-mean in self-reported plot size in sub-Saharan Africa (Carletto,
Savastano and Zezza, 2013; Carletto, Gourlay and Winters, 2015; Bevis and Barrett,
2018; Desiere and Jolliffe, 2018; Gourlay, Kilic and Lobell, 2017; Abay et al., 2018).8

Combining equation 1, which represents the farmer's decision process, with equation 3,
which gives the general form of measurement error in X , results in:

       Y - X =  oX  +  ov +                                                                       (7)

As such, the farmer's intensification parameter may be recovered by estimating either
equation 1, where self-reported plot size is used on both sides, or ­ less typically ­
equation 7, where the input intensity dependent variable is computed using
8
    A more general form of equation 4, v = f (X  ) +  , accommodates focal-point-bunching for which
    v = X  +  is locally true within the basin of attraction of any given focal point, but f (X  ) may
    be non-monotone, even discontinuous across the support of X  . We also see evidence of focal point
    bunching in the data.



                                                   7
self-reported plot size, and self-reported plot size on the right-hand side is split into its
two components: GPS-measured plot size, X  , and measurement error, v .

Estimating equation 2, on the other hand, leads to the biased choice parameter estimate
  in equation 8:
                        Cov (v, X  )
      =  o + ( o + 1)                                                                       (8)
                         Var (X  )

If -1 <  o < 0 as one would expect under the Boserupian intensification hypothesis,
then `correcting' for plot size measurement error by estimating equation 2 recovers an
downwardly biased intensification parameter when Cov (v, X  ) < 0, that is, when
measurement error is negatively correlated with true plot size, as is typical and
observed in our data. In comparing equations 6 and 8, note that similar bias arises over
the same range for  o or   , whether one estimates equation 1 when measurement error
arises from misreporting or estimates equation 2 when misperceptions generate the
measurement error. The main difference relative to the misreporting scenario is that
under classical measurement error, the bias in equation 8 disappears completely because
Cov (v, X  ) = 0. So under classical measurement error, no division bias exists in the
behavioral parameter estimate.

The econometrician might also be interested in the effect of plot size misperceptions on
"true" input intensity (as calculated using GPS-measured plot size), holding true plot
size itself constant. That is, econometricians might wish to estimate equation 9, where
the parameters on X  and v are derived from equation 7, as shown in Appendix A.
    Y - X  =  o X  + ( o + 1)v +                                                            (9)

Note that equation 9 uses true plot size on the left-hand side rather than the farmer
self-reported value, since the object of interest is the true biophysical relationship on
the landscape.

2.3    Scenario 3: Misreporting and Misperception
Now assume that farmers report log plot size X = X  + v as in equation 3, but perceive
log plot size as the convex combination of true and reported size, weighted by the
parameter 01:
    X = X + (1 - ) X  = v + X                                                            (10)

Put differently, self-reported plot size now reflects both farmer misreporting and
misperceptions. However, farmers base input application decisions on perceived plot
size, as in equation 11, where u is assumed orthogonal to both X  and v . This equation
replaces equations 1 and 2.
    Y -X = X +u                                                                          (11)

Under this hybrid measurement error process, the farmer's true intensification choice
parameter is  . Estimating equation 1 will then lead to the parameter estimate:
                                  Cov (v, X )
     o =  -  + 1 (1 - )                                                                  (12)
                                   Var (X )

                                                8
Similarly, estimation of equation 2 will lead to the parameter estimate

                   Cov (v, X  )
       =  + ( + 1)                                                                     (13)
                    Var (X  )

Equations 12 and 13 necessarily blend scenarios 1 and 2, generalizing our prior results.
For example, just as in equation 6, equation 12 indicates that estimation of equation 1 ­
i.e., using farmer-reported plot size ­ generates no bias at all if there is no misreporting
( = 1), otherwise downward bias arises when  > -1 and Cov           (v,X )
                                                                 Var (X )
                                                                           > 0, even with
classical measurement error. The bias is now mitigated by (1 - ), reflecting the
proportion of farmer perceptions that reflect true plot size values. Similarly, equation 13
indicates that estimation of equation 2 ­ i.e., using GPS-measured plot size ­ generates
no bias at all if the farmer suffers no misperceptions ( = 0), indicating that
measurement error is purely misreporting. But if the farmer does suffer misperceptions
( > 0), then no bias exists if measurement error is classical (Cov (v, X  )=0). But
under the more common finding that Cov (v, X  ) < 0, then the intensification estimate
is downwardly biased for  > -1.

Equations 12 and 13 illustrate that when 0 <  < 1, neither equation 1 nor equation 2
estimate the intensification parameter that guides farmer behavior. Estimating equation
11 is of course impossible because X is not observed. However, we may derive equation
14 (as done in Appendix A), which includes only observed variables:

    Y - X  =  X  +  + 1 v + u                                                          (14)

Equation 14 models true input intensity as a function of both true plot size and plot
size measurement error, recovering the unbiased estimate of the intensification choice
parameter no matter the mechanism generating the measurement error. The fact that
equation 14 estimates  by including v as a regressor should not be surprising; the
functional form of the bias in equations 6, 8, 12, and 13 all match the functional form of
omitted variable bias. That is, the bias is weighted precisely by the coefficient on
measurement error v , should v be regressed on the endogenous variable of interest,
namely X  or X (Wooldridge, 2010). Thus equation 14 offers a preferable specification
to estimate the relationship of interest in the presence of measurement error generated
by an unknown mechanism.

In this more flexible, hybrid case, since 01, the coefficient estimate on v might be
less than ( + 1) as is implied in the more restricted version in equation 9. In fact, one
can estimate the parameter  by dividing the coefficient estimate on v by one plus the
coefficient estimate on X  . If  = 1, then farmers perceive log plot size precisely as they
report it, and act accordingly. In the other bounding case, if  = 0, then farmers' plot
size perceptions perfectly align with true plot size, implying that measurement error
reflects misreporting only. So the  parameter estimate directly decomposes
measurement error between farmer misreporting and misperceptions.W

Table 1 summarizes the bias associated with estimation of equation 1 (using
self-reported measures of plot size, X ), equation 2 (using true plot size, X  ), and the
more general equation 14 (including measurement error, v , along with X  ), under each
scenario. We use the parameter  to denote the farmer's intensification parameter in all

                                             9
 cases (i.e., to denote   under scenario 1,  o under scenario 2, and  under scenario
 3). Note that the covariance conditions are satisfied in our data and   -1 seems
 highly implausible. The key takeaway of the table and this analytical section is that the
 standard regression specifications used to estimate the agricultural intensification
 parameter ­ equations 1 or 2 ­ only generate an unbiased estimate of the farmer
 behavioral parameter of interest under the strong assumption that one knows the true
 mechanism behind the measurement error ­ misreporting or misperceptions ­ and that
 the true process is not a hybrid of the two. The preferred specification includes both
 the true plot size and the measurement error as regressors in order to generate unbiased
 coefficient estimates under more general conditions.
         Table 1 Bias in estimated farmer's behavioral intensification parameter
                                                                                  Mixed misreporting
Measurement error is:      Misreporting only            Misperception only
                                                                                  and misperception
                            (scenario 1):                  (scenario 2):
                                                                                    (scenario 3):
Regression includes:             =0                             =1
                                                                                      0<<1
                           Downward bias when                                      Downward bias when
  Only self-reported X      > -1, Cov (v,X )
                                   Var (X ) > 0 :                                   > -1 , Cov (v,X )
                                                                                            Var (X ) >0:
                                                               Unbiased
      (equation 1)
                            -( +   1) Cov (v,X )
                                       Var (X )                                   - ( + 1) (1 - ) Cov (v,X )
                                                                                                   Var (X )
                                                        Downward bias    when     Downward bias    when
                                                                   (v,X  )                   (v,X  )
 Only true measure X                                     > -1, Cov
                                                                Var (X  ) < 0 :    > -1, Cov
                                                                                          Var (X  ) < 0 :
                                 Unbiased
     (equation 2)                                                                                     
                                                         +( + 1) Cov (v,X )
                                                                  Var (X  )        + ( + 1)  Cov (v,X )
                                                                                              Var (X  )

  Both true measure X 
and measurement error v          Unbiased                      Unbiased                   Unbiased
      (equation 14)


 Finally, we note that  is only a sample mean estimate. This could reflect a mixture
 distribution among farmers, with some  share of respondents accurately reporting
 misperceptions and the complementary 1 -  share misreporting. Or it could reflect
 hybrid measurement error throughout the population of the sort we model in equation
 14. Although one can only make sample-level inferences with , it nonetheless tells us a
 great deal about whether the conventional approach to measurement error, of assuming
 it all reflects misreporting, holds in the population sampled.


 3     Empirical Strategy
 Section 2 points to an empirical strategy for exploring the implications of plot size
 measurement error for inference about the agricultural intensification, and for testing
 for misreporting versus misperception in measurement error more generally. First, we
 study the patterns of measurement error in self-reported plot size. Then, we explore the
 consequences of such measurement error for inference about agricultural intensification,
 relying on a multivariate extension of equation 14 for our preferred specification.
 Finally, we test the misperceptions hypothesis and estimate the measurement error
 decomposition parameter in farmer self-reported plot size. We retain the notation of
 section 2, but now interpret X  more specifically as log GPS-measured plot size, and X
 as log farmer-reported plot size. Measurement error v is defined precisely as before,
 obtained through simple subtraction, as v  X - X  .

                                                   10
3.1     Understanding Measurement Error
We begin by testing whether measurement error in farmer-reported plot size behaves
classically or non-classically, i.e., whether it is correlated with variables of interest,
especially true plot size. The misreporting scenario 1 implies a reduced form correlation
between true log plot size and measurement error, meaning that error is non-classical.
Equation 15 lets us test whether we can reject the classical measurement error null
hypothesis that  = 0, in favor of the NCME alternate hypothesis.9

    v = X  +  Z +                                                                                (15)

Even if we fail to reject the NCME null, two-sided measurement error has the potential
to negatively bias the intensification parameter when estimated using self-reported area
under the misreporting or hybrid misreporting and misperceptions scenarios. Figure A1
illustrates that the relationship between v and X  indeed appears reasonably linear
throughout most of our sample. However, we also relax the linearity assumption in
subsequent robustness checks.
                                                                   
The parameter  estimates a conditional version of Cov       (v,X )
                                                          Var (X  )
                                                                    , with implications for the
direction of bias in equations 8 and 13. Because the bias specified by equations 6 and 12
relies instead on Cov (v,X )
                   Var (X )
                             , we also estimate equation 16, in which the parameter
similarly estimates that partial correlation coefficient:

    v=     X + Z +                                                                               (16)

We estimate equations 15 and 16 with and without controls Z , though always including
a vector of ones, corresponding to an intercept term in  . In all four countries, Z
includes household and year fixed effects, all the household and plot characteristics
listed in Table 2, and country-specific dummy variables indicating the crops being
grown on each plot.10

3.2     Testing the Intensification Hypothesis in the Presence of
        Measurement Error
The second step in our empirical strategy explores the impact of measurement error for
estimates of the Boserupian intensification parameter of interest. Our dependent
variables are input intensity with respect to four different factors of production: labor,
which is central to the original Boserupian hypothesis, and the three most common
modern inputs found in the data: inorganic fertilizer, improved seed, and pesticides. We
begin by operationalizing equations 1 and 2, again adding control variables, Z :

    Y - X =  oX +  oZ +                                                                          (17)

    Y - X  =  X  +  Z +                                                                          (18)
9
 The parameter  may reflect any of several structural parameters arising under different measurement
 error processes, as enumerated in Appendix A, each producing a similar, reduced form relationship
 between v and X  .
10
   In Uganda, where we view two agricultural seasons per year, a season fixed effect is also included.



                                                 11
The conditional regressions make more plausible the assumption that the error term is
uncorrelated with GPS-measured plot size, although we cannot claim this to necessarily
be so. In the empirical section below, we do not make strict causal claims.

Under scenario 1 farmers act on perfect information on true plot size, now captured by
  . Therefore, the Boserupian intensification parameter of interest,   from equation 2,
can be consistently estimated via equation 18 if  is conditionally orthogonal to X  .
The intensification hypothesis holds that one can reject the null   = 0 in favor of the
one-sided alternate hypothesis that   < 0, i.e., that input intensity declines with plot
size. Under scenario 1,  o from equation 17 is a biased estimate of the true
intensification parameter, downwardly biased if   > -1 and measurement error in plot
size is negatively correlated with GPS-measured plot size.

Under scenario 2, however, farmers accurately report their misperceptions, and so their
decision making process is specified by equation 17, even if the biophysical relationship
on the landscape is more accurately represented by equation 18. In this case,  o from
equation 17 is an unbiased estimate of the Boserupian intensification parameter of
interest when  is conditionally orthogonal to X , and the   estimate from equation 18
captures only a statistical/biophysical relationship, not patterns of human choice.
Additionally, farmers may act on a perception of plot size that falls somewhere between
GPS-measured plot size and reported plot size as under scenario 3. In this case, neither
the  o estimate from equation 17 nor the   estimate from equation 18 provide an
unbiased estimate of the Boserupian intensification parameter of interest, per Table 1.
Correct interpretation of the estimation results of equations 17 and 18 therefore requires
knowing whether farmers misreport plot size, misperceive plot size, or both. Next, we
test the misperceptions hypothesis in order to identify the underlying measurement
error data generating process.

3.3    Testing the Misperceptions Hypothesis
Under scenarios 2 and 3 in section 2, v reflects a measurement error that is less an
econometric challenge due to a flawed survey process than a misperception that leads
farmers to make systematic errors. We test the misperceptions hypothesis for this
difference by estimating the conditional analogue of the unconditional relationship in
equation 14:
    Y - X  = X  + v +  Z + w                                                          (19)

Note that equation 19 is just a more general version of equation 18, which relaxes the
exclusionary restriction that  = 0, as is implied by equation 18. That restriction holds
only under scenario 1, when measurement error has no behavioral effect and thus should
be unrelated to input intensity once conditioned on true plot size, X  . Thus, under our
assumptions from section 2, rejecting the null hypothesis that  = 0 in equation 19
confirms the misperceptions hypothesis, that at least part of v reflects misperceptions
on which farmers truly act. In the conditional context these assumptions necessitate
that the random component of measurement error is orthogonal to input levels Y, or
more simply that v is conditionally orthogonal to w in equation 19.

If scenario 2 holds and the farmer perceives plot size exactly as she reports it in survey
data ­ i.e., if v contains only farmer misperception and no misreporting and the

                                            12
farmer's decision process therefore follows equation 17 ­ then we should find  = 1 + 
and also  =  o . Conversely, if scenario 1 holds, and v exclusively represents farmer
self-reporting errors on which farmers do not act, then we should find  =   . That is,
under scenario 1, the intensification parameter estimate is equivalent under equation 18
and its more general form, equation 19, because then v is just a noise parameter.

If the farmer's perception of plot size lies somewhere between GPS-measured plot size
and self-reported plot size, however, then v contains both farmers' misperception and
misreporting, thus  may be less than  + 1, because in this case <1. We can estimate
 from equation 19 as in equation 20.

        = / ( + 1)                                                                   (20)

The parameter estimate  represents the share of the observed measurement error due
to farmer misperceptions. Tests of the two bounding null hypotheses, that v represents
purely misperceptions (when  = 1), or only misreporting (when  = 0), therefore help
identify which measurement error scenario most accurately describes the data. Since
[0, 1], the predicted value  is necessarily censored at the lower and upper bounds of
the unit interval.

So as to increase the efficiency of the non-nested hypothesis tests, we estimate equations
17-19 via seemingly unrelated regressions (SUR) with shared fixed effects (Blackwell,
2005). Due to the fact that fixed effects are shared across equations, however, SUR
estimates vary slightly from the single equation OLS estimates. We therefore exploit
SUR for conducting joint hypothesis tests of parameters, but base hypothesis tests
around single parameters on the single equation OLS results, which includes
equation-specific fixed effects. We solve for  according to equation 20, using the
OLS-estimated parameters  and  from equation 19, bootstrapping our confidence
intervals for  so as to accommodate prospective non-normality in the distributions of
either parameter estimate.11


4        Data
We use Living Standard Measurement Study-Integrated Surveys on Agriculture
(LSMS-ISA) data from four countries: Ethiopia, Malawi, Tanzania, and Uganda. These
datasets have been collected by national statistical offices, in partnership with the
World Bank, under country-specific labels. These high quality, nationally
representative, agriculture-focused panel data are fairly comparable across countries.
The Ethiopian Socioeconomic Survey data contain three rounds of household panel
data, collected in 2011/12, 2013/14, and 2015/16. Malawi's Integrated Household Panel
Survey also includes three rounds of household panel data, collected in 2010/11, 2013,
and 2016/17. In both Tanzania and Uganda we have three rounds of household panel
data and a fourth wave of non-panel data (i.e., the fourth waves cover new respondent
households). Uganda's National Panel Surveys took place in 2009/10, 2010/11,
2011/12, and 2012/14. Tanzania's National Panel Surveys took place in 2008/9,
2010/11, 2012/13, and 2014/15.
11
     We use Stata's percentile confidence intervals, and run 1,000 replications.


                                                      13
In each country we observe either multiple agricultural plots or multiple agricultural
land parcels per household, and agricultural input and output data are reported at the
plot/parcel level. Parcels are defined as contiguous land under the same ownership
system. Plots are defined by cropping system, and are located within parcels. In
Malawi and Ethiopia data are at the plot level; in Uganda and Tanzania data are
necessarily at the parcel level, since parcels were measured for size rather than plots.12
For convenience we refer to all plots and parcels as "plots" throughout the paper, and
return during discussion to the possible implications of viewing size and measurement
error for parcels, rather than plots, in Uganda and Tanzania. Uganda's panel includes
two observations of many plots per year, covering both agricultural seasons, which are
relatively equal in importance. In Tanzania we include only data from the main masika
season, as the great majority of farmers do not grow crops during the secondary vuli
season. In both Ethiopia and Malawi, only the main rainy season is included.

In every survey farmer respondents report plot size and then surveyors measure the
land via handheld GPS units, to avoid influencing self-reported size (Carletto, Gourlay
and Winters, 2015). These two measures allow us to examine measurement error in
farmer-reported size, relative to GPS measures of the same plot. Plots without
GPS-measured size are necessarily dropped: this amounts to about 5, 15, 39, and 52
percent of the listed plots in Ethiopia, Malawi, Tanzania, and Uganda, respectively.13
Pooled across all survey rounds, this leave us with 36,304 plots in Ethiopia, 53,460 plots
in Malawi, 13,855 plots in Tanzania, and 13,855 plots in Uganda, all with both measures
of size. Because we drop a substantial portion of plots due to missing GPS measures,
Table A1 examines this attrition according to covariate characteristics. In most
countries it appears that more valuable plots (irrigated plots, plots growing cash crops
or crops central to food security) are more likely to be measured via GPS. In Tanzania
and Uganda, self-reported plot size is not statistically significantly related to attrition
from the nationally representative data. However, that is not the case in Ethiopia and
Malawi. Patterns in attrition underscore that our findings only hold in this sample.

Table 2 provides summary statistics for households and plots for all four countries.
Ethiopia, Malawi, and Uganda are densely populated and land constrained (Headey and
Jayne 2014, Jayne, Chamberlin and Headey, 2014). Since Tanzania is less densely
populated and less land-constrained, it is unsurprising that farms are larger in Tanzania
than in the other countries. While Tanzanian farms average 8.4 acres, Ugandan farms
average just 5.1 acres, Ethiopian farms 3.6 acres, and Malawian farms only 3.5 acres.
Malawi and Ethiopia also have the smallest average plot sizes: 0.4 acres in Ethiopia,
and 1.1 acres in Malawi. Uganda and Tanzania have larger plots (2.4 and 2.9 acres,
respectively), since the units of observations are actually land parcels. Per capita farm
size average is largest in Tanzania (1.5 acres) and smallest in Malawi (0.7 acres).
12
   More specifically, Ethiopian plots (called fields in survey) are small, defined units of land within a
   parcel, demarcated by hedges or paths and generally assigned for a specific crop. In Malawi plots are
   defined as "a continuous piece of land on which a unique crop or a mixture of crops is grown under
   consistent crop management system." In Tanzania parcels (called plots in survey) are defined as a
   contiguous piece of land under a single form of tenure. In Uganda, a parcel is defined as a contiguous
   piece of land with uniform tenure and land characteristics.
13
   In Ethiopia we also dropped about 15 percent of plots, for which we cannot find the conversion factor
   for local land area measurement units. This problem has also been noted in other studies relying on
   these data. In Tanzania 47 percent of dropped plots are in round 1 (2008/9), during which very few
   plots were measured using GPS.

                                                   14
               Table 2 Pooled summary statistics of households and plots
                                         Ethiopia         Malawi         Tanzania          Uganda
 Land area measurement
 Self-reported plot size (acres)        0.40 (1.48)      0.97 (0.78)     2.58 (6.07)      1.92 (5.22)
 GPS-measured plot size (acres)         0.43 (1.37)      1.12 (9.08)     2.94 (7.06)     2.43 (14.53)
 Farm size (acres)                      3.60 (11.6)      3.49 (3.42)    8.41 (18.65)     5.11 (23.45)
 Household characteristics:
 Male household head (%)                0.85 (0.36)      0.74 (0.44)     0.77 (0.42)     0.72 (0.45)
 Age of household head (years)          47 (14.26)       44 (16.32)      49 (15.65)      47 (14.99)
 Household-head literate (%)            0.58 (0.49)      0.13 (0.34)     0.70 (0.46)     0.65 (0.48)
 Household size (# persons)             5.65 (2.21)      4.81 (2.17)     5.95 (3.50)     7.02 (3.27)
 Acres per person (acres/person)        0.85 (0.36)      0.74 (0.44)     1.52 (2.79)     0.93 (7.63)
 Plot characteristics
 Pure stand cropping (%)                0.62 (0.48)      0.60 (0.49)     0.47   (0.50)   0.44   (0.49)
 Irrigated plot (%)                      0.04 (0.2)      0.01 (0.08)     0.02   (0.13)   0.02   (0.13)
 Soil quality perceived as good (%)     0.31 (0.46)       0.48 (0.5)     0.40   (0.49)   0.60   (0.49)
 Steep slope (%)                        0.12 (0.32)      0.11 (0.31)     0.03   (0.18)   0.11   (0.31)
 Plot is owned (%)                      0.87 (0.33)      0.85 (0.36)     0.86   (0.35)   0.89   (0.32)
 Number of crops grown (#)              1.52 (0.84)      1.98 (1.01)     1.69   (0.92)   2.48   (1.77)
 Observations                              36,304           53,460          13,855         19,754
 Notes : Except for land areas, the variables above are self-reported by farmers. Farm size relies on
 GPS-measured size for plots with GPS measurement, and self-reported size for plots without GPS
 measurement. Mean values are outside parenthesis, standard deviations are inside parentheses.

Because the plot size distribution is skewed, these means exceed the median plot/parcel
sizes of 0.22, 0.78, 0.94, and 1.26 acres, in Ethiopia, Malawi, Uganda and Tanzania,
respectively. In Ethiopia, about 95% percent of plots are under 1 acre, and almost all
plots are under 5 acres. In Malawi these figures are about 75 and 99 percent,
respectively. In Uganda, they are 52 and 92, and in Tanzania, they are 42 and 85,
respectively. So, all four countries' agriculture is smallholder-dominated with cultivation
on very small plots of land.

Most other household and plot characteristics are similar across countries. Household
heads are slightly more likely to be male in Ethiopia, and are notably less likely to be
literate in Malawi. Household sizes are largest, on average, in Uganda, which also has
the most diversified cropping system. Ethiopia and Malawi, which are heavily reliant on
teff and maize, respectively, are most likely to have mono-cropped plots. Irrigation is
almost non-existent in all countries. Ethiopia's farmers are least likely to list their plot
as having good soil quality, while Uganda's farmers are most likely to do so.

The differences between average self-reported and average GPS-measured plot size in
Table 2 are fairly substantial: 7.5, 13.4, 14.0, and 26.6 percent of mean GPS-measured
plot size in Ethiopia, Malawi, Tanzania and Uganda, respectively. Part of this
discrepancy is driven by a tendency of self-reports to bunch around integers and simple
fractions (e.g., 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2 acres) that serve as natural focal points. Figure 1 depicts
histograms that illustrate this bunching, which varies in magnitude across countries but
is omnipresent. Of course, GPS data are not entirely free of error either, but a check of
the data -- following Judge and Schechter (2009) -- shows that GPS- measured plot
size largely follow Benford's Law while self-reported size does not (Figure A2).



                                                 15
More importantly, the bias in mean, self-reported plot size varies substantially over the
distribution of true, GPS-measured plot size. In Table 3 we calculate bias as the
difference between quartile-specific mean self-reported plot size and quartile-specific
mean GPS-measured plot size. Relative bias is given as quartile-specific (mean) bias as
a percent of (mean) GPS-measured plot size. The totals in the bottom row report the
same calculation for the entire sample.

               Figure 1    Distribution of self-reported and GPS plot sizes




Consistent with prior studies (Carletto, Savastano and Zezza, 2013; Carletto, Gourlay
and Winters, 2015), measurement error in self-reported plot size declines with true,
objectively measured plot size, in both absolute and percentage terms. Relative bias is
by far the largest for the smallest plots, the size of which tend to be drastically
over-estimated by farmers. Bias and relative bias are low ­ close to zero ­ in the third
quartile, for all countries. Notably, bias is positive for all quartiles except for the last;
only the largest plots are generally under-estimated. However, the extent of
under-estimation on these large plots is so great that it drives country-average
self-reported plot size to be lower than country-average GPS-measured plot size, as seen
in Table 2 and at the bottom of Table 3. This is notable since bias actually goes in the
other direction for the vast majority of plots.




                                             16
                   Table 3    Discrepancies between Self-reported and GPS-based measures
Plot Size             Ethiopia                      Malawi                      Tanzania                   Uganda
Quartile       Bias        Relative           Bias       Relative         Bias       Relative        Bias      Relative
(GPS)        (SR-GPS)      bias (%)        (SR-GPS)      bias (%)       (SR-GPS)     bias (%)      (SR-GPS)    bias (%)
0-25%           0.04        136.54            0.26         95.43           0.34       130.11          0.24      103.15
25-50%          0.02         17.50            0.14         22.56           0.23        27.14          0.19       28.55
50-75%          0.00          0.63            0.04          4.18           0.01        0.80           0.12       8.73
75-100%        -0.18        -14.78           -1.01        -38.75          -2.03       -23.04         -2.60      -34.90
Total          -0.03         -6.36           -0.14        -12.71          -0.36       -12.14         -0.51      -21.09
Notes: GPS denotes acres measured using handheld GPS units; SR denotes self-reported acres. SR-GPS provides quartile-
specific mean differences. Relative differences are as a percent of (mean) GPS-measured plot size.

         In Table 4 we report agricultural intensification rates, considering four key inputs and
         using both self-reported and GPS-based plot sizes to calculate intensity. For all
         countries, we compute these conditional intensification rates only for those plots on
         which these inputs were applied. The sample sizes in Table 4 are therefore smaller than
         those in Table 2. Additionally, a few small differences exist across countries due to the
         way the data were collected. In Uganda and Tanzania, data on improved seed use exists
         only for purchased seed, and is expressed in monetary value terms. Since most
         improved seed is hybrid, which loses vigor if one uses retained seed from a first crop, the
         understatement of improved seed use by using purchased improved seed is likely low.
         For Ethiopia we use improved seed application in kilograms. In Malawi, we cannot
         identify improved and traditional seed variety for the initial survey rounds, so our
         analysis for improved seed only uses the last survey round. Additionally, pesticide use
         is given only as a binary indicator in Ethiopia, so although we describe it here, we omit
         it from the later intensification regressions because those would only describe change at
         the extensive margin, and thereby miss the Boserupian intensification of interest. For
         Malawi, pesticide use is given in kilograms or liters. For Tanzania and Uganda, it is
         measured in monetary value of agrochemical applications per hectare.

         Given the log-normal distribution of input intensity, Table 4 reports both mean and
         median application rates. The median and average application rates for most countries
         are comparable to those previously reported (e.g., Sheahan and Barrett, 2017). For
         Malawi, Tanzania, and Uganda, median input rates are similar across GPS and
         self-reported measurement, while mean input rates are substantially higher under GPS
         measurement. This reflects the under-estimation of input intensity on small plots,
         which are reported by farmers as larger than they truly are. In Ethiopia, the same holds
         true for fertilizer, while mean input intensity actually appears higher under
         GPS-measurement for labor intensity and improved seed intensity. Again, however,
         median input use is comparable across the two measurement methods for Ethiopian
         inputs. These results, and those of Table 3, suggest that while mean input use rates are
         biased when generated with self-reported land size, this is generally driven by bias in
         land size for the smallest and largest plots. Median input use is therefore more reliable
         if generated with self-reported land measurement ­ it is less biased, and also better
         captures the central tendency of a skewed distribution.




                                                           17
                Table 4 Input use rates (for those plots that received the input)
                                                                Mean input            Median input
                                        Input applied
                                                                  intensity             intensity
                                                              (Self-                (Self-
                                     # plots    % plots                  (GPS)                 (GPS)
                                                             report)               report)
 Ethiopia
 Labor (days/acre)                    33,442       92         93.84     109.22      27.27      27.05
 Fertilizer (kg/acre)                 9,649        27        165.43     117.17      56.81      50.40
 Improved seed (kg/acre)              13,275       36         75.81      64.54      19.65      17.75
 Malawi
 Labor (days/acre)                    48,914       91        247.80     276.66      165.00     177.78
 Fertilizer (kg/acre)                 32,866       61         78.72      91.76       50.00     50.01
 Improved Seed (kg/acre)              4,976        9         16.22      17.74       10.00       9.21
 Pest/herbicide (kg/acre)             1,121        2         20.74      26.40        0.80       0.71
 Tanzania
 Labor (days/acre)                    11,649       84         49.14      69.12      30.00      32.67
 Fertilizer (kg/acre)                 1,455        11        214.60     263.64      40.00      42.86
 Improved Seed (value/acre)           1,552        11         15.85      19.66       8.00       9.13
 Pest/herbicide (value/acre)          1,228         9         14.38      16.28       6.25       6.67
 Uganda
 Labor (days/acre)                    16,506       84        193.56     227.02      102.00     106.67
 Fertilizer (kg/acre)                  243         1         27.57       28.54       7.78       7.69
 Improved Seed (value/acre)           1,345        7         16.99      20.05        8.33       8.57
 Pest/herbicide (value/acre)           914         5         18.55       30.17       7.50       7.45
 Notes: For Tanzania and Uganda improved seed and pesticide/herbicide application is given in
 terms of value purchased per acre. All other inputs are in kg/acre, except for labor which is listed
 in days/acre.


5        Empirical Results and Discussion
Following the empirical strategy outlined in section 3, we first estimate the reduced
form relationship between measurement error in farmer-reported plot size, as reported
in Table 3, and plot size as measured by GPS and as reported by farmers. If
measurement error is correlated with GPS-measured plot size, it behaves non-classically.
Furthermore, the size and direction of these relationships have implications for the size
and direction of bias in the estimated intensification parameter. We next estimate the
intensification parameter of interest according to both GPS-measured and self-reported
plot size using the standard specification, as well as with our preferred, more general
specification. Last, we test the farmer misperceptions hypothesis and estimate the share
of observed plot size measurement error attributable to misperceptions on which
farmers act, versus simple misreporting in response to survey questions.

Table 5 reports OLS estimates of equation 15, the linear relationship between
measurement error in plot size and true plot size, in odd columns. Even columns report
estimates of equation 16, the linear relationship between measurement error and
self-reported plot size. As described in section 4, measurement error is defined as the
difference between log-transformed self-reported and GPS-measured plot size. All
columns include the household and plot characteristics in Table 2 as well as household,
round, and crop fixed effects.14 Appendix Table A2 reports the unconditional
relationships. For all countries we easily reject the classical measurement error null
14
     Note that household fixed effects also control for community-level factors, such as availability of un-
     cultivated land, that might impact intensification behaviors.


                                                        18
     hypothesis (that  =0) in favor of the NCME alternate, specifically that measurement
     error is negatively associated with true plot size, e.g., experiences regression to the
     mean. This is consistent with previous studies that find that farmers generally
     over-estimate the size of small plots and under-estimate the size of large plots (Carletto
     et al., 2013; 2015; Bevis and Barrett, 2018; Desiere and Joliffe, 2018; Abay et al., 2018).
     The magnitudes of these precisely estimated relationships range from -0.3 to -0.5
     suggesting that measurement error is quite large, as well as reasonably linear across the
     plot size distribution, as reflected in Figure A1. We likewise show that measurement
     error is positively, precisely, and statistically significantly correlated with self-reported
     plot size in all countries. Per section 2, these relationships imply downward bias in the
     intensification parameter estimates generated using self-reported area measures unless
     measurement error exclusively represents farmer misperceptions of plot size, and
     downward bias again when using GPS-measured area, unless measurement error is
     purely misreporting.

     Table 5 Measurement error relationship with GPS-measured and self-reported plot size
                               Ethiopia                 Malawi                    Tanzania                Uganda
                           (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)            (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)
ln (GPS plot size):     -0.304***                -0.490***                 -0.396***               -0.426***
                         (0.010)                  (0.010)                  (0.0127)                (0.0167)
ln (SR plot size):                  0.141***                0.223***                   0.166***               0.411***
                                     (0.009)                (0.015)                    (0.0176)               (0.0206)

Observations           35483        35483      53416             53416       9197        9197        16582      16582
R2                     0.234        0.055       0.388            0.067       0.339      0.0881       0.304      0.286
Notes: Standard errors, clustered at household level, are        given in parentheses. All regressions include household,
year and crop fixed effects, plot and household controls. *      p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

     Having established the predicted directions of bias under each form of plot area
     measurement, we report OLS estimates for equations 17 and 18 in Table 6. These
     equations reflect the standard regression specifications in the literature but are only
     unbiased under strong assumptions about the measurement error mechanism at play
     (Table 1). We use the same controls as in Table 5. Each input is a separate column.
     Each country is a separate vertically stacked panel within the table. For each country
     and input, the intensification parameter is first estimated using self-reported plot size
     ( o from equation 17), and then estimated in a separate regression using GPS-measured
     plot size (  from equation 18). In the last row within each country panel, we estimate
     the difference between the two estimates, ( o -   ), purely to check whether the choice
     of plot size measure matters to the resulting point estimates. As these estimates come
     from non-nested regressions, we estimate equations 17-19 via seemingly unrelated
     regressions (SUR) with shared fixed effects and use the resulting covariance matrix to
     test the null hypothesis that the two parameters are equal (Blackwell, 2005).

     Regardless of land area measurement methods, the estimates in Table 6 consistently
     show a strong inverse relationship between plot size and input use intensity for all
     countries and for all inputs, consistent with the Boserupian hypothesis and with many
     previous studies (Pender and Gebremedhin, 2007; Headey, Dereje and Taffesse, 2014;
     Josephson et al., 2014; Ricker-Gilbert, Jumbe and Chamberlin, 2014; Sheahan and
     Barrett, 2017).15 Intensification parameters range from -0.4 to -0.8 across inputs,
     15
          This inverse relationship holds if one allows for non-linear relationships, as given in Table A3.

                                                            19
  Table 6 Intensification parameter estimates with and without measurement error
                                 (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)
                                Labor             Seeds           Fertilizer       Pesticides
 Ethiopia
 ln (SR plot size):  o         -0.805***         -0.469***        -0.475***
                                (0.005)           (0.013)          (0.017)
 Observations                   32750              12927            9430
 R2                              0.726             0.389            0.248
 ln (GPS plot size):           -0.800***         -0.473***        -0.444***
                                (0.004)           (0.012)          (0.017)
 R2                              0.778             0.420            0.237
 o -                             -0.005            0.003           0.031***
 Malawi
 ln (SR plot size):  o         -0.546***         -0.464***        -0.565***         -0.607***
                                (0.012)           (0.063)          (0.021)           (0.084)
 Observations                   48791              4970             32795             1117
 R2                              0.335             0.355            0.282             0.515
 ln (GPS plot size):           -0.622***         -0.562***        -0.614***         -0.585***
                                (0.009)           (0.042)          (0.017)           (0.096)
 R2                              0.509             0.433            0.419             0.528
 o -                           0.076***          0.098***          0.050***         -0.021*
 Tanzania
 ln (SR plot size):  o         -0.542***         -0.604***        -0.439***         -0.671***
                               (0.0142)          (0.0464)         (0.0571)          (0.0650)
 Observations                    9175              1487             1305               949
 R2                              0.340             0.373            0.218             0.389
 ln (GPS plot size):           -0.593***         -0.635***        -0.496***         -0.791***
                               (0.0109)          (0.0371)         (0.0503)          (0.0474)
 R2                              0.484             0.477            0.314             0.503
 o -                           0.050***           0.031*            0.057            0.120**
 Uganda
 ln (SR plot size):  o         -0.770***         -0.788***        -0.579***         -0.642***
                               (0.0151)          (0.0800)          (0.171)          (0.0783)
 Observations                   16164              1335              241               906
 R2                              0.350             0.263            0.555             0.262
 ln (GPS plot size):           -0.734***         -0.784***         -0.432**         -0.706***
                               (0.0148)          (0.0837)           (0.189)         (0.0752)
 R2                              0.390             0.316             0.597            0.309
 o -                            -0.036***         -0.004***        -0.147***        0.064***
 Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the household level. The bottom row for each country
 presents the difference between the OLS parameter estimates  o and   . Significance of this dif-
 ference is obtained via seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) with shared fixed effects (Blackwell,
 2005). All regressions include household, year and crop fixed effects, plot and household controls.
 For all rows, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

countries, and plot size measurement methods. Boserupian intensification appears a
robust finding, although all of these estimates will be downwardly biased if
measurement error represents a mixture of misreporting and misperception.

The value of the difference between the two parameter estimates ( o -   ) varies by
country, and generally falls in the range of 10-20 percent of either estimate. Most of

                                                 20
those differences are significant at the one percent level, so choice of measure does
matter. But unless measurement error reflects only pure misperceptions or pure
misreporting, both estimates are biased.

Table 7 reports OLS estimates of equation 19, now controlling for measurement error in
plot size v alongside GPS-measured plot size, X  . This is our preferred specification
because, as shown in section 2, the coefficient estimate, , on GPS-measured plot size
offers an unbiased estimate of the intensification parameter of interest, the parameter
shaping farmer decisions, no matter the data generating process behind measurement
error in plot size. That parameter estimate is consistently negative, statistically
significant, and of relatively large magnitude, falling in the range [-0.81, -0.36]. Again,
the Boserupian intensification hypothesis finds strong support in these data. But these
point estimates are fairly consistently statistically significantly smaller in magnitude
than those reported in Table 6, when we imposed the assumption that measurement
error was either entirely misreporting or exclusively misperceptions. This can be seen in
the hypothesis test results reported at the bottom of each country-specific panel in
Table 7. Because measurement error is negatively correlated with true plot size and
positively correlated with farmer self-reported plot size in these data, the conventional
regression specifications suffer omitted variable bias that downwardly biases both types
of estimates, exaggerating the magnitude of the farmer input intensification as plot size
changes. The results in Table 7 are precisely what the theory in section 2 predicts.

What about the misperceptions hypothesis? The parameter estimates in Table 7
consistently indicate that plot size measurement error is positively and statistically
significantly associated with input intensity (i.e.,  > 0), conditional on GPS-measured
plot size. Consistent with this, the null hypothesis ( -   ) = 0 is rejected at the one
percent level for almost all inputs and countries. Thus, the misperceptions hypothesis
finds strong support in all four countries, and for most inputs. The fact that farmers
who over-estimate plot size apply higher levels of inputs per acre suggests that the
discrepancy between self-reported and GPS- measured plot size arises, at least in part,
from farmer misperceptions rather than just from survey reporting error.16

The input-country variation in  estimates, and the precision of the  estimate, are a
function of the extent of use of the input. Bootstrapped confidence intervals censored at
the 0 and/or 1 bounds may reflect sub-samples for which omitted variable bias is
compounded by the non-linear nature of our estimation, or for which our structural
assumptions do not fully hold. Additionally, tighter confidence bounds in Ethiopia and
Malawi may reflect not only greater sample sizes but also the fact that analysis is
conducted at the plot level, rather than the parcel level. If the intensification decision is
at the crop-specific, plot level, aggregating data across plots within a land parcel will
almost surely lead to less precisely estimated parameters.




16
     This result also holds when we break measurement error into over-estimates and under-estimates,
     allowing for prospective asymmetric behavior depending on the sign of measurement error (appendix
     Table A4). The misperception effect is reasonably symmetric. Overestimation (underestimation) of
     plot size leads to higher (lower) input intensity. For most country-input combinations, one cannot
     reject the null of equal coefficients on under- and over-estimation.


                                                   21
 Table 7 Input intensity as a function of true plot size and measurement error
                                 (1)                 (2)             (3)               (4)
                                Labor               Seeds         Fertilizer        Pesticides
Ethiopia
ln (GPS plot size):            -0.782***         -0.422***         -0.388***
                                (0.005)           (0.012)           (0.017)
Measurement error:             0.057***          0.203***           0.224***
                                (0.008)           (0.019)           (0.024)
R2                               0.779             0.432             0.258
 -                             0.018***          0.051***          0.056***
 - o                           0.023***          0.048***          0.087***
                                 0.261            0.352             0.367
95% CI                      [0.293, 0.545]    [0.237, 0.424]    [0.308, 0.426]
Malawi
ln (GPS plot size):            -0.493***         -0.466***         -0.495***        -0.543***
                                (0.010)           (0.062)           (0.019)          (0.092)
Measurement error:             0.263***           0.193*            0.239***         0.150*
                                (0.015)           (0.099)           (0.023)          (0.079)
R2                               0.539             0.436             0.444            0.536
 -                              0.130***         0.096***          0.119***          0.043***
 - o                            0.054***          -0.002           0.069***          0.064**
                                 0.518             0.361            0.473             0.327
95% CI                         [0.609, 1]       [0, 0.778]           [0, 1]         [0, 0.685]
Tanzania
ln (GPS plot size):            -0.499***         -0.581***         -0.361***        -0.664***
                               (0.0126)          (0.0441)          (0.0499)         (0.0640)
Measurement error:             0.237***           0.163**           0.283***         0.299***
                               (0.0203)          (0.0642)          (0.0741)         (0.0892)
R2                               0.505             0.483             0.338            0.521
 -                             0.094***          0.054***          0.135***          0.126***
 - o                           0.044***          0.023***          0.078***           0.007*
                                0.473             0.390             0.443             0.889
95% CI                      [0.264, 0.779]      [0, 0.993]        [0, 0.764]        [0.438, 1]
Uganda
ln (GPS plot size):            -0.687***         -0.721***         -0.427**         -0.611***
                               (0.0163)          (0.0895)           (0.203)         (0.0836)
Measurement error:             0.111***            0.135            0.0261           0.294***
                               (0.0177)          (0.0964)           (0.224)         (0.0985)
R2                               0.394             0.319             0.598            0.322
 -                             0.047***          0.063***          0.006***          0.095***
 - o                             0.083***         0.067***          0.153***          0.031***
                                  0.354            0.485             0.046              0.754
95% CI                          [0, 0.906]          [0, 1]            [0,1]           [0.041,1]
Notes:  and  are estimated by OLS of equation 22. Standard errors are clustered at the household
level. Significance of  -   and  -  o are obtained via SUR with shared fixed effects (Blackwell,
2005).  is estimated via equation 20 and confidence intervals are bootstrapped, then values censored
at the 0 and 1 lower and upper bounds, respectively. All regressions include household, year and
crop fixed effects, plot and household controls. For all rows, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                               22
Estimated values of , and the bootstrapped confidence intervals around them, suggest
that measurement error reflects both farmer misreporting and farmer misperceptions,
with the precise mixture varying by input-country combination. All of the  point
estimates lie between 0 and 1. For 4 of 15 estimates, including all of the Ethiopia
estimates, the 95 percent confidence interval encompasses neither 0 nor 1, strongly
suggesting hybrid measurement error in those cases. And in 7 of 15 regressions, the 95
percent confidence interval around the  estimate lies strictly above 0, providing strong
evidence rejecting the maintained hypothesis underpinning conventional measurement
error corrections, that measurement error exclusively reflects misreporting. But the
pure misperceptions hypothesis likewise finds at best weak support, and in only a few
cases. More broadly, there is no general pattern across all input-country combinations.
The takeaway empirical finding is thus that measurement error arises from either or
both mechanisms, but one cannot safely assume either misreporting or misperceptions
dominate, much less fully explain measurement error. On the whole, the  parameter
estimates and the confidence intervals around them suggest that measurement error
reflects both misreporting and misperceptions. This underscores the importance of this
more general specification to unbiased estimation of the intensification parameter of
interest in the presence of measurement error.

It remains possible that the intensification parameter estimate remains biased by
measurement error in input application levels that we cannot check in these data. If
input application is measured with error, and that error is correlated with the error in
self-reported plot size, then this could spuriously drive the misperception effect evident
in Table 7. Abay et al. (2018) show that the correlation between measurement errors in
two variables can bias ­ even aggravate bias in ­ parameter estimates when one corrects
for measurement error in only one variable. Omitted variable bias could also drive these
results: if v is not conditionally exogenous to w in equation 18, we cannot identify .

One way to address both concerns indirectly is to re-estimate equation 19 using only
binary indicator variables for input use. This robustness check addresses the concern
about correlated measurement error under the quite plausible assumption that farmers
are far less likely to misreport which inputs they use than to misreport the amount of
input used. This also addresses any concern about omitted variable bias that might
arise if the decision process differs between the intensive and extensive margins of input
use. Note, however, that we do not expect an inverse relationship between plot size and
the extensive margin of input use, since the Boserupian hypothesis regards input
intensity at the intensive margin, not discrete input use at the extensive margin. We
therefore re-estimate equation 19 at the extensive margin of input use purely as a
robustness check to examine the coefficient on plot size measurement error. Rejecting
the null hypothesis that plot size measurement error is unrelated to (binary) input use
seems a reasonable, indirect way of establishing that our prior findings are unlikely due
solely to unobserved, non-classical measurement error in input levels. It also suggests
that omitted variable bias is unlikely to drive the effect.

Appendix Table A5 replicates Table 7, now looking at the relationship at the extensive
margin only, where measurement error in the binary indicator variable for input use is
almost surely negligible. Note that we omit labor since very few cultivated plots
employed no labor; we consider just improved seed, fertilizer and pesticide use. As
shown in Table A5, we find qualitatively identical results: positive and statistically

                                           23
significant coefficient estimates on the plot size measurement error term in virtually all
country-input combinations. That pattern is also reasonably symmetric across both
over- and under-estimation, as shown in appendix Table A6. Thus, it does not appear
that measurement error in input application levels, prospectively correlated with
measurement error in self-reported plot size, explains our results. More generally, taken
as a whole, the consistent story told by alternate specifications of our estimations in
Tables A3-A6 suggest that omitted variables bias is unlikely to drive our estimates,
though we cannot rule the possibility out entirely. We interpret the consistency of all
robustness checks as supporting our core findings in Table 7,that farmers intensify input
application on smaller plots and that farmer misperceptions account for part of
observed plot size measurement error and of the Boserupian intensification pattern
observed throughout the data. Farmers systematically misestimate their plot sizes and
allocate inputs in part accordingly to those misperceptions.


6    Conclusion

This paper explores the possibility that survey measurement error may reflect not only
misreporting but also or instead respondents' accurate reports of mistaken beliefs they
hold and on which they act, i.e., misperceptions. We show how the mechanism
generating measurement error in survey data matters to appropriate regression
specifications and to inference about behavioral parameters of interest. We identify a
regression specification that permits unbiased estimation of the behavioral parameter of
interest under far less restrictive assumptions about measurement error mechanisms.
We also introduce an estimable parameter that reflects the average share of
measurement error attributable to respondent misperceptions rather than to
misreporting, and explain how one can recover that weighting parameter and directly
test the misperceptions hypothesis in data. These concepts and the method we employ
would seem to have broad application for empirical research using self-reported survey
data subject to measurement error generated by unknown mechanisms. More accurate,
objective measures made possible through improved survey methods and technological
advances generate data that are clearly superior for describing objective conditions. But
so long as we allow for human actors to hold mistaken beliefs and for those beliefs to
affect behaviors of interest, these more accurate, objective measures may not eliminate
­ indeed, they could aggravate ­ bias in inference about behavioral parameters of
interest. The possibility that behavioral phenomena might underpin at least some
component of measurement error should cause us pause before applying traditional
econometric corrections or replacing self-reported data with more objective measures.

We apply these techniques to revisit the Boserupian input intensification hypothesis in
sub-Saharan African agriculture, considering the implications of widespread
measurement error in farmer self-reports of plot size. In particular, we consider the
possibility that measurement error might arise not just due to farmer misreporting, but
perhaps due as well or instead to farmer misperceptions that lead to input allocation
based on erroneous farmer beliefs about true plot size. Given the importance of the
intensification hypothesis in the face of rising population densities in rural Africa, and
recent findings that apparent allocative inefficiency among African farmers might
account for a large share of the region's productivity deficit compared to the rest of the

                                            24
world, it seems important to sort out what measurement errors truly represent and how
one should interpret, or correct econometrically, standard hypothesis tests.

We show that measurement error is pervasive in farmer self-reports of plot size in
nationally representative longitudinal survey data from Ethiopia, Malawi, Tanzania and
Uganda. That measurement error is non-classical, reflecting strong focal-point-bunching
and regression to the mean patterns. We also find, using the new test we introduce,
that part of that measurement error represents farmer misperceptions, not merely
misreporting. The evidence in support of the Boserupian intensification hypothesis ­
that input intensity is greater on smaller plots than on larger ones ­ is overwhelming
and consistent across inputs and countries. But part of the observed intensification
seems to reflect farmers acting on their misperceptions of plot size, amplifying observed
input intensification beyond that which would exist if farmers allocated inputs based on
fully accurate perceptions of plot sizes. Our results therefore speak to the evolving
literature documenting pervasive factor misallocations in SSA agriculture (e.g., Gollin
and Udry, 2019; Restuccia and Santaeulalia-Llopis, 2017). If farmer misperceptions of
plot size crowd in input use, it may contribute to factor misallocation. This raises a
natural hypothesis amenable to experimentation: if farmers are provided with accurate
information on plot size, do they update previously-mistaken beliefs and do they adjust
input application ­ and prospectively other ­ choices?




                                           25
References
Abay, K. A., Abate, G.A., Barrett, C.B., Bernard, T. 2018. "Correlated
  Non-Classical Measurement Errors and `Second Best' Policy Inference: The Case of
  The Inverse Size-Productivity Relationship in Agriculture." IFPRI Discussion Paper
  01710.

Adamopoulos, T. and Restuccia, D. 2014. "The size distribution of farms and
  international productivity differences." American Economic Review, 104(6):1667-97.

Angner, E., Loewenstein, G. 2012. "Behavioral Economics." In U. Maki, ed.,
  Handbook of the Philosophy of Economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Bevis, L., Barrett, C. B. 2018. "Close to the edge: High productivity at plot
  peripheries and the inverse size-productivity relationship." Working paper.

Binswanger-Mkhize, H.P., Savastano, S. 2017. "Agricultural Intensification: The
   Status in Six African Countries." Food Policy, 67(1), 26­40.

Blackwell, J. L. 2005. "Estimation and testing of fixed-effect panel-data systems."
   The Stata Journal, 5(2): 202­207.

Borjas, G. J. 1980. "The relationship between wages and weekly hours of work: The
  role of division bias." Journal of Human Resources, 15(3): 409­423.

Boserup, E. 1965. Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian
  Change Under Population Pressure. New York: Aldine Publishing Co.

Bound, J., Brown, C., Mathiowetz, N. 2001. "Measurement error in survey data,"
  in Heckman J. and Leamer E. (eds), Handbook of Econometrics (Vol. 5, pp.
  3705­3843). Elsevier.

Bustos, P., Caprettini, B. and Ponticelli, J. 2016. "Agricultural productivity and
  structural transformation: Evidence from Brazil." American Economic Review,
  106(6): pp.1320-65.

Carletto, C., Gourlay, S., Winters, P. 2015. "From guesstimates to GPStimates:
  land area measurement and implications for agricultural analysis." Journal of
  African Economies, 24(5): 593­628.

Carletto, C., Savastano, S., Zezza A. 2013. "Fact or Artifact: The Impact of
  Measurement Errors on the Farm Size­Productivity Relationship." Journal of
  Development Economics, 103: 254­61.

Cohen, A. 2019. "Estimating Farm Production Parameters with Measurement Error
  in Land Area." Economic Development and Cultural Change.

Corno, L. and De Paula, A. ´ 2019. "Risky Sexual Behaviours: Biological Markers
  and Self-reported Data." Economica.

Desiere, S., Jolliffe, D. 2018. "Land productivity and plot size: Is measurement error


                                          26
   driving the inverse relationship?" Journal of Development Economics, 130: 84­98.

Gibson, J., Kim, B. 2010. "Non-classical measurement error in long-term
  retrospective surveys." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 72(5):687­95.

Gollin, D., Lagakos, D. and Waugh, M.E. 2013. "The agricultural productivity
  gap." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2): 939-993.

Gollin, D., Parente, S. and Rogerson, R. 2002. "The role of agriculture in
  development." American Economic Review, 92(2): 160-164.

Gollin, D., Udry, C. 2019. "Heterogeneity, Measurement Error, and Misallocation:
  Evidence from African Agriculture." NBER working paper w25440.

Gourlay, S., Kilic, T., Lobell, D. 2017. "Could the Debate Be Over? Errors in
  Farmer-Reported Production and Their Implications for Inverse Scale - Productivity
  Relationship in Uganda." Paper Presented at the 2017 World Bank Land and
  Poverty Conference, March 23, 2017, Washington, DC.

Headey, D., Dereje, M., Taffesse, A.S. 2014. "Land Constraints and Agricultural
  Intensification in Ethiopia: A Village-Level Analysis of High Potential Areas." Food
  Policy, 48(1): 129­141.

Headey, D., Jayne, T.S. 2014. "Adaptation to land constraints: is Africa different?"
  Food Policy, 48: 18­33.

Holden, S. T. 2018. "Fertilizer and Sustainable Intensification in Sub-Saharan
  Africa." Global Food Security, 18: 20­26.

Holden, S. T., Fisher, M. 2013. "Can Area Measurement Error Explain the Inverse
  Farm Size Productivity Relationship?" CLTS Working Paper No. 12, Norwegian
  University of Life Sciences, As, Norway.

Holden, S. T., Yohannes, H. 2002. "Land redistribution, tenure insecurity, and
  intensity of production: A study of farm households in Southern Ethiopia." Land
  Economics, 78(4): 573­590.

Hyslop, D.R., Imbens, G.W. 2001. "Bias from classical and other forms of
  measurement error." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 19(4): 475­481.

Jayne, T. S., Chamberlin, J., Headey, D. 2014. "Land pressures, the evolution of
   farming systems, and development strategies in Africa: A synthesis." Food Policy,
   48: 1­17.

Jayne, T.S., Muyanga, M. 2012. "Land constraints in Kenya's densely populated
   rural areas: implications for food policy and institutional reform." Food Security,
   4(3), 399­421.

Josephson, A.J., Ricker-Gilbert, J., Florax, R.J.G.M. 2014. "How does
   population density influence agricultural intensification and productivity? Evidence
   from Ethiopia." Food Policy, 48: 142­152.


                                           27
Judge, G. and Schechter, L. 2009. "Detecting problems in survey data using
  Benford's Law." Journal of Human Resources, 44(1): 1­24.

Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. 1984. "Choices, values, and frames." American
  Psychologist, 39(4): 341­350.

Larsen, A.F., Headey, D., Masters, W.A. 2019. "Misreporting Month of Birth:
   Diagnosis and Implications for Research on Nutrition and Early Childhood in
   Developing Countries." Demography, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524-018-0753-9

Pender, J., Gebremedhin, B. 2007. "Determinants of agricultural and land
  management practices and impacts on crop production and household income in the
  highlands of Tigray, Ethiopia." Journal of African Economies, 17: 395­450.

Restuccia, D., Santaeulalia-Llopis, R. 2017. "Land Misallocation and
  Productivity." NBER working paper 23128.

Ricker-Gilbert, J., Jumbe, C., Chamberlin, J. 2014. "How does population
   density influence agricultural intensification and productivity? Evidence from
   Malawi." Food Policy, 48: 14­128.

Rosenzweig, M. R., Udry, C. 2014. "Rainfall forecasts, weather, and wages over the
  agricultural production cycle." American Economic Review, 104(5): 278­83.

Sheahan, M., Barrett, C.B. 2017. "Ten striking facts about agricultural input use in
  Sub-Saharan Africa." Food Policy, 67: 12­25.

Tversky, A., Kahneman, D. 1973. "Availability: a heuristic for judging frequency
  and probability." Cognitive Psychology, 5(2): 207-232.

Van Ittersum, Martin K., Lenny GJ Van Bussel, Joost Wolf, Patricio
  Grassini, Justin Van Wart, Nicolas Guilpart, Lieven Claessens et al. 2016.
  "Can sub-Saharan Africa feed itself?" Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 113(52): 14964-14969.

Wossen, T., T, Abdoulaye, A. Alene, P, Nguimkeu, S. Feleke, I. Y. Rabbi,
  M. G. Haile, and V. Manyong. 2018. "Estimating the Productivity Impacts of
  Technology Adoption in the Presence of Misclassification." American Journal of
  Agricultural Economics, 101(1): 1-16.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2010. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel
  Data. MIT Press.




                                          28
Appendix A                     Full Derivations From Section 2
In this portion of the appendix, we repeat the equations reported in the main text ­
keeping the same equation numbers for ease of comparison ­ and provide the algebraic
derivations of the results featured in the text. The two main equations of interest are:

       Y - X =  oX +                                                                                   (1)

       Y - X  =  X  +                                                                                  (2)

And measurement error follows:

       X = X + v                                                                                       (3)

We assume          is orthogonal to X  , and  is orthogonal to both X  and v .

Scenario 1: Misreporting

In the main text, we explain the misreporting scenario as it might arise from a global
regression-to-mean or a focal-point-bunching process.17 We assume:

       v = X  +                                                                                        (4)

Where  is assumed to be orthogonal to X  and to . It follows that:

       X = X  + v = X  + X  +  = (1 + )X  +                                                            (5)

Since the data generating process follows equation 2, we can rearrange equation 1 as:

       Y - X = Y - X  - v = (  X  + ) - (X  +  ) =   (X - v ) - X  + - 

       =   X -   v - [X  +  ] +
       =  X -  v - v +
       =   X - (  + 1)v +

Therefore, estimating equation 1 will generate the biased coefficient estimate:

               Cov ([Y - X ], X )   Cov ([  X - (  + 1)v + ], X )   Cov ([  X - (  + 1)v ], X )
       o =                        =                               =
                    Var (X )                  Var (X )                       Var (X )

                                 Cov (v, X )
         o =   - (  + 1)                                                                               (6)
                                  Var (X )
And this can be further specified in terms of the data generating process parameters:

                           Cov X  + , (1 + )X  + 
           o   =  - ( + 1)
                               Var (1 + )X  + 
17
     Focal point bunching reflects local regression-to-the-mean around focal points but is necessarily non-
     linear and non-monotone so not directly reflected in equation 4.


                                                     29
                           2              2
                   (1 + )X              
    =  - ( + 1)         2     2
                                +          2    2
                (1 + )2 X  +      (1 + )2 X   + 




Alternatively,  o can be derived as a function of Cov (v, X  ) rather than of Cov (v, X ) :


           Cov [Y - X ], X   Cov [(  + 1)X  + - (X  + v )], X  + v )
    o =                    =
               Var X                     Var X  + v


      Cov [  X  + - v ], X  + v   Cov [  X  - v ], X  + v
    =                           =
            Var X  + v                 Var X  + v


               x
               2                         2
                  + ( - 1) Cov (v, X ) - v
                                                         
                                               Cov (X , X + v )   Cov (v, X  + v )
     o =          2                  
                                           =                    -
                 x      2
                     + v + 2Cov (v, X )         Var (X  + v )      Var (X  + v )

An alternative mechanism behind misreporting might arise from optimal prediction
error (Hyslop and Imbens, 2001). For instance, if seeding density or fertilizer
application rate recommendations are common knowledge, then farmers may report the
plot size that corresponds to these recommendations, given the exact quantity of seed or
fertilizer they know they recently purchased and fully applied to the plot. As we show,
this process generates a similar form of non-classical measurement error, and implies a
similar form of bias in the intensification parameter of interest. That is, distinct data
generating processes driven by pure misreporting result in similar outcomes.

To illustrate this, let us now assume a different data misreporting process, one in which
NCME reflects a relationship between measurement error v and input quantity Y :

    v = Y + 

where  is assumed uncorrelated with X  and with from equation 2. Combining
equations 2 and 7 yields v =  (  + 1) X  +  +  . By defining  (  + 1) we can
define the functional form of measurement error as

    v = X  +  + 

If  < 0 , measurement error again drives regression to the mean, just as occurs if  < 0
under scenario 1. Although the precise mechanisms behind the NCME differ, a common
reduced form relationship exists. Combining expressions results in

    X = (1 + )X  +  + 

These equations are remarkably similar to those from the misreporting case in the main
text, despite the difference in the data generating process underlying the measurement
error. Measurement error remains a reduced form function of true plot size, but now
with a second term that reflects the component of input levels not derived from plot
size, , reflecting that farmer beliefs about plot size are formed based on observations of
Y . This leads to an extra term in the variance of self-reported plot size.

                                            30
Under this form of NCME, OLS estimation of equation 2 (i.e., using GPS-measured
plot size), will again result in an unbiased estimate of   . Since again the data
generating process follows equation 2, we can derive:

   Y - X = Y - X - v

   = (  X  + ) - (X  +  +  )
   = (  - )X  + (1 -  ) - 
   =   (X - v ) - X  + -  - 
   =   X -   v - [X  +  +  ] +
   =  X -  v - v +
   =   X - (  + 1)v +

Therefore estimating equation 1 using self-reported plot size will yield the biased
coefficient estimate
         Cov [Y - X ], X   Cov [  X - (  + 1)v + ], X   Cov [  X - (  + 1)v ], X
   o =                   =                            =
             Var (X )               Var (X )                    Var (X )
                          Cov (v, X )
     o =   - (  + 1)
                           Var (X )

And this can be further specified in terms of the data generating process parameters:

                          Cov X  +  + , (1 + )X  +  + 
     o =   - (  + 1)
                                 Var (1 + )X  + 

                                2
                        (1 + )X             22                  2
   =   - (  + 1)             2
                                     +         2
                                                      +          2
                     (1 + )2 X  + 
                                   2   (1 + )2 X  + 
                                                    2   (1 + )2 X   + 
                                                                      2


The general form of bias here is identical to that of equation 6, though the structural
parameters within the brackets differ under this new form of measurement error. Under
classical measurement error, where  =  = 0 the first two terms of the bracketed
expression again disappear. The last term again reflects division bias arising through
the dependent variable, and remains even under classical measurement error.

Scenario 2: Misperceptions

Now we assume that the data generating process follows equation 1. Combining
equations 1 and 3 leads to:

   Y - X =  o X +  =  o (X  + v ) +  =  o X  +  o v +                                 (7)

From equation 7 we can define Y =  o X  +  o v +  + X . The outcome variable in
equation 2 can therefore be reformulated as:

   Y - X  = [ o X  +  o v +  + X ] - X 

   = [ o X  +  o v +  + (X  + v )] - X 

                                           31
    =  o X  + ( o + 1)v + 

Estimating equation 2 therefore yields:

         Cov [Y - X  ], X    Cov [ o X  + ( o + 1)v + ], X 
       =                   =
             Var (X  )                  Var (X  )

                           Cov (v, X  )
       =  o + ( o + 1)                                                                  (8)
                            Var (X  )

Equation 7 can also be recast so as not to use the self-reported plot size data, to yield:

    Y - X =  oX  +  ov + 

     Y - (X  + v ) =  o (X  + v ) + 
     Y - X  =  o X  + ( o + 1)v +                                                       (9)

Scenario 3: Misreporting and Misperception

In this scenario X is a weighted combination of X and X  whereby 01:

    X = X + (1 - ) X  = v + X                                                          (10)

Therefore a new data-generating process is found:

    Y -X = X +u                                                                        (11)

where we assume u is orthogonal to both X  and v . Equation 10 implies X  = X - v ,
and equation 11 implies that Y = ( + 1)X + u. By combining equations 3 and 10 we
find that:

    X = v + X  = v + (X - v ) = ( - 1) v + X = X - (1 - ) v

or alternatively, X = X + (1 - ) v . Therefore, equation 1 can be rearranged to take the
form

    Y -X =       + 1 X + u - X + (1 - ) v

    =  X - (1 - ) v + u
    =  (X - (1 - ) v ) - (1 - ) v + u
    =  X - ( + 1) (1 - ) v + u

And so estimating equation 1 will lead to:

          Cov ([Y - X ], X )   Cov ([ X -  + 1 (1 - ) v + u], X )
    o =                      =
               Var (X )                   Var (X )

                                    Cov (v, X )
      o =  -  + 1 (1 - )                                                               (12)
                                     Var (X )

                                             32
Estimating equation 2 will therefore lead to:

         Cov [Y - X  ], X    Cov [ X  + ( + 1)v + u], X 
    =                      =
             Var (X  )                 Var (X  )

       Cov [ X  + ( + 1)v ], X 
   =
               Var (X  )
                            Cov (v, X  )
      =  + ( + 1)                                          (13)
                             Var (X  )

Equation 2 may also be manipulated to show:

   Y - X  = [( + 1)X + u] - [X - v ]

   =  X + u + v
   =  (v + X  ) + u + v
   =  X  + ( + 1)v + u                                     (14)




                                           33
Appendix B              Additional Results

        Table A1 Parcel-level Attrition Due to Missing GPS Measurement
                                                                 Retained   Dropped    T-stat
     Ethiopia
     Head is male (binary)                                         0.847     0.872    -0.025***
     Age of household head (years)                                47.354    45.348    2.006***
     Head is literate (binary)                                     0.422     0.452     -0.030**
     Household size (# members)                                    5.652     5.807    -0.156***
     Acres per person (log acres/members)                         -0.921    -1.086    0.165***
     Self-reported parcel size (log acres)                        -1.759     -1.53    -0.228***
     Pure stand cropping (binary)                                  0.622     0.789    -0.167***
     Irrigated plot (binary)                                       0.043     0.028    0.014***
     Soil quality perceived as good (binary)                       0.312     0.167    0.145***
     Steep slope (binary)                                          0.115     0.077    0.038***
     Plot is owned (binary)                                        0.873     0.735    0.137***
     Number of crops grown (# crops)                               1.517     1.158    0.360***
     Plot grows barley                                             0.052     0.056      -0.004
     Plot grows maize                                              0.135     0.132       0.003
     Plot grows sorghum                                            0.115     0.102      0.013*
     Plot grows teff                                               0.098     0.115     -0.017**
     Plot grows wheat                                              0.061     0.078    -0.017***
     Plot grows horse beans                                        0.028     0.042    -0.014***
     Plot grows chat                                               0.04      0.013    0.027***
     Plot grows coffee                                             0.066     0.045    0.021***
     Plot grows enset                                              0.034     0.018    0.016***
     Malawi
     Head is male (binary)                                         0.739     0.783    -0.044***
     Age of household head (years)                                44.179    40.144    4.034***
     Head is literate (binary)                                     0.13       0.29    -0.160***
     Household size (# members)                                    4.811     4.311    0.500***
     Acres per person (log acres/members)                         -0.517    -0.658    0.141***
     Self-reported parcel size (log acres)                        -0.249    -0.123    -0.126***
     Pure stand cropping (binary)                                  0.598     0.813    -0.215***
     Irrigated plot (binary)                                       0.006     0.145    -0.139***
     Soil quality perceived as good (binary)                       0.477     0.507    -0.030***
     Steep slope (binary)                                          0.108     0.137    -0.029***
     Plot is owned (binary)                                        0.851     0.699    0.152***
     Number of crops grown (# crops)                               1.978     1.192    0.786***
     Plot grows maize (local)                                      0.209     0.049    0.160***
     Plot grows maize (hybrid)                                     0.191     0.071    0.120***
     Plot grows maize (hybrid recycled)                            0.038     0.015    0.022***
     Plot grows groundnuts                                         0.045     0.011    0.034***
     Plot grows sorghum                                            0.038     0.005    0.033***
     Plot grows beans                                              0.048      0.02    0.028***
     Plot grows soya beans                                         0.031     0.012    0.020***
     Plot grows pigeon pea                                         0.121     0.018    0.103***
     Plot grows nkhwani                                            0.09      0.028    0.061***
              *               **               ***
     Notes:       p < 0.10,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01.




                                                           34
             Parcel-level Attrition Due to Missing GPS Measurement
                                                            Retained   Dropped    T-stat
Tanzania
Head is male (binary)                                         0.77       0.79     -2.59***
Age of household head (years)                                49.18      47.95      5.86***
Head is literate (binary)                                     0.70       0.73     -3.90***
Household size (# members)                                    5.95       5.77      4.17***
Acres per person (log acres/members)                         -0.22      -0.34      7.55***
Self-reported parcel size (log acres)                         0.27       0.25        1.58
Pure stand cropping (binary)                                  0.47       0.54     -8.82***
Irrigated plot (binary)                                       0.02       0.02        0.20
Soil quality perceived as good (binary)                       0.40       0.39      2.02**
Steep slope (binary)                                          0.03       0.03       -0.73
Plot is owned (binary)                                        0.86       0.75    22.31***
Number of crops grown (# crops)                               1.69       1.51    12.59***
Plot grows beans                                              0.19       0.15      6.27***
Plot grows maize                                              0.67       0.52    17.81***
Plot grows sunflower                                          0.05       0.04      3.18***
Plot grows sorghum                                            0.08       0.07        1.46
Plot grows cowpeas                                            0.05       0.04      3.47***
Plot grows millet                                             0.02       0.02        1.01
Plot grows groundnuts                                         0.11       0.08      4.82***
Plot grows rice                                               0.12       0.22    -15.95***
Plot grows simsim                                             0.02       0.03     -2.63***
Plot grows sweet potato                                       0.08       0.06      6.17***
Plot grows pigeon peas                                        0.06       0.04      3.86***
Plot grows cotton                                             0.04       0.02      4.17***
Plot grows bambara nuts                                       0.02       0.02       -0.12
Uganda
Head is male (binary)                                         0.72       0.72       -0.55
Age of household head (years)                                47.20      45.73    10.25***
Head is literate (binary)                                     0.65       0.68     -6.33***
Household size (# members)                                    7.02       7.21     -5.91***
Acres per person (log acres/members)                         -1.04      -1.07     2.91***
Self-reported parcel size (log acres)                        -0.03      -0.04        1.33
Pure stand cropping (binary)                                  0.44       0.58    -24.38***
Irrigated plot (binary)                                       0.02       0.01     5.97***
Soil quality perceived as good (binary)                       0.60       0.65     -9.54***
Steep slope (binary)                                          0.11       0.13     -8.13***
Plot is owned (binary)                                        0.89       0.64    59.91***
Number of crops grown (# crops)                               2.48       1.93    31.82***
Plot grows maize                                              0.33       0.30     5.86***
Plot grows millet                                             0.06       0.06        0.33
Plot grows sorghum                                            0.08       0.07     3.76***
Plot grows beans                                              0.36       0.33     6.78***
Plot grows groundnuts                                         0.10       0.10       -0.35
Plot grows sweet potato                                       0.22       0.18     9.65***
Plot grows cassava                                            0.36       0.32     9.00***
Plot grows matooke                                            0.36       0.19    36.48***
Plot grows beer banana                                        0.06       0.02    18.19***
Plot grows sweet banana                                       0.03       0.02    10.44***
Plot grows coffee                                             0.14       0.06    27.09***
Plot left fallow                                              0.04       0.02     7.67***
         *               **               ***
Notes:       p < 0.10,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01.




                                                      35
Table A2 Measurement error relationships with GPS-measured and self-reported plot size,
unconditional regressions
                                Ethiopia                   Malawi                   Tanzania                     Uganda
                           (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)            (7)          (8)
 ln (GPS plot size):           ***                       ***                      ***                         ***
                        -0.293                    -0.465                   -0.334                      -0.299
                         (0.010)                   (0.009)                 (0.00705)                   (0.0121)
 ln (SR plot size):                  0.104***                  0.170***                -0.0293***                  0.0603***
                                     (0.008)                   (0.014)                  (0.00849)                   (0.0103)

 Observations             36304       36304       53475        53475         13847      13847           19738        19738
 R2                       0.229       0.023       0.377        0.032         0.354     0.00176           0.260      0.00788
 Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the household level, are given in parentheses. No controls or fixed effects are included.
 *
   p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                               36
  Table A3 Measurement error and input use intensity, including non-linear terms
                                   (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)
                                  Labor             Seeds            Fertilizer        Pesticides
Ethiopia
ln (GPS plot size)              -0.827***          -0.280***         -0.306***
                                 (0.008)            (0.017)           (0.032)
ln (GPS plot size)2             -0.010***          0.040***          0.027***
                                 (0.002)            (0.004)           (0.009)
Measurement error               0.069***           0.150***          0.211***
                                 (0.008)            (0.018)           (0.024)
Observations                      32750              12927             9430
R2                                0.780              0.442             0.261
Malawi
ln (GPS plot size)              -0.511***          -0.527***         -0.537***         -0.418***
                                 (0.012)            (0.064)           (0.020)           (0.124)
ln (GPS plot size)2             -0.014***          -0.069***         -0.033***           0.090
                                 (0.005)            (0.025)           (0.009)           (0.070)
Measurement error               0.268***           0.250**           0.247***          0.162**
                                 (0.015)            (0.103)           (0.023)           (0.078)
Observations                      48791              4970              32795             1117
R2                                0.540              0.440             0.447             0.547
Tanzania
ln (GPS plot size)               -0.488***         -0.577***         -0.363***         -0.664***
                                 (0.0124)          (0.0447)          (0.0498)          (0.0638)
ln (GPS plot size)2             -0.0297***         -0.00857         -0.0689***          0.00487
                                (0.00447)          (0.0142)          (0.0160)          (0.0165)
Measurement error               0.266***           0.172***         0.344***           0.300***
                                 (0.0194)          (0.0660)          (0.0762)          (0.0875)
Observations                       9175              1487              1305               949
R2                                 0.511             0.484             0.368             0.521
Uganda
ln (GPS plot size)               -0.699***         -0.730***         -0.450**          -0.604***
                                 (0.0160)          (0.0909)           (0.203)          (0.0835)
ln (GPS plot size)2             -0.0193***          0.0269             0.206            -0.0186
                                (0.00479)          (0.0308)           (0.135)          (0.0334)
Measurement error               0.113***             0.131            -0.187           0.305***
                                 (0.0173)          (0.0955)           (0.258)          (0.0973)
Observations                       16164              1335              241               906
R2                                 0.395             0.320             0.614             0.322
Notes: This table provides relationships between alternative indicators of measurement error and
input use intensity. We construct relative overestimations and underestimations in self-reported plot
sizes, for those over and under-estimated plot sizes. All regressions include household and year fixed
effects, plot and household controls, and plot dummies. For all rows, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p
< 0.01.




                                                  37
Table A4 Input intensity and measurement error decomposed into over-/under-estimate
                                         (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)
                                        Labor              Seeds           Fertilizer       Pesticides
Ethiopia
ln (GPS-measured plot size)            -0.788***          -0.410***        -0.382***
                                        (0.005)            (0.012)          (0.017)
Overestimation (% area)                0.023**            0.267***         0.278***
                                        (0.011)            (0.029)          (0.043)
Underestimation (% area)              -0.113***          -0.123***        -0.176***
                                        (0.012)            (0.030)          (0.032)
Observations                             32734              12923            9430
R2                                       0.779              0.433            0.258
Malawi
ln (GPS-measured plot size)            -0.489***         -0.501***         -0.498***         -0.520***
                                        (0.011)           (0.062)           (0.019)           (0.118)
Overestimation (% area)               0.269***             0.050           0.241***            0.237
                                        (0.019)           (0.129)           (0.031)           (0.243)
Underestimation (% area)              -0.250***          -0.334**         -0.225***           -0.075
                                        (0.024)           (0.157)           (0.040)           (0.142)
Observations                             46570              4812             31317              1076
R2                                       0.539             0.446             0.451             0.536
Tanzania
ln (GPS-measured plot size)            -0.510***          -0.599***        -0.373***         -0.677***
                                       (0.0132)           (0.0468)         (0.0520)           (0.0683)
Overestimation (% area)               0.200***             0.0105            0.161           0.310**
                                       (0.0289)           (0.0922)          (0.103)            (0.146)
Underestimation (% area)              -0.270***          -0.290***        -0.401***          -0.244**
                                       (0.0301)            (0.103)          (0.106)            (0.110)
Observations                             8937               1458              1265               930
R2                                       0.509              0.491            0.345              0.536
Uganda
ln (GPS-measured plot size)            -0.692***         -0.699***          -0.357*          -0.580***
                                       (0.0167)          (0.0924)           (0.197)          (0.0848)
Overestimation (% area)               0.0727***          0.345**             0.705             0.266
                                       (0.0270)           (0.158)           (0.683)           (0.173)
Underestimation (% area)              -0.151***          0.00883             0.297          -0.427***
                                       (0.0264)           (0.165)           (0.387)           (0.147)
Observations                             15760             1302               227               874
R2                                       0.397             0.323             0.616             0.335
Notes: This table provides relationships between alternative indicators of measurement error and input
use intensity. We construct relative overestimations and underestimations in self-reported plot sizes, for
those over and under-estimated plot sizes. All regressions include household and year fixed effects, plot
and household controls, and plot dummies. For all rows, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                    38
       Table A5 Measurement error and the extensive margin of input use
                                          (1)                   (2)                  (3)
                                     Improved seed           Fertilizer           Pesticide
                                       (dummy)               (dummy)              (dummy)
Ethiopia
ln (GPS-measured plot size)             0.044***             0.053***              0.021***
                                        (0.002)               (0.002)              (0.001)
Measurement error                       0.008**              0.019***              0.005**
                                        (0.004)               (0.003)              (0.002)
Observations                             35397                 35483                35483
R2                                       0.582                 0.201                0.170
Malawi
ln (GPS-measured plot size)               -0.022             0.188***              0.015***
                                         (0.017)              (0.006)              (0.002)
Measurement error                        -0.031              0.092***              0.006**
                                         (0.023)              (0.008)              (0.003)
Observations                              10370                53416                53416
R2                                        0.401                0.267                0.034
Tanzania
ln (GPS-measured plot size)             0.0162***            0.0236***            0.0252***
                                        (0.00565)            (0.00491)            (0.00460)
Measurement error                       0.0146*              0.00980              0.0129**
                                        (0.00756)            (0.00693)            (0.00561)
Observations                               7987                 9197                 9197
R2                                        0.0974               0.0354               0.0943
Uganda
ln (GPS-measured plot size)             0.0117***            0.00485**            0.0124***
                                        (0.00416)            (0.00204)            (0.00354)
Measurement error                      0.00889**             0.00226             0.00730**
                                        (0.00429)            (0.00195)            (0.00367)
Observations                              16582                16571                16571
R2                                       0.0479                0.0131               0.0349
Notes: This table provides relationships between measurement error and the extensive margin
of input use. We rely on binary (indicator) variables showing whether a farmer has applied a
specific input in a specific plot. All regressions include household and year fixed effects, plot
and household controls, and plot dummies. For all rows, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                               39
Table A6 Measurement error by direction and the extensive margin of input use
                                         (1)                   (2)                 (3)
                                    Improved seed           Fertilizer          Pesticide
                                      (dummy)               (dummy)             (dummy)
Ethiopia
ln (GPS-measured plot size)            0.042***             0.055***             0.021***
                                        (0.002)              (0.002)             (0.001)
Overestimation (% area)                 -0.001              0.030***             0.006**
                                        (0.006)              (0.004)             (0.003)
Underestimation (% area)              -0.024***              -0.002               -0.004
                                        (0.006)              (0.006)             (0.004)
Observations                             35379                35465                35465
R2                                       0.582                0.202                0.170
Malawi
ln (GPS-measured plot size)             -0.015              0.190***             0.016***
                                       (0.018)               (0.007)             (0.003)
Overestimation (% area)                 0.015               0.093***             0.008*
                                       (0.034)               (0.012)             (0.004)
Underestimation (% area)               0.089**             -0.087***              -0.005
                                       (0.036)               (0.014)             (0.005)
Observations                             9975                 51010                51010
R2                                      0.399                 0.268                0.034
Tanzania
ln (GPS-measured plot size)             0.0135**            0.0219***           0.0256***
                                       (0.00584)            (0.00491)           (0.00487)
Overestimation (% area)                 0.0133               0.0107              0.0120
                                        (0.0108)             (0.0101)           (0.00805)
Underestimation (% area)                -0.0102             -0.00323            -0.0155*
                                        (0.0121)             (0.0110)           (0.00867)
Observations                              7778                 8959                8959
R2                                       0.0973               0.0348              0.0938
Uganda
ln (GPS-measured plot size)            0.0113***            0.00466**           0.0106***
                                       (0.00428)            (0.00200)           (0.00351)
Overestimation (% area)                 0.00721             -0.00104            -0.00442
                                       (0.00641)            (0.00242)           (0.00551)
Underestimation (% area)               -0.00901             -0.00513           -0.0166***
                                       (0.00658)            (0.00367)           (0.00524)
Observations                             16175                16164               16164
R2                                       0.0480               0.0134              0.0352
Notes: This table provides relationships between alternative indicators of measurement error
(overestimations and underestimations) and extensive margin of input use decisions. All regres-
sions include household and year fixed effects, plot and household controls, and plot dummies.
For all rows, * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                              40
Figure A1   Linearity of the Relationship Between Measurement Error and Log GPS Plot Size




        Figure A2     GPS vs. Self-reported Plot Size Adherence to Benford's Law




                                           41
