                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    COMMANDING NATURE BY OBEYING HER:
            A REVIEW ESSAY ON JOEL MOKYR'S A CULTURE OF GROWTH

                                         Enrico Spolaore

                                       Working Paper 26061
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26061


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Enrico Spolaore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Commanding Nature by Obeying Her: A Review Essay on Joel Mokyr's A Culture of Growth
Enrico Spolaore
NBER Working Paper No. 26061
July 2019
JEL No. N0,N13,N33,O3,O52,Z1

                                         ABSTRACT

Why is modern society capable of cumulative innovation? In A Culture of Growth: The Origins
of the Modern Economy, Joel Mokyr persuasively argues that sustained technological progress
stemmed from a change in cultural beliefs. The change occurred gradually during the seventeenth
and eighteenth century and was fostered by an intellectual elite that formed a transnational
community and adopted new attitudes toward the creation and diffusion of knowledge, setting the
foundation for the ethos of modern science. The book is a significant contribution to the growing
literature that links culture and economics. This review discusses Mokyr's historical analysis in
relation to the following questions: What is culture and how should we use it in economics? How
can culture explain modern economic growth? Will the culture of growth that caused modern
prosperity persist in the future?


Enrico Spolaore
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Braker Hall
8 Upper Campus Road
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
enrico.spolaore@tufts.edu
        Scientia et potentia humana in idem coincident [...]. Natura non nisi parendo vincitur.

        Human knowledge and human power meet in one [...]. Nature to be commanded must be
        obeyed.
                                                         Francis Bacon (1620)


    1. The Cultural Roots of Sustained Technological Progress

        Modern economic growth is historically unprecedented. Before 1800, no society had ever
experienced the sustained growth in productivity, income per capita and living standards that we
have enjoyed ­ and often taken for granted - over the past two centuries. 1 Why are we so much
richer than our ancestors?

        Earlier economic explanations of modern growth focused on its most visible feature, the
accumulation of physical capital in the form of new machines, buildings, railroads, and so on.
Later, models of growth have included investment in human capital. However, most economic
historians and growth economists agree that neither capital accumulation nor education alone can
explain modern economic growth. At the center of modern development is technological
progress: faster growth of total factor productivity due to the continuous introduction of better
technologies.

        Innovation has always been part of human existence, from the control of fire by Homo
erectus to the transition to agriculture during the Neolithic, from the spread of water mills in
Classical antiquity to the introduction of the printing press in fifteenth-century Europe. Before
the Industrial Revolution, however, technological improvement was glacially slow, and its
impact on income per capita was eventually offset by population growth, leaving the pre-modern
world stuck in a Malthusian trap (Galor 2011). In contrast, over the last two centuries a
spectacular cascade of innovations has continued to raise productivity and income per capita,
generating what Deidre McCloskey (2016) has called "the great enrichment." As Robert Lucas
(2002, p.109) remarked: "The novelty of the discovery that a human society has this potential for



1
  Previous phases of high growth, such as in early Song China and Tokugawa Japan, were remarkable but did not
last. They were "rises without follow-ons" (McCloskey 2016, p.534).

                                                     2
generating sustained improvement in the material aspects of the lives of all of its members [...]
cannot be overstressed."

        If we want to understand modern development, we must then ask why we now live in a
world that is capable of cumulative innovation that gradually raises our material standards of
living. Joel Mokyr's A Culture of Growth. The Origins of the Modern Economy provides an
original and persuasive answer to this question.

        Mokyr's main argument is that sustained technological progress stemmed from a change
in cultural beliefs about the natural world and the diffusion of knowledge. The change took place
in Europe after 1500 - especially during the seventeenth and eighteenth century. Mokyr's focus
is on "the one element in cultural beliefs that economists have so far neglected almost entirely,
namely the attitude toward Nature and the willingness and ability to harness it to human material
needs." (p.14) He argues that the cultural transformation occurred gradually, starting within a
small but influential elite that shared new habits of mind and communication. Those intellectuals
formed a transnational and interconnected community known as Respublica Literaria or the
Republic of Letters. Over time, its members adopted new attitudes toward the creation and
diffusion of knowledge that anticipated the ethos of modern science, as characterized by Robert
K. Merton (1973). They started to believe that knowledge should be universal (not specific to a
single group); it should be shared by placing it in the common domain; and it should be acquired
through disinterested and skeptical search by researchers whose findings are systematically
verified by equally disinterested and skeptical peers. 2

        This community shared two fundamental beliefs. First, we can understand how the
natural world works. Second, we can and should use such knowledge to improve human
production and welfare. In 1620, Francis Bacon - a central hero in Mokyr's story ­ wrote that
"human knowledge and human power meet in one, for where the cause is not known the effect
cannot be produced. Nature to be commanded must be obeyed." He meant that the source of
human power over nature is a deep causal knowledge of natural rules. A premise of this view is
that there exists an objective reality, which follows natural rules, independently of human wishes


2
  These cardinal scientific virtues are sometimes summarized as Communalism, Universalism, Disinterestedness,
and Organized Skepticism: CUDOS (Pinker 2018, p. xvii).

                                                     3
and feelings. And yet, by understanding and obeying the rules of nature, humans can control the
world for their own goals. For example, humans can now fly not because the Wright brothers
"negated" or "violated" the law of gravity and the other constraints of physics, but because they
commanded those natural rules by obeying them in a novel and creative way.

         Mokyr argues that this Baconian belief in the practical power of scientific knowledge has
been crucial for the long-term development of technology. Many historians believe that formal
science had little to do with technological progress during the Industrial Revolution. 3 Mokyr
acknowledges that "on the eve of the Industrial Revolution, it was not easy to see the fruits of
science translated into practical uses" (p.269). There was no direct impact of Galileo and
Newton's Scientific Revolution on major technological advances of the Industrial Revolution,
especially in the sectors of textiles and iron. However, other areas benefited from scientific
breakthroughs - e.g., Newcome's atmospheric engine, soda-making process and chlorine
bleaching, the calculation of the trajectory of a projectile, the determination of longitude at sea,
smallpox inoculation and vaccination. In Mokyr's view, those applications greatly mattered not
as much because of their immediate economic impact, but rather as impressive examples that
Bacon was right: science had the potential to improve technology. More broadly, Mokyr rejects
the widespread view that formal scientific knowledge was not essential to the emergence of
modern growth. Instead, he argues that high-skilled artisans were necessary but not sufficient:
"useful knowledge and artisanal dexterity were strongly complementary" (p.273). His central
argument is that, in the absence of a deep understanding of the natural principles that make
techniques work, technological progress would have eventually slowed down and stopped, as it
had happened in all previous instances of rapid innovation. Knowing why new techniques
worked allowed continuous technological progress that would have been impossible if
innovators had to rely only on imitation and learning by trial and error. As Mokyr eloquently
states, "when cultural evolution began to involve persuasion regarding the natural principles that
make techniques work, the game of innovation was changed forever, and increasingly discrete
leaps in technology became increasingly frequent. That is the tale underlying the great
enrichment." (p.33)

3
  The book includes a detailed discussion of the role of scientific methods and discoveries in the early stages of the
Industrial Revolution (see especially pp.268-280).

                                                          4
       A Culture of Growth originates from the lectures that Mokyr gave at the Schumpeter
Society in Graz, and builds on a lifetime of path-breaking research on the history of
technological progress, including well-known classics such as The Lever of Riches:
Technological Creativity and Economic Progress (1992), The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins
of the Knowledge Economy (2002), and The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of
Britain 1700-1850 (2010). A common thread in his investigations is that ideas are fundamental
causes of economic development, or, as he stated at the very beginning of The Enlightened
Economy: "Economic change in all periods depends, more than economists think, on what
people believe." In this book, Mokyr expands on his earlier contributions in two related ways: by
digging deeper into the interplay of cultural and institutional changes that led to the gradual
formation of an influential community of intellectual innovators, and by linking his sophisticated
historical analysis to the broader debate on the role of culture in economics.

       In the first part of the book (chapters 1-5), Mokyr presents an extensive discussion of
"Evolution, Culture, and Economic History." At first, readers who are unfamiliar with the
literature on cultural evolution may find these chapters rather abstract and remote from the
central topic of the book. However, their relevance becomes more apparent after reading the core
of the historical contribution, which is mostly provided in the third part of the book ("Innovation,
Competition, and Pluralism in Europe: 1500-1700" - chapters 9-12), where Mokyr masterfully
explains how the Republic of Letters emerged and why it mattered, and in the fourth part
("Prelude to the Enlightenment" - chapters 13-15), which includes an insightful discussion of the
relationship between the Enlightenment and economic change. These core parts are preceded by
two intriguing and entertaining chapters on Francis Bacon and Isaac Newton, two "cultural
entrepreneurs" who played a pivotal role in the emergence of the new culture of growth.

       The last part of the book ("Cultural Change in the East and West" ­ chapters 16-17),
discusses why the cultural transformation happened first in Europe rather than in other advanced
civilizations, such as China. In the European competitive market for ideas, the "moderns"
ultimately triumphed over the "ancients," and society adopted the revolutionary belief that each
new generation has the potential to create a better culture and a superior body of knowledge,
improving on what has existed until then. In contrast, "the heavy hand of the respect for



                                                 5
`ancients' was felt throughout much of Chinese history" (p.298). Nonetheless, according to
Mokyr, the emergence of modern science in European and the triumph of conservative ideology
in China were not historically preordained and inevitable, but the results of contingent
circumstances and choices that, under slightly different conditions, could have led to different
outcomes. An intriguing counterfactual is what might have happened to Chinese history if
Mohism, with its focus on scientific thought, logic and impartiality, had not completely vanished
in favor of Confucianism, its main intellectual rival (p.299). Even within Confucianism itself,
"there was a great deal of heterogeneity and room for flexibility, and surely it allowed for
different degrees of openness to innovation" (p.298). And yet, eventually China and Europe
followed very different intellectual paths regarding the rise of open science. A key difference
was that "China paradoxically lacked a unifying single coordinating mechanism such as a
competitive market in which new ideas were tested" (p.318). In contrast, the European "market
for ideas worked well enough to allow new entrants to challenge incumbents." Ultimately, what
made successful cultural entrepreneurs - such as Newton, Lavoisier, Darwin and numerous
others - possible was that "in Europe the market for ideas was not just contestable, but that ideas
were actually continually contested. Intellectual sacred cows were increasingly being led to the
slaughterhouse of evidence." (p.319)

       Mokyr's fascinating historical analysis raises three sets of questions. First, what is culture
and how should we use it in economics? Second, how can culture specifically explain modern
economic growth? Third, is the "culture of growth" that has fostered modern prosperity likely to
persist in the future? In the rest of this essay, I will discuss the book in relation to the first two
sets of questions, and will conclude with a few brief remarks about the third question.

   2. What is Culture and How Should It Be Used in Economics?

       Cultural beliefs and mechanisms are at the center of Mokyr's analysis, even though,
traditionally, economists have been reluctant to use culture as an explanation for economic
outcomes. One reason for such reluctance is that culture is an elusive concept, with multiple
meanings in everyday language and among academics. In an often-cited study, the
anthropologists Alfred Kroeber and Clyde Kluckhohn (1952) listed 164 definitions of culture.




                                                  6
        The word's etymology reflects this complexity. The English culture comes from the
Latin cultura, which meant cultivation, as in agriculture (cultivation of the soil), from the verb
colere, "to till" the soil, in turn coming from the Indo-European root kwel-, meaning "to move
around" and therefore also to "change" and "improve." 4 Roman writers extended this idea of
improvement to the areas of knowledge and values (cultura animi, cultivation of the soul), from
where we get the normative concept of culture as "development or improvement of the mind by
education and training." 5 Later, the meaning of culture was extended to encompass all traits that
are transmitted through learning and imitation across generations, independently of their quality.
Voltaire (1756) used "culture" to denote the customs of different populations, so that different
cultures produced "different fruits," in contrast with "nature," which he viewed as common
among all human beings. This more general and neutral meaning is the source of the concept of
culture as "the total ways of living built up by a group of human beings and transmitted from one
generation to the other," 6 which is central in anthropology and other social sciences.

        Building on this contemporary meaning, Peter Richerson and Robert Boyd (2005, p.5),
two leading scholars of cultural evolution, provide a comprehensive definition of culture as
"information capable of affecting individuals' behavior that they acquire from other members of
their species through teaching, imitation, and other forms of social transmission." Echoing
Voltaire's observation that different cultures produce "different fruits," contemporary students of
human evolution view cultural transmission as a first-order source of differences across human
societies. For instance, Joseph Henrich and Richard McElreath (2003, p.123) write that "while a
variety of local genetic adaptations exist within our species, it seems certain that the same basic
genetic endowment produces arctic foraging, tropical horticulture, and desert pastoralism [...].
The behavioral adaptations that explain the immense success of our species are cultural in the
sense that they are transmitted among individuals by social learning and have accumulated over
generations. Understanding how and when such culturally evolved adaptations arise requires



4
  kwel- is also the root of the English word wheel. Thus, the words for culture and for one of humanity's major
inventions are etymologically related ­ although this may tempt some critics to quip that economists who use culture
to explain technological progress are reinventing the wheel.
5
  Webster's Encyclopedic Unabdidged Dictionary, meaning 4.
6
  Webster's Encyclopedic Unabdidged Dictionary, meaning 6.


                                                         7
understanding of both the evolution of the psychological mechanisms that underlie human social
learning and the evolutionary (population) dynamics of cultural systems."

        Richerson and Boyd (2005) play a deservedly prominent role in Mokyr's methodological
discussion of culture and evolution at the beginning of A Culture of Growth. Following their
approach, he formulates a useful definition of culture as "the set of beliefs, values, and
preferences, capable of affecting behavior, that are socially (not genetically) transmitted and that
are shared by some subset of society" (p.8). Methodologically, the whole book is about the
relevance of this concept of culture for understanding modern economic growth.

        A prominent and explicit role for human choice is central to economists' approach to
culture. For example, in their seminal work on the economics of cultural transmission (discussed
by Mokyr in chapter 4), Alberto Bisin and Thierry Verdier (2000, 2001) have gone beyond
mechanical models of transmission that mirrored genetic mechanisms - such as those studied by
Luigi Luca Cavalli Sforza and Marcus Feldman (1981) - and explicitly introduced choice by the
relevant economic agents. In general, when it is studied with the tools of economic analysis,
cultural transmission can best be understood as the outcome of a complex set of purposeful
decisions, whereby choices inside the family across generations (vertical transmission) interact
with social imitation and learning outside the family, occurring both horizontally (from peers and
media) and obliquely (from teachers and role models). Therefore, the study of cultural
transmission is closely related to the growing field of economics that studies social interactions
and social learning. 7

        Because of the interplay between vertical transmission and horizontal transmission,
deeply-rooted similarities and differences across groups and societies may matter when studying
economic development, but not necessarily in the direct and deterministic way that proponents of
simple causal links from the past to the present have proposed. Rather than directly affecting
comparative performance, cultural and historical differences may create barriers to
communication and exchange across populations. Conversely, people who are historically and


7
  Discussions of the economics literature on social interactions are provided by Durlauf and Ioannides (2010) and
Ioannides (2013). Contributions on culture and economics are surveyed by Bisin and Verdier (2010), Nunn (2012),
Spolaore and Wacziarg (2013), Spolaore (2014), and Alesina and Giuliano (2015).


                                                        8
linguistically closer to each other may be more likely to adopt each other's cultural and
institutional innovations through social influence and social learning. For example, Romain
Wacziarg and I have found that the Industrial Revolution initially spread to populations that were
more closely related to the English, and only later to more distant societies (Spolaore and
Wacziarg 2009, 2018). We have also found (Spolaore and Wacziarg 2019) that new social norms
about fertility control, pioneered by the French in the eighteenth and early nineteenth century,
percolated to the rest of Europe along linguistic and cultural lines. In the initial phases of the
demographic transition, only populations that were closer to the French reduced their fertility,
while over time all other European populations gradually adopted the new fertility behavior.
These findings suggest that cultural distances from the English and the French are not capturing
the direct impact of "deep" differences between populations (a persistent effect of "Englishness"
on industrialization or "Frenchness" on fertility behavior), but a temporary barrier effect:
populations that were at a higher social distance from the innovators took longer to adopt
modern norms and behaviors. Generally, horizontal transmission and vertical transmission tend
to interact ­ so that new ideas and attitudes emerge and spread horizontally across different
individuals and groups, but the patterns and dynamics of diffusion may be affected by pre-
existing vertically-transmitted connections between them.

        Mokyr places the mechanisms of cultural transmission and cultural change at the center
of his narrative. The fact that cultural beliefs are not "immutable for life" but a matter of choice
is crucial in his analysis. As he points out (p.36), "the degree to which people deviate from their
default and adopt new cultural features is the critical variable that allows for dramatic cultural
change." 8 In fact, Mokyr belongs to a small but prominent group of scholars of economic
history who have suggested changes in culture and ideology as fundamental causes of modern
development. Others in this line of research include Margaret Jacob (1997, 2014), Jane Jacobs
(1992), Jack Goldstone (2009), and Deidre McCloskey (2006, 2010, 2016).




8
  This does not necessarily imply that all decisions are taken under perfect rationality. As Mokyr remarks (p.44),
"the rational or even boundedly rational optimization process often assumed by economists does not seem terribly
helpful when people make once-in-a-lifetime very rare choices." He prefers Samuel Bowles's approach, whereby
people are "adaptive agents," who learn when they are exposed to cultural variants and decide whether or not to
adopt them (Bowles 2004, p.60).

                                                        9
       And yet, the use of ideas, beliefs and values to explain economic outcomes has often
been met with skepticism in the economics profession. Are cultural phenomena too vague to
satisfy the rigorous methodological standards required for proper causal analysis? Mokyr is well
aware of these objections, and cites (p.5) a well-known line by Robert Solow (1970), who said
that all attempts to explain national differences in economic performance and growth using non-
economic factors "end up in a blaze of amateur sociology."

       Solow's original comment, however, was not against cultural explanations. On the
contrary, Solow was arguing for bringing such factors into the picture, but in a rigorous way. The
context of his comment was an article on "Science and Ideology in Economics," published in
National Affairs in 1970 and written in response to Robert Heilbroner's (1970) criticism of the
"limited relevance" of economics. The words "culture" or "cultural" were never used by either
Solow or Heilbroner in their articles, but Solow mentioned several "social forces" that
economists had suggested to explain the relatively slow growth of the British economy compared
to Continental economies after World War II. Those included, for example, "the slowness of
English management to adopt new products or new processes or new ideas" and "the style of
English education and the attitudes it imprints on graduates." The "blaze of amateur sociology"
occurred when economists brought up all those factors (and many others) in an undifferentiated
and confused way. Nevertheless, Solow recognized that those non-economic forces were
relevant to explain national differences in growth performance, because "the identifiable purely
economic factors do not account for the full difference between the growth of productivity in
Britain and in, say, Germany or Sweden" (Solow 1970, p.103). Solow was not against the use of
social and cultural variables themselves, but was arguing for a more scientific approach, noting
that "it is a fair, if very complicated, problem in social science to measure the other social forces
that operate on the level of output per man and the growth of output per man" (Solow 1970,
p.103). His hope was that the social sciences would become interdisciplinary in a practical and
research-motivated way, as it happened in the natural sciences, where "biochemistry and
biophysics got started not because someone thought that biology should be interdisciplinary but
because concrete research problems arose on the borderline of the biological and the chemical or
physical" (Solow 1970, pp.101-2).



                                                 10
       In fact, the main goal of Solow's article was countering what we might now call "post-
modern" critics, who questioned a scientific approach to economic phenomena on ideological
grounds: "The modern critics of economics and the other social sciences rarely seem to do any
research themselves. One has the impression that they don't believe in it, that the real object of
their dislike is the idea of science itself, especially, but perhaps not only, social science. [...]
The critics [...] do not criticize on the basis of some new discovery of their own, but on the basis
that [...] anything that is discovered is likely to interfere with their own prescriptions for the
good society. My own opinion is that the good society is going to need all the help it can get
[...]. A society that wants to be humane [...] should be looking for clever, unhurtful, practical
knowledge" (Solow 1970, p.107).

       Solow's 1970 article is relevant to the arguments in Mokyr's book for two reasons. The
first reason is that Solow, far from opposing the use of culture in economics, was in favor of
introducing social and cultural forces into the picture, as long as the analysis was not vague or
ideologically motivated. The second reason is that Solow`s conclusion is an eloquent statement
of the Baconian ethos that upholds a scientific approach to reality, so that we can achieve
practical knowledge and improve human welfare. In the social world as well as in the physical
world, we can only "command nature" if we "obey her." Thus, quite fittingly, Robert Solow - the
creator of the most influential growth model - was himself a cultural heir of the Baconian beliefs
and values that are at the center of Mokyr's narrative about the emergence of modern economic
growth.

       Consistent with Solow's prescriptions, Mokyr's A Culture of Growth uses culture in a
concrete and research-driven way. He introduces cultural variables and mechanisms because he
has concluded that we cannot explain modern economic growth without them. And his use of
culture is not generic but very precise. In his view, only a specific change in cultural beliefs
about nature and the diffusion of knowledge can satisfactorily explain why modern economic
growth occurred when it occurred (and not at some other times) and why it happened in Europe
(and not elsewhere). In the next section, I will discuss Mokyr's claim in more detail, in the
context of the broader literature on culture, institutions, and development.




                                                 11
    3. How Does Culture Explain Modern Economic Growth?

        As modern economic growth is historically unique, we observe its onset only once.
Hence it is extremely difficult to explain why it happened. Several potential "causes" proposed
in the literature can be viewed at best as necessary conditions for prosperity, but they are
inadequate to explain the exact timing, location, and spectacular size of the "great enrichment."

        Among those preconditions is geography. Jared Diamond (1997) famously argued that
some regions of the world had geographical and biological characteristics that were more
favorable to the domestication of animals and plants and the spread of agricultural innovations. 9
These factors can help explain why complex civilizations emerged earlier in Eurasia than in
other continents, but cannot explain why modern economic growth started in Western Europe
rather than in China (a topic that Mokyr addresses in chapters 16 and 17 of his book, as we have
already seen).

        Another set of important preconditions is institutions associated with protection of
property rights, enforcement of contracts and laws, executive constraints, and participation in
political decisions (North 1981, 1990; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2005; Acemoglu and
Robinson 2012). There is extensive evidence that societies with extractive and anti-market
institutions have worse economic outcomes than similar societies with relatively better
institutions. As Mokyr remarks (p.11), an "almost hackneyed example" is the different
development of North and South Korea, while another recent case is the contrast between
Venezuela and Colombia. But if "bad institutions" can too easily kill prosperity, there is no
guarantee that "good institutions" by themselves can foster a great enrichment. In fact, for
millennia societies have enforced property rights and even adopted pro-market institutions
without experiencing major economic progress (McCloskey 2010, p.316). According to Mokyr,
the Industrial Revolution "does not seem to have been a response to any obvious institutional
stimulus" (pp.5-6). Inclusive institutions and well-functioning markets may be a necessary
component for sustained growth, but they do not appear to be sufficient.



9
  An overview of empirical tests of the Diamond's hypotheses and other long-term approaches to comparative
development is provided in Spolaore and Wacziarg (2013).


                                                   12
       If geography and market-friendly institutions are not enough to explain modern economic
growth, is culture the cause of the great enrichment? As already noted, culture is a broad
concept, encompassing all information that is transmitted non-biologically across generations ­
including technological knowledge itself. Thus, technological progress is by definition a cultural
phenomenon, and it would only be natural ­ and almost tautological - that cultural variables and
mechanisms should affect it. The question is not whether culture in general matters for economic
growth (of course it does), but what specific cultural traits played a key role in the great
enrichment and why. A great virtue of Mokyr's analysis is that it provides precise and testable
hypotheses about such factors. In his view, the central changes associated with modern economic
growth were the new belief in the power of humans to understand nature, and the creation of a
new system to acquire and diffuse such knowledge, adopted by a transnational community of
scholars (the Republic of Letters).

       Cultural change was the driving force. It took place over time through intellectual
innovation, persuasion, and cultural diffusion. Specifically, culture changed as the result of
individual choices and social interactions, whereby cultural entrepreneurs came up with new
ideas, and other intellectuals were persuaded by those entrepreneurs and adopted their new
beliefs and attitudes. Over time, this cultural revolution affected technology not only directly, by
changing attitudes towards the natural world, but also indirectly, by creating social rules and
habits that stimulated and supported the accumulation and diffusion of useful knowledge. Those
new social norms included tolerance of heterodox views, rigorous standards based on proofs and
reproducible experiments, and positive attitudes towards openness, collaboration and disclosure.
They provided the cultural and institutional foundations for a community of scholars that
continuously exchanged new ideas and discoveries: the Republic of Letters in the seventeenth
century and its successor, the Republic of Science, in the eighteenth and nineteenth century.
Cultural change was therefore accompanied by a strongly complementary form of institutional
change. However, the novel institutions that Mokyr highlights in this book are not government-
enforced rules about protection of property rights in standard markets for rival goods, which are
generally emphasized in the institutional literature. Rather, he stresses the role of social norms
and informal rules that helped create a well-functioning market for non-rival goods: a market for
ideas, discoveries, and innovations.


                                                13
       Interestingly, open science did not become the "central institutional principle of the
intellectual world of early modern Europe" by conscious design. Rather, "it was an emergent
property, the unintended consequence of a different phenomenon: scholars trying to build
reputations among their peers in order to gain various advantages, including the much-hoped-for
financial security, freedom, and time to do undisturbed research through patronage position"
(p.183). As a result of the behavior of people who were responding to those incentives, useful
knowledge became much more accessible and could eventually affect technology and
productivity. As Mokyr explains, this is an important instance of how institutions are eventually
"internalized" and "fed back" into cultural beliefs. Ultimately, "open science and free access to
knowledge as a social method of organizing knowledge became itself a value, something to be
savored and protected" (p.183).      Consequently, culture and institutions are not alternative
explanations for modern economic growth. Instead, cultural beliefs and institutional
arrangements coevolve, whereby culture form "the foundation of institutions, in that it provides
them with legitimacy" (p.10). In this respect, Mokyr's work is a significant contribution to the
growing literature that studies the interplay and joint evolution of culture and institutions from an
economics perspective (Greif 1994, 2005; Tabellini 2008, 2010; Alesina and Giuliano 2015;
Bisin and Verdier 2017).

       Mokyr's emphasis on cultural change helps dispel the common error that cultural
explanations for economic development should only refer to persistent traits, passed without
much variation from one generation to the next over the long run, and inexorably leading to
foreordained outcomes for different societies. In other words, an evolutionary approach focused
on cultural change is an antidote against the misconception that the effects of "culture" could
only be interpreted in terms of "deep" characteristics that deterministically continue to affect
contemporary outcomes. Modern economic growth "was not the ineluctable culmination of
Western history, nor a sign of the greater dynamism of Western culture, but the unintended and
unanticipated result of a set of circumstances that affected the culture of some parts of Europe
and through them the institutions that set the parameters of intellectual development. Neither the
classical world, nor the medieval church, nor the Renaissance made the material successes of the
West inevitable." (p.33)



                                                 14
        Consistent with an evolutionary approach to culture, Mokyr argues that the cultural
mutations that actually took place were only some among many possible mutations that could
have occurred. When we deal with cultural innovation and cultural choices, we face an inherent
element of contingency and unpredictability, whereby similar circumstances can lead to different
outcomes. It is generally erroneous to assume that "since what happened did happen it must have
been inevitable," as Deidre McCloskey (2016, p.376) remarks when she criticizes David
Landes's claim that "one could have foreseen the postwar economic success of Japan and
Germany by taking account of culture" (Landes 1998, p.517).

        And yet, evolutionary innovation is not the outcome of pure randomness. The Scientific
Revolution and the Enlightenment did not happen in a vacuum, but arose and spread because
cultural mutations took place in an environment that was favorable to them. As Mokyr writes,
"historical circumstances were conducive to the sprouts of the seeds that were already present in
the soil." (p.32)

        Mokyr's book contains an extensive discussion of the historical and political
circumstances that set Europe apart from other regions of the world, ultimately allowing the
cultural innovators to defeat intellectual conservatism. In particular, the collapse of the Roman
Empire in the West had led to the development of a unique situation in medieval Europe,
whereby political fragmentation - the existence of a system of numerous independent states,
polities and other self-governing entities in competition with each other - coexisted with
substantial cultural and intellectual unity, derived from a shared classical heritage, the Christian
Church, and the use of Latin as the lingua franca of scholars. Thus, cultural innovators could
communicate with each other and spread their ideas, while political fragmentation and interstate
competition limited rulers' ability to suppress cultural heterodoxy. This exceptional combination
of political fragmentation and cultural unity played a key role in Europe's intellectual
development, especially starting in the sixteenth century, when "heterodox cultural variants"
emerged in every area of knowledge. Hence, political and institutional developments that took
place in medieval times, such as the resurgence of the Latin Church and the formation of self-
regulating communes and states, mattered not only because of their direct impact on economic




                                                15
growth (which is more typically emphasized by economic historians 10), but because they created
favorable conditions to the emergence and diffusion of cultural innovation - an indirect and
unintended effect which turned out to be even more important in the longer run.

           The view that European political divisions may have been economically beneficial in the
long run because they fostered competition and imposed limits on rulers has a long pedigree,
going back to David Hume (1742), who famously noted that "the divisions into small states are
favourable to learning, by stopping the progress of authority as well as that of power." As Mokyr
notes (pp.167-168), contemporary scholars have often interpreted the systemic benefits of
political fragmentation in terms of fiscal and administrative constraints, but Hume's focus was
much more on cultural advantages ("freedom of thought and examination") than on taxation. On
the other hand, political fragmentation and competition among European states obviously
entailed significant costs because they were often associated with violent interstate wars and
protectionist policies. Nonetheless, Hume's argument, strongly supported by Mokyr's historical
analysis, suggests that those costs might have been offset by large indirect cultural benefits from
political divisions. However, for those benefits to emerge, political fragmentation was necessary
but not sufficient. As already mentioned, it had to be accompanied by substantial cultural unity,
embodied by a pan-European community of transnational scholars who could take full
advantages of the mobility of people (especially intellectuals) and ideas across political and
linguistic borders. In this respect, according to Mokyr, European national and regional borders
did not translate into significant cultural barriers to the spread of modern science. The essential
cultural unity of European elites, developed during medieval times, persisted during the long
critical period when the Republic of Letters emerged in the sixteenth and seventeenth century,
and turned into the Republic of Science during the eighteenth and nineteenth century (even
though the transnational network of scientists and intellectuals was disrupted by the French
Revolution and the Napoleonic wars, it was reconstructed after 1815).

           In emphasizing the pan-European origins of the Scientific Revolution, Mokyr is within
the mainstream historical literature, which has generally rejected claims that scientists from
specific national groups, such as the British or the French, played a dominant role in that process.

10
     For example, see Greif (2006) and Campbell (2016), reviewed by Cheney (2018) in this journal.


                                                         16
Mokyr acknowledges that different national versions of scientific research evolved during the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, but "they constantly interacted and influenced one another,
freely mixing and exchanging cultural beliefs across national boundaries." (p.242). Multiple
"national styles" did not prevent intense collaboration across political and religious boundaries.
On the contrary, Mokyr believes that a multinational diversity of approaches and viewpoints
fostered cultural innovation and intellectual progress.

       In an in-depth and fascinating discussion of the religious (Puritan) origins of "British
Exceptionalism" (chapter 13), Mokyr remarks that eighteenth-century British science might have
differed from Continental (and specifically French) science in ways that made it more suitable to
the Industrial Enlightenment: an "increasingly pragmatic and empirical orientation and interest in
prescriptive knowledge, and its diffusion to a wide circle through mostly private and spontaneous
mechanisms." (p.231). Stemming in part from the specific beliefs of the Puritans about the
relationship between God and nature, British science had embraced a deeply empirical and
experimental methodology, grounded on careful observation and examination of facts, rather
than on the Cartesian use of logically rigorous derivations, which dominated in France and other
parts of the Continent. Mokyr agrees with Margaret Jacob (1997) that there is a complex but
clear intellectual lineage going from Francis Bacon to the Industrial Enlightenment and the
Industrial Revolution via Puritan Science, Anglican Science (during the restoration), and
Newtonian Science. And yet, Mokyr does not believe that British leadership in the Industrial
Revolution was due to a cultural divergence between British Science and Continental Science.
While he acknowledges that, on the Continent, cultural evolution "took slightly different routes
from that of England and Scotland" he expects that, even without Britain's leadership, the other
countries in Western Europe would "eventually have found the path from the Republic of Letters
to economic growth" (p.244). This bold counterfactual prediction may surprise the reader,
especially in light of Mokyr's convincing arguments elsewhere that modern economic growth
was not preordained, and that even relatively small differences in shocks and contingencies could
have led to different outcomes. And yet, he expects that, even without the ability to observe and
learn from the spectacular success of the British Industrial Revolution, innovators and
entrepreneurs in other European countries would have eventually adopted the technological and
institutional innovations required for modern economic growth. Mokyr's optimistic assessment


                                                 17
of Europe's long-term perspectives for growth, independently of anything that happened in
Britain, seems to be founded on his conclusion that the central cause for sustained growth is the
belief in the "transformative powers, social prestige and virtuousness of useful knowledge"
(p.267). Mokyr is confident that such belief would have eventually impacted the European
economies, because it was already shared by the European elites and institutionally embodied in
a "well-functioning market for ideas" at the time of the Enlightenment. Thus, the fundamental
catalyst for growth was already in place before the Industrial Revolution took off in Britain, and
it would have ultimately led to modern economic growth in other European societies even
without the British example.

       While it is obviously impossible to observe what would have happened in the rest of
Europe in the absence of British leadership, it is reasonable to wonder whether Mokyr's analysis
may underplay the role of British influence in the actual development of the modern economy.
Mokyr does provide a strong argument about the existence of a common ethos of science and
empiricism shared by a pan-European elite of scholars and intellectuals. Nonetheless, in the
absence of the British example, it is not fully clear how that ethos would have percolated across
larger segments of society and influenced substantial numbers of entrepreneurs and innovators,
leading to actual technological progress and economic growth over time. As Mokyr himself
points out in his discussion of British exceptionalism, an important difference between British
science and Continental science was that the British version had already reached a much wider
circle of connected individuals during the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. Plausibly,
such broader social diffusion of empiricist attitudes was connected to the spread of ethical ideas
about the "dignity and liberty" of the bourgeoisie (middle class), as extensively argued by Deidre
McCloskey (2006, 2010, 2016). According to McCloskey (2010, p. 366), it was the coming of a
"business-respecting civilization" that reduced social distance between classes, whereby "the
longstanding traditional barriers between upper-class philosophers, market-driven entrepreneurs,
large-scale industrialists, and skilled craftspeople and technicians dissolved, so that all these
groups came together to initiate a culture of innovation" (Goldstone 2009, p. 134). Therefore,
ethical and rhetorical changes that happened within British society seem to have contributed to
lowering the barriers to the diffusion of new ideas on how to produce, which Mokyr views as
essential for growth. Mokyr is right to point out that an entrepreneurial or bourgeois culture


                                               18
alone, without innovations and productivity growth, would not have been enough for sustained
economic growth (p.122). However, the converse may also be true: an ethos of science that is not
accompanied by an entrepreneurial and inclusive ethic is likely to remain confined to an
aristocratic and military elite (as it happened in France during most of the eighteenth century),
therefore failing to turn into technological progress and sustained growth. Hence eighteenth-
century British society might have been exceptional after all, insofar as it enjoyed the unique
combination of two cultural innovations: a new culture of knowledge (thanks to its prominent
participation in the Republic of Letters) and a new bourgeois ethic (which the English had
learned from the Dutch, and then modified and developed throughout their turbulent religious
and political history during the seventeenth century). That unique combination of cultural traits
might be a reason why the Industrial Revolution first took off in Britain, and only later diffused
to other societies in Europe and the rest of the world.

     4. Conclusions

         The spread of modernity is a complex phenomenon, likely to be the result of multiple
factors, possibly with different historical origins and following different diffusion processes. 11
As Landes (2000, p.3) wrote, "Economic analysis cherishes the illusion that one good reason
should be enough, but the determinants of complex processes are invariably plural and
interrelated. Monocausal explanations will not work."

         Mokyr's analysis is very far from being monocausal. On the contrary, his book is a
sophisticated and nuanced study of a vast set of factors and mechanisms that interacted and
coevolved, often leading to unintended and unpredictable consequences. And yet, Mokyr is not
shy about singling out what he views as the ultimate causes for modern economic growth: the
Baconian belief in the human ability and duty to "command nature by obeying her," and its
institutional embodiment in a community of innovators devoted to the cardinal scientific virtues:
Communalism, Universalism, Disinterestedness, and Organized Skepticism (CUDOS, Pinker
2018, p. xvii).


11
  For example, as already mentioned, the spread of modern industrialization and the diffusion of modern norms
about fertility control took place along different cultural and linguistic lines, reflecting their origins in different
European societies (Spolaore and Wacziarg 2009, 2018, 2019).

                                                          19
       Mokyr's story is a wonderful tale of achievement and enrichment, and yet the reader may
wonder whether economic growth will continue for the foreseeable future or eventually stop, as
it always happened in previous instances. On the one hand, Mokyr gives us reasons for
optimism. If the ultimate engine of growth is the existence of a large transnational network of
scientists and innovators who share the values of scientific inquiry and operate in a politically
fragmented but culturally unified world, we should be in a pretty good shape when compared to
previous historical periods. As Mokyr remarks (p.42), "a prediction of this model is that the
veritable explosion of communication technology in the late twentieth century will lead to an
acceleration of technological progress as social interactions and information exchanges have
become essentially costless regardless of distance." Thus, as long as we continue to practice the
scientific virtues of CUDOS within today's dense network of social interactions, there is no
reason to fear that the flow of new ideas and innovations will dry up. Or is there?

       In light of Mokyr's historical analysis, a key question is whether contemporary societies
will continue to support innovators who embrace the ethos of science. Mokyr's own discussion
of cultural evolution highlights how cultural beliefs can change quite rapidly and unpredictably.
New cultural variants can quickly spread through populations, and the changes can be
maladaptive in terms of genetic fitness or physical health (Richerson and Boyd 2005, chapter 5).
The development of science was a lucky occurrence in the history of cultural evolution, as it
"scotched many harmful superstitions by making the adaptive component of content biases more
powerful" (Richerson and Boyd 2006, p.190). But there is no guarantee that future generations
will continue to believe in the idea of science, founded on careful observation, logic and
experimentation, which we have inherited from the Republic of Letters and the Enlightenment.

       In fact, the scientific method has never been very popular among large sectors of modern
society, including influential intellectuals and opinion-makers. In his eloquent and passionate
defence of the values of the Enlightenment (reason, science, humanism, and progress), the
psychologist Steven Pinker laments that many students today are taught that "science is just
another narrative like religion and myth, that it lurches from revolution to revolution without




                                                20
making progress" (Pinker 2018, p.401). Pinker also argues that the "stigmatization of science is
[...] jeopardizing the progress of science itself." 12

        Whether science is currently under threat or not, Mokyr's historical analysis helps
scientific progress for two reasons. The first reason is intellectual. This book is a substantial
contribution to the progress of scientific knowledge, as it sheds invaluable light on the causes of
an important social phenomenon, modern economic growth. The second reason is ethical.
Mokyr, by explaining how the scientific ethos emerged and caused economic prosperity,
provides his readers with persuasive arguments that go a long way towards strengthening our
own commitment to scientific inquiry as a force for human betterment.




12
  For instance, Pinker (2018, p.402) cites a medical researcher who contends that the current constraints imposed on
scientific research would have prevented former scientific breakthroughs that we take for granted, such as X-rays,
cardiac catheterization, and general anesthesia.

                                                        21
         References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2005. "Institutions as a Fundamental
     Cause of Economic Growth." In Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds. Handbook of
     Economic Growth Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp.385-465.

Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2012. Why Nations Fail. The Origins of Power,
     Prosperity and Power. New York: Crown.

Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano. 2015. "Culture and Institutions." Journal of Economic
       Literature, 53 (4): 898-944.
Bacon,      Francis, 1620. Novum Organum Scientiarum,                First   Book,    III.    Web
         http://www.earlymoderntexts.com/authors/bacon.

Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2000. "`Beyond the Melting Pot': Cultural Transmission,
        Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits." Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 115 (3): 955­88.
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2001. "The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the
        Dynamics of Preferences." Journal of Economic Theory 97 (2): 298­319.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier. 2017. "On the Joint Evolution of Culture and Institutions."
        NBER Working Paper No. 23375. April.

Bowles, Samuel. 2004. Microeconomics: Behavior, Institutions, and Evolution. Princeton and
      Oxford: Princeton University Press.

Campbell, Bruce M. S. 2016.The Great Transition: Climate, Disease and Society in the Late-
     Medieval World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi Luca, and Marcus W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and
       Evolution: A Quantitative Approach. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Chaney, Eric. 2018. "Medieval Origins: A Review Essay on Campbell's The Great Transition."
      Journal of Economic Literature, 56 (2): 643-56.
Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York and
      London: Norton.

Durlauf, Steven N., and Yannis M. Ioannides. 2010. "Social Interactions." Annual Review of
       Economics 2 (1): 451­78.

Galor, Oded. 2011. Unified Growth Theory. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.




                                               22
Goldstone, Jack A. 2009. Why Europe? The Rise of the West in World History, 1500-1850.
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Greif, Avner. 2006. Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval
        Trade. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

Heilbroner, Robert. 1970. "On the Limited `Relevance' of Economics." National Affairs. 40.
       The Public Interest. Fall. Web https://www.nationalaffairs.com/public_interest/detail/on-
       the-limited-relevance-of-economics
Henrich, Joseph, and Richard McElreath. 2003. "The Evolution of Cultural Evolution."
       Evolutionary Anthropology 12 (3): 123­35.

Hume, David. 1742. "On the Rise and Progress of the Arts and Sciences" in David Hume,
      Essays: Moral, Political and Literary, edited by Eugene F. Miller. Indianapolis, Liberty
      Fund, 1985, pp.111-37.
Ioannides, Yannis M. 2012. From Neighborhoods to Nations: The Economics of Social
       Interactions. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.

Jacob, Margaret. 1997. Scientific Culture and the Making of the Industrial West. Second edition.
       Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

Jacob, Margaret. 2014. The First Knowledge Economy: Human Capital and the European
       Economy, 1750-1850. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Jacobs, Jane. 1992. Systems of Survival: A Dialogue on the Moral Foundations of Commerce
       and Politics. New York: Random House.
Kroeber, A. L., and Clyde Kluckhohn. 1952. Culture: A Critical Review of Concepts and
      Definitions. New York: Random House, Vintage Books.

Landes, David S. 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some So
      Poor. New York and London: Norton.

Landes, David S. 2000. "Culture Makes Almost All the Difference." In Lawrence E. Harrison
      and Samuel P. Huntington (eds.) Culture Matters: How values Shape Human Progress.
      New York: Basic Books. pp. 1-13.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. 2002. Lectures on Economic Growth. Cambridge MA: Harvard University
       Press.

McCloskey, Deidre N. 2006. The Bourgeois Virtues: Ethics for an Age of Commerce. Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.

McCloskey, Deidre N. 2010. Bourgeois Dignity: Why Economics Can't Explain the Modern
      World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

                                               23
McCloskey, Deidre N. 2016. Bourgeois Equality: How Ideas, not Capital or Institutions,
      Enriched the World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Merton, Robert K. 1973. The Sociology of Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mokyr, Joel. 1990. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress.
      Oxford; New York; Toronto and Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
Mokyr, Joel. 2002. Gifts of Athena. Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy. Princeton and
      Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Mokyr, Joel. 2010. The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain 1700­1850. New
      Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Mokyr, Joel. 2017. A Culture of Growth. The Origins of the Modern Economy. Princeton and
      Oxford: Princeton University Press.
North, Douglass C. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: Norton.

North, Douglass C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance.
       Cambridge; New York and Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.

Nunn, Nathan. 2012. "Culture and the Historical Process." Economic History of Developing
      Regions. 27 (S1): 108-126.

Pinker, Steven. 2018. Enlightenment Now. New York: Viking.
Richerson, Peter J., and Robert Boyd. 2005. Not By Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed
       Human Evolution. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.

Solow, Robert M. "Science and Ideology in Economics." National Affairs, 40. The Public
      Interest. Fall. Web https://www.nationalaffairs.com/public_interest/detail/science-and-
      ideology-in-economics
Spolaore, Enrico. 2014. "Introduction" to Enrico Spolaore (ed.), Culture and Economic Growth.
       Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg. 2009. "The Diffusion of Development." Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 124 (2): 469­529.

Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg. 2013. "How Deep Are the Roots of Economic
Development?" Journal of Economic Literature. 51 (2): 325-369.

Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg. 2018. "Ancestry and Development: New Evidence."
       Journal of Applied Econometrics. 33 (5): 748-762.



                                             24
Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg. 2019. "Fertility and Modernity." NBER Working Paper
       No. 25957. June.
Tabellini, Guido. 2008. "Institutions and Culture." Journal of the European Economic
       Association 6 (2­3): 255­94.

Tabellini, Guido. 2010. "Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of
       Europe." Journal of the European Economic Association 8 (4):677­716.

Voltaire. 1756. Essai sur les moeurs et l'esprit des nations et sur les principaux faits de l'histoire
       depuis Charlemagne jusqu'à Louis XIII." edited by René Pomeau (1990). Paris: Garnier
       frères.




                                                 25
