                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           WELFARE COSTS OF CATASTROPHES:
                           LOST CONSUMPTION AND LOST LIVES

                                          Ian W.R. Martin
                                         Robert S. Pindyck

                                        Working Paper 26068
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26068


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2019




The authors declare that they have no relevant or material financial interests that are related to the
research described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Ian Martin is grateful
to the ERC for support under Starting Grant 639744.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ian W.R. Martin and Robert S. Pindyck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Welfare Costs of Catastrophes: Lost Consumption and Lost Lives
Ian W.R. Martin and Robert S. Pindyck
NBER Working Paper No. 26068
July 2019
JEL No. D81,H5,Q5,Q58

                                         ABSTRACT

Most of the literature on the economics of catastrophes assumes that such events cause a
reduction in the stream of consumption, as opposed to widespread fatalities. Here we show how
to incorporate death in a model of catastrophe avoidance, and how a catastrophic loss of life can
be expressed as a welfare-equivalent drop in wealth or consumption. We examine how potential
fatalities affect the policy interdependence of catastrophic events and "willingness to pay" (WTP)
to avoid them. Using estimates of the "value of a statistical life" (VSL), we find the WTP to
avoid major pandemics, and show it is large (10% or more of annual consumption) and partly
driven by the risk of macroeconomic contractions. Likewise, the risk of pandemics significantly
increases the WTP to reduce consumption risk. Our work links the VSL and consumption disaster
literatures.


Ian W.R. Martin
Department of Finance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
i.w.martin@lse.ac.uk

Robert S. Pindyck
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-522
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
RPINDYCK@MIT.EDU
1       Introduction
The welfare costs of unpredictable catastrophic events have been addressed in a variety
of studies. In most, the events are "generic," in that the cause is unspecified, and each
event reduces GDP and consumption by some (random) amount. One can think of these
events as destroying a random part of the capital stock or reducing its productivity, and
reducing output accordingly. Welfare costs arise in part from the direct impact of the
events on consumption and in part from their unpredictability.1 In Martin and Pindyck
(2015), we considered different types of catastrophic events (e.g., nuclear terrorism, a climate
catastrophe, or a financial crisis), explored their policy interdependence, and developed a
rule for determining which events it is optimal to avert. But as with generic disasters, we
assumed that the impact of each type of catastrophic event is a reduction in consumption.
    Some catastrophic events kill people but cause little or no drop in the consumption of
those who survive. Perhaps the best example -- and the one we focus on in this paper -- is a
major pandemic that spreads uncontrollably. Most of the damage from such an event would
be the deaths of a significant fraction of the population. Indeed, the Spanish Flu pandemic
of 1918­1919 infected about 20 percent and killed about 4 to 5 percent of the populations of
Europe and the U.S., but had a minimal impact on GDP and the consumption of survivors.
Thus an equally virulent pandemic today might kill more than ten million people in the U.S.
alone. Epidemiologists have argued that new and more virulent pandemics are very likely to
occur in the next couple of decades, and because of modern travel, could kill an even larger
fraction of the population.2
    We explore the welfare implications of the threat of pandemics, but in the context of a
world also threatened by "generic" consumption disasters. As usual, we measure the benefit
from averting either threat in terms of "willingness to pay" (WTP), i.e., the maximum
fraction of consumption society would be willing to sacrifice, now and throughout the future,
to eliminate the threat. We examine the WTP to avoid future pandemics, and ask how that
WTP is affected by ongoing economic uncertainty. In particular, what is the WTP to avoid
a pandemic, the WTP to avoid consumption disasters, and the WTP to avoid both?
    1
    Barro (2006, 2009), Martin (2008), Pindyck and Wang (2013), and others refer to (generic) catastrophes
as "consumption disasters." The potential for such catastrophes can help explain the equity premium and
low risk-free rate "puzzles." As discussed below, Barro (2006, 2009), Barro and Urs´ua (2008) and others use
historical data for a panel of countries to estimate the mean arrival rate and impact distribution of these
events; Martin (2008) and Pindyck and Wang (2013) use data on aggregate economic and financial variables
to get the mean arrival rate and impact distribution as outputs of a general equilibrium model.
    2
   See, e.g., Byrne (2008), Kilbourne (2008), Enserink (2004), and Harvard Global Health Institute (2018).
Johnson and Mueller (2002) estimated the Spanish Flu U.S. mortality rate to be 6.5 percent.


                                                     1
   Why include consumption disasters in a study of the threat of pandemics? First, as
we showed in Martin and Pindyck (2015), with multiple potential catastrophes, simple cost-
benefit analysis breaks down: because they are "non-marginal," considering them in isolation
can lead to sub-optimal policies, even if the catastrophes occur independently of one another.
Second, general economic uncertainty is a form of "background risk" that raises the WTP
to avert a pandemic, and we want to determine by how much. Third, the welfare effects of
consumption disasters provides a scale that can help us evaluate the importance of averting
pandemics. And finally, combining the two in one model is natural because the framework
we develop works by relating the welfare effects of fatalities to losses of consumption.3
   Here we show how to incorporate death in a model of catastrophe avoidance, and how
a catastrophic loss of life can be expressed as a welfare-equivalent drop in consumption.
We want to find the WTP to avert a catastrophe that would kill some fraction  of the
population (chosen at random), leaving the consumption of those who live unchanged, as
opposed to reducing the consumption of everyone by  . As one would expect, the WTP to
avert the deaths of some fraction of the population is much greater than the WTP to avert
a drop in consumption by the same fraction; a drop in consumption causes a marginal loss
of utility, whereas death causes a total loss (albeit for only a fraction of the population).
    We proxy for the value of a life lost by the "value of a statistical life" (VSL). The VSL
is the marginal rate of substitution between wealth (or consumption, or discounted lifetime
consumption) and the probability of survival. Thus it is a local measure, and is highly
imperfect in that we would expect an individual (or society) to be willing to pay much more
than the VSL to avoid certain death or a high probability of death. Nonetheless, the VSL is
used widely in public policy applications. Many studies have estimated the VSL using data
on risk-of-death choices made by individuals, and typically find numbers in the range of 3
to 10 times average lifetime income or consumption. (So as society becomes richer, the VSL
will increase.) Here we link the VSL literature to the literature on consumption disasters.
    In Martin and Pindyck (2015) we assumed that there are N types of potential catastro-
phes, all of which would cause a drop in consumption. We now allow for just two types of
catastrophes, one of which is a generic consumption disaster and the other is an event (e.g.,
a pandemic) that kills people. Thus the WTP to avoid the second type results from lives

   3
    Barro (2014) develops a model with two catastrophes, a consumption disaster and also an environmental
catastrophe (e.g., from climate change), with different probabilities of occurring. But he assumes the two
catastrophes have the same impact distribution and simply adds the probabilities, in effect modeling a single
catastrophe, but with a greater likelihood of occurring than the consumption disasters in the earlier papers.




                                                     2
saved, as opposed to consumption saved.4
   Determining the WTP to avert a catastrophe that kills people introduces a fundamental
issue: How should society value the very existence of people, alive now and potentially in
the future, relative to the consumption enjoyed by those people? We want to be clear that
we do not have anything new to say about the hard philosophical question regarding the
value of human life. To our knowledge, there is no consensus regarding the social value of
more or fewer people, although economists tend to value changes in population asymmetri-
cally. Increases in population are seen by some as "good" (on purely ethical grounds, but
also by contributing to technological change), and by some as "bad" (because of crowding,
congestion, and environmental stress). Based on social norms, decreases in population are
seen as purely "bad," in that we go to great lengths to save lives and prevent life-threatening
disasters.5 Consistent with these social norms, the model we develop treats deaths caused
by catastrophes as a pure "bad" that reduces social welfare. Consistent with the views of
environmentalists, our model also treats natural increases in population as "bad," although
our focus is on the welfare effects of catastrophes.
    Using middle-of-the-road estimates of the VSL and conservative estimates of the likeli-
hood and impact distribution, we find the WTP to avert future pandemics to be large --
more than 10% of consumption. Also, a good portion of that WTP comes from "background
risk," here the threat of a consumption catastrophe. Likewise, the threat of pandemics sub-
stantially affects the WTP to avert consumption catastrophes. This is another example of
the policy interdependence of major catastrophic threats.
    In the next section we lay out our framework for measuring the welfare loss from catastro-
phes that kill people, but leave the consumption of survivors unchanged. In Sections 3 and 4
we present a fully dynamic model with two types of catastrophes that arrive independently
as Poisson processes, one that causes a (random) drop in consumption and the other a (ran-
dom) number of deaths. We specify distributions for the random impacts of each type, and
we find the WTPs to avert each and to avert both. In Section 5 we calibrate the model using
parameter values consistent with the recent literatures on pandemics and macroeconomic
contractions, calculate the WTPs, and discuss the policy implications. Section 6 concludes.
   4
    As is clear from Barro and Urs´ua (2008), some of the greatest "consumption disasters" during the past
century were the result of major wars. Those wars caused vast numbers of deaths (military and civilian),
the welfare losses from which were likely greater than the losses from reduced consumption.
   5
    But see Young (2005) and Voigtl¨ ander and Voth (2013), who show how pandemics and plagues can raise
welfare over time. For estimates of the negative population externality associated with climate change, see
Bohn and Stuart (2015).



                                                    3
2       Framework
We assume that at time t there are Nt identical consumers who, barring a catastrophe,
remain alive indefinitely. We use a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility function
to measure the welfare accruing from a consumption stream, and denote the index of relative
risk aversion by  and rate of time preference by  . Unless noted otherwise, we will assume
that  > 1. This is consistent with the finance and macroeconomics literatures, which put
 in the range of 2 to 5. We also assume that the occurrence of a catastrophe is a Poisson
event with a known mean arrival rate, that can occur repeatedly.
   Without any catastrophe, real per-capita consumption, Ct , grows at the constant rate
g , and we normalize so that at time t = 0, C0 = 1. Likewise the population, Nt , grows at
the constant rate n, and we normalize so that N0 = 1. Utility for each individual comes
only from consumption; ut = Ct1- /(1 -  ). We assume that total welfare for society is
proportional to the population:
                                                  
                                                      1
                                    V0 = E              Nt Ct1- e-t dt                                   (1)
                                              0      1-
Note that with  > 1, V0 < 0, so a higher natural rate of population growth n reduces total
social welfare. This is not the result of an explicit population externality, but simply an
implication of scaling social welfare by population.6 It might appear, then, that eqn. (1)
implies that a catastrophe that reduces Nt will increase welfare. But as we will see, our
treatment of deaths from a catastrophe ensures the opposite.
    We consider two types of catastrophes. The first consists of catastrophes which cause a
permanent drop in log consumption by a random fraction  for the entire population (so
that  is roughly the fraction by which total consumption falls). Thus if the catastrophic
event first occurs at time t1 , Ct = egt for t < t1 and then falls to Ct = e-+gt at t = t1 . Let
c denote the mean arrival rate of this type of event.
    The second type consists of catastrophes which result in the death of a random fraction 
of the population, where the distribution of deaths is also random, i.e., each individual has a
probability  of dying. This type of catastrophe, however, leaves unchanged the consumption
path for those who remain alive. Thus the first occurrence of a "death" event causes the
population to fall to Nt = e-+nt but leaves Ct unchanged. Let d denote the mean arrival
time of this type of event. For now we make no assumptions regarding the distributions for
    6                                                                                  1- 
    We could introduce a population externality by writing individual utility as ut = Ct  Nt /(1 -  ), so the
                                                                                     1+
externality is positive (negative) if  > (<) 0. Then Nt in eqn. (1) is replaced by Nt , so V0 /N > (<) 0
if  < (>) - 1. Population externalities are not the focus of this paper, so we will not introduce one.


                                                       4
 and  (and these distributions need not be the same).
  Later, when we calibrate and apply the model, we will be more specific about the nature
of these two types of catastrophes (e.g., a "death" event will be a pandemic). For now we
simply assume that one causes a drop in Ct and the other a drop in Nt . We will want to
calculate the WTP to avert each type, and the WTP to avert both.7

2.1     The Quick and the Dead
To handle catastrophes that cause death, we must aggregate the welfare of those who remain
alive after the event and the welfare of those who die.
    What is the welfare loss for a person that dies? One approach to this question is to
simply assume that the consumption of those who die falls to zero. This might make sense
for CRRA utility with  < 1, because then u(C ) = C 1- /(1 -  ) = 0 when C = 0. But we
have assumed that  > 1, so utility is negative, and unbounded as C  0.
    An alternative, "critical-level utilitarianism," is to find a consumption level C0 just high
enough to sustain (tolerable) life, and then measure utility relative to u(C -C0 ). (See Broome
(2004) and Blackorby, Bossert and Donaldson (2005).) But as a matter of calibration, we
see no obvious way to determine C0 . More importantly, in our model C could fall below C0 ,
and we need a way to compare this to an outcome in which C falls just to C0 .
    Another and perhaps simplest approach is to assume that upon death, utility (as opposed
to consumption) falls to zero, i.e., the individual loses the utility she enjoyed while alive.
But with CRRA utility, this can considerably underestimate the welfare loss from death.
    To see this, consider an individual who lives two periods and enjoys the same consumption
                                                                                            -1
C0 = 1 in each period. Ignore discounting and assume  = 2, so her welfare is V = -2C0          =
-2. But what if she dies just before the second period? Does she simply lose the utility
she otherwise would have gained from consuming 1 unit? Upon death her consumption goes
to zero and U (0) = -, which implies a loss far greater than -1. To see why the loss
must be greater than the utility she otherwise would have received in Period 2, suppose her
consumption in Period 2 fell not to zero, but only by 75%, i.e. to 0.25. Then Period 2 utility
would be -4 and her welfare change would be -4 - (-1) = -3, a much greater loss than
the utility otherwise gained from consuming 1 unit. But consuming only 25% of "normal"
consumption is still (for most people) far preferable to death.
    Nonetheless, the usual approach in the literature is to assume that upon death utility
  7
   We focus on completely averting a catastrophe, but as shown in Martin and Pindyck (2015), our frame-
work also allows for partially alleviating the catastrophe, e.g., by reducing its mean arrival rate.



                                                  5
falls to zero. For example, Hall and Jones (2007), in their study of the value of life-extending
health expenditures, do this by adding a positive constant b to the utility function:
                                                    1
                                         u(C ) =      C 1-  + b .
                                                   1-

For Hall and Jones (2007) the constant b is essential because it allows them to show that
as income and consumption increase, the marginal utility of an extra dollar of consumption
falls relative to the marginal benefit (in terms of an increase in the probability of survival)
from an extra dollar of health care spending.8 In their case, death corresponds to a drop in
consumption from C0 to a value  such that u( ) = 0, i.e.,  = [( - 1)b]1/(1-) .
   We are interested in the loss of welfare resulting from death, but not a comparison of
marginal benefits from additional health care spending, so we can retain the CRRA utility
function without adding a constant. We can then treat death using the same framework
used to treat the utility loss from a drop in consumption. To do this we adopt the VSL
measure that is widely used in public policy.

2.2     The Value of Life
To determine the welfare effects of fatalities, we need to know the value of a life (or more
precisely, the value of a life lost). There is a large literature on this topic, which focuses on
the "value of a statistical life" (VSL), defined as the marginal rate of substitution between
wealth (or future lifetime consumption) and the probability of survival. Thus the VSL tells
us how much an individual (or society) would pay in terms of a small decrease in wealth
or consumption in return for a small increase in the probability of survival. It does not
tell us how much an individual or society would pay to avoid certain death, or a significant
probability of death, which we expect would be much more than the VSL. It also need not
aggregate consistently; a VSL estimate applied to a country's entire population can easily
exceed the present value of the country's projected GDP over the next, say, 40 years.9
   8
     Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) also use this formulation, normalize utility at death to be zero, and
take   0.8 so that b < 0. With  > 1, a value of b sufficiently large so that u(C ) > 0 over any relevant
range of C is also needed to ensure that indifference curves between consumption and life expectancy slope
down. See Pratt and Zeckhauser (1996). In a related paper, Jones (2016) develops a representative agent
model in which research effort can lead to consumption growth, but also the chance of a catastrophe that will
kill the agent, whose utility then falls to zero. Arrow and Priebsch (2014) propose a generalized hyperbolic
absolute risk aversion utility function which is bounded for any value of C .
   9
    For an overview of the VSL and its measurement and use, see Andersson and Treich (2009), Ashenfelter
(2006), and Viscusi (2018). The VSL has other issues. For example, the macro/finance literatures put the
coefficient of relative risk aversion,  , well above 1. Estimates of the income elasticity of the VSL are 0.5 to


                                                       6
    Many studies have sought to estimate the VSL using data on risk-of-death choices made
by individuals, such as the decision to take a riskier but higher-paying job rather than a safer
one. (See, e.g., Viscusi (1993) and Cropper and Sussman (1990).) The range of estimates is
wide: 3 to 10 times lifetime income or lifetime consumption, with an average value of around
7. Consistent with this average value, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency set the
VSL at about $9 million when it conducted cost-benefit analyses of proposed policies.10
   Let w represent wealth or lifetime consumption, and let p be the ex ante probability of
death (so 1 - p is the probability of survival). Suppose an individual can reduce p at the
cost of some reduction in w. Let u(w) be the individual's utility if alive, and v (w) her utility
if dead, with u(w) > v (w) and u (w) > v (w). The VSL measures the trade-off between
wealth (or lifetime consumption) and the probability of survival, i.e., it is the marginal rate
of substitution between w and 1 - p:11
                                      dw       dw       u(w) - v (w)
                        VSL = -              =    =                       .                                 (2)
                                    d(1 - p)   dp   (1 - p)u (w) + pv (w)
Note that u(w) and v (w) are measured in utils, and u (w) and v (w) are measured in utils
per dollar, so the VSL is measured in dollars. The VSL is a cardinal measure, invariant to
affine transformations of u or v . Doubling the VSL implies a doubling of the compensation
required to incur an incremental increase in the risk of death. Consistent with the literature,
we take the VSL to be an observable multiple of wealth: VSL = sw.
    The VSL is increasing in the ex ante probability of death p; if p is high there is less
incentive to limit spending to reduce p because it is unlikely the individual will survive and
have the opportunity to enjoy whatever wealth remains. (Pratt and Zeckhauser (1996) call
this the "dead anyway" effect.) In our case, the ex ante probability of death, whether from
natural causes or a catastrophe, is low. Likewise, most empirical studies of the VSL are

0.6; see, e.g., Viscusi and Aldy (2003). Kaplow (2005) shows that this low income elasticity is inconsistent
with  > 1. Also, the VSL is a partial equilibrium measure that ignores transfers across society (if I live to
100, the young will have to work harder to support me); see, e.g., Arthur (1981).
  10
     U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2014), page 7-8: "EPA currently recommends a default central
VSL of $7.9 million (in 2008 dollars) to value reduced mortality for all programs and policies." This translates
to $9.7 million in 2017 dollars. In 2017, U.S. per capita consumption was about $41,000, which corresponds to
lifetime consumption of roughly $1,600,000 (i.e., a factor of 40). The average VSL estimate of 7 times lifetime
consumption yields $11.2 million. Rohlfs, Sullivan and Kniesner (2015), using airbag regulations during the
1990s and used car prices, find a median VSL between $9 and $11 million, and Aldy (2019), using employment
decisions of married couples, estimates the VSL to be between $9 and $13 million. But Greenstone, Ryan and
Yankovich (2012), using variation in occupation-specific mortality risks and occupation-specific re-enlistment
bonuses, found that soldiers' re-enlistment decisions implies a VSL of only $3 to $4 million.
  11
   To get eqn. (2), note that expected utility is V = (1 - p)u(w) + pv (w). Setting the total derivative
dV = (V /p)dp + (V /w)dw = 0 yields dw/dp.


                                                       7
based on the behavior of populations for which p varies, but over a small range and a very
low base value. Thus it is reasonable to evaluate the VSL at p = 0, which we do below.
    We will think of u(w) as the utility associated with a wealth level of w in the hands of a
living person, and v (w) as the (social) utility associated with the same wealth if the person
dies and their assets are redistributed, either via intentional bequests to children or others,
or through some other reallocation mechanism. As s is observable and we can approximate
p  0, the relationship between v (w) and u(w) must satisfy

                                  v (w) = u(w) - swu (w).                                  (3)

   Each person's utility while alive is ultimately derived from a flow of consumption, Ct :
                                                      
                                                          1
                        Expected utility = E                Ct1- e-t dt .
                                                  0      1-
As discussed below, we assume that consumption growth is i.i.d., which implies that expected
                            1- 
utility is proportional to C0   /(1 -  ) and that consumption and wealth are proportional to
one another (Martin (2008), Barro (2009)). Thus we can simply work with utility u(w) =
w1- /(1 -  ). As long as we are consistent in whether we work with wealth or consumption,
the constant of proportionality itself is unimportant, given the invariance of the VSL to
affine transformations.
    Equation (3) implies that we must have

                                     w 1- 
                            v (w) =        - sw1-
                                     1-
                                     w 1- 
                                   =       [1 + s ( - 1)]
                                     1-
                                                              1   1- 
                                         w [1 + s ( - 1)] 1-
                                   =                                    .
                                                      1-
    It follows immediately that the social welfare loss associated with a death is equivalent
to the loss that would occur following a drop in wealth for a living person from w to w,
where  is given by:
                                                       1
                                    = [s( - 1) + 1] 1- .                                  (4)

Or, if thinking in consumption terms, it is equivalent to the loss following a drop in con-
sumption from C to C .
   As explained above, estimates of s vary, but the average is around 7, and we will use that
value in much of what follows. Thus if  = 2,  = 1/(s + 1) = .125, i.e, death is equivalent

                                              8
in welfare terms to an 88% drop in wealth or consumption. If  = 3,  = .27, and if  = 4,
 = .42. Note that  is increasing in  because a larger value of  implies a larger utility
loss from any given reduction in w or C . The utility loss in (2) is fixed by the VSL, so the
welfare-equivalent reduction in consumption upon death must be smaller if  is larger.
   Note that in our model the social welfare loss from a death is equivalent to a percentage
drop in wealth, which implies that this loss depends on the person's wealth level. In fact,
the VSL itself is increasing in wealth w, because a wealthier individual has more utility to
lose should she die.12 This would be a problem if our objective were to make interpersonal
(or cross-country) comparisons, or to estimate `
                                               a la Hall and Jones (2007) how the relative
marginal benefit of health care spending varies with income and consumption. We address
a simpler problem by assuming in eqn. (1) that prior to a catastrophe consumption is the
same for everyone, so total welfare is proportional to the population.

2.3     Welfare Loss
                                      1- 
Initially, static welfare is U0 = N0 C0   /(1 -  ). With  > 1 so U0 < 0, it might appear that a
catastrophe-induced drop in N0 raises welfare, but that is not the case. Setting C0 = N0 = 1,
if a fraction  of the population dies, welfare becomes

                                                    1 - 1- 
                                    UN = U0 -               < U0
                                                      1-

The adjustment term  (1 - 1- )/(1 -  ) captures the welfare loss associated with the fraction
of the population that has died, and ensures that UN < U0 . From (4), 1- = s( - 1) + 1,
so UN = [1 + ( - 1)s]/(1 -  ) < U0 as long as s > 0. And if instead consumption falls by
a fraction , welfare becomes UC = (1 - )1- /(1 -  ) < U0 .
    We can also compare the welfare loss for an event that kills a fraction  of the population
with the loss for an event that reduces the consumption of everyone by the same fraction.
Let LR denote the ratio of the first welfare loss to the second. Using (4), the (annual) welfare
loss for each person who dies is Ld = u() - u(C0 ) = [1- - 1]/(1 -  ) = -s. Since a fraction
 die, the total loss is -s. This is independent of  , because the drop in consumption (from
1 to ) is constrained to yield a welfare loss equal to the VSL. If instead the consumption of
everyone falls by the same fraction , the welfare loss is Lc = [(1 - )1- - 1]/(1 -  ). (This
loss depends on  because the drop in consumption is fixed.)

  12
    Think of D(w) = v (w) - u(w) as the "cost of death," so expected utility is V = u(w) - pD(w) and we
can rewrite eqn. (2) as dw/dp = D(w)/[u (w) + pD (w)]. D(w) is increasing in w, as is the VSL. (Thus Bill
Gates has more to lose by dying than most other people.)


                                                   9
    The ratio of the welfare loss from death to the loss from reduced consumption is then:

                                                  ( - 1)s
                               LR = Ld /Lc =                                              (5)
                                               (1 - )1- - 1

If s = 7 and  = 2, for "low" values of , e.g.,  = .1, the welfare loss from death is more
than six times the welfare loss from destruction. (As   0, LR  s, i.e., LR approaches
the VSL.) The ratio is large because compared to a drop in consumption, death causes a
much larger loss of utility, albeit for only a fraction  of the population.
  How large would the drop in consumption for all members of society have to be to yield
the same welfare loss as an event that kills a fraction ? Denoting the equivalent drop in
consumption by c , using (4), and setting u[(1 - c )C0 ] - u(C0 ) = [u(C0 ) - u(C0 )],
                                                              1
                                c = 1 - [s( - 1) + 1] 1-                                  (6)

If s = 7 and  = .05, when  = 2, c = .26, and when  = 4, c = .21. (Setting  = .05
corresponds roughly to the Spanish Flu of 1918-19.) If  = .1, c = .41 when  = 2 and
.31 when  = 4. So c is 3 to 5 times as large as  when   .10. However, the multiple is
smaller when  is large, and can be less than 1 if  is sufficiently large. (If  = .8 and  = 4,
c = .62.) Once again, the VSL constrains Ld , but Lc is unconstrained as c increases.


3     A Dynamic Model
To determine the welfare loss from a drop in per-capital consumption Ct or a drop in pop-
ulation Nt , we need to describe how these events can unfold over time. We thus turn to a
fully dynamic model, and specify the processes for Ct and Nt . We assume that catastrophic
events that reduce Ct occur as Poisson arrivals with mean arrival rate c , and the impact of
the k th arrival, k , is i.i.d. across realizations k . Then the process for consumption is:
                                                       Q(t)
                                  ct = log Ct = gt -          k                           (7)
                                                       k=1

where g is the normal growth rate of per capita consumption, and Q(t) is a Poisson counting
process with known mean arrival rate c . When the k th catastrophic event occurs, per-capita
consumption is multiplied by the random variable e-k . (We are scaling consumption so that
C0 = 1 and hence c0 = 0.) We can then define the cumulant-generating function (CGF),

                               C,t ()  log E ect   log E Ct .


                                             10
We showed in Martin and Pindyck (2015) that since log consumption follows a L´
                                                                             evy process,
the CGF is linear in t--that is, C,t () = C,1 ()t--and we can write

                              C ()  C,1 () = g + c E e- - 1 ,                                           (8)

where  is a representative of the (i.i.d.) k .13
       We assume that Nt , the population alive at time t, follows an analogous process:
                                                             X (t)
                                      nt = log Nt = nt -             k ,                                (9)
                                                             k=1

where n is the natural rate of population growth, X (t) is a Poisson counting process with
arrival rate d that determines how many "death events" have happened by time t, and k
measures the size of the k th event. Thus when the k th event occurs, Nt is multiplied by the
random variable e-k . We scale Nt so that N0 = 1, and we define the corresponding CGF,

                                   N,t ()  log E ent   log E Nt .

Once again, the CGF scales linearly with t, so we write

                              N ()  N,1 () = n + d E e- - 1                                            (10)

where  is a representative of the (i.i.d.) k . Thus
                                                           - -1)t            ~
                             E Nt = eN (1)t = ent+d (E e              = ent-d t .

The term   ~ d = d (1 - E e- ) can be interpreted as the adjusted death arrival rate, taking into
account that only a fraction of the population dies when a death event occurs. Depending on
the relative sizes of n and  ~ d , the population may grow or shrink in expectation: if disasters
are sufficiently frequent (large d ) or cataclysmic (small E e- ), and population growth n is
sufficiently low, then the expected population is declining in t, in which case N (1) < 0.
     We will use an asterisk to denote the absence of catastrophes. So if there are no death
catastrophes (d = 0), the population evolves as Nt = ent , and the CGF for Nt is      N ( ) = n .
Likewise, if there are no consumption catastrophes (c = 0), consumption evolves as Ct = egt ,
and the CGF for Ct is      C ( ) = g .

  13
    We could easily make the normal growth of consumption stochastic, i.e., replace gt in (7) by any L´  evy
process gt (e.g., a Brownian motion). Then g in (8) becomes g (), the CGF of g1 . The normal rate of
population growth can likewise be stochastic. For simplicity, we limit uncertainty to catastrophic events.



                                                    11
   Recall that the social welfare loss associated with a death is equivalent to the loss that
would occur from a drop in consumption to a fraction  of what it was before, i.e., from Ct
to to Ct , where  is given by eqn. (4). So if no catastrophes are averted, total welfare is
                                    
                                             Nt Ct1- (Nt - Nt )1- Ct1-
                    V =E               e-t          +                            dt ,                (11)
                                0             1-           1-
where (Nt - Nt ) is the number of people that have died.
    Because Ct is an exponential L´ evy process, it evolves independently of Nt . This makes
it easy to calculate the expectations inside the integral above. In particular,

                          E(Nt Ct1- ) = E Nt E Ct1- = eN (1)t · eC (1-)t

and
                                                     
                   E (Nt - Nt )1- Ct1- = eN (1)t - eN (1)t 1- eC (1-)t .
Substituting these expressions into the integral above,
              1            1                  1-                     1- 
V        =                            +                     -
             1-    - N (1) - C (1 -  )  - N (1) - C (1 -  )    - N (1) - C (1 -  )
              1        1 - 1-                 1- 
         =                            +                                      .                         (12)
             1-    - N (1) - C (1 -  )  - N (1) - C (1 -  )
To interpret this equation, note that the second term captures the welfare associated with
the guaranteed consumption stream Ct (which is "received" via bequests, etc., even after
death). We can think of  -         N (1) =  - n as the social rate of time preference (i.e., discount
rate on future utility) associated with this consumption stream: it adjusts, via           N (1) = n,
for the fact that the population is increasing (so that the larger is n, the lower is the discount
rate, and because V < 0, the lower is total welfare). The first term captures the welfare
associated with the additional ongoing consumption stream (1 - )Ct received by those who
are still alive (i.e., those alive receive (1 - )C + C = C ). Since there is a risk of death, this
latter consumption stream is discounted at the higher rate  - N (1) >  -              N (1).
                                                                                             14

     We want to find the WTPs to avert each type of catastrophes individually, and the WTP
to avert both. Averting a consumption catastrophe corresponds to setting c = 0, and thus
replacing C (1 -  ) by        C (1 -  )  g (1 -  ). What is the WTP to avert this catastrophe?
If it is averted at the cost of a permanent loss of a fraction wc of consumption, welfare is
                  (1 - wc )1-            1 - 1-                   1- 
             Vc =                                        +                                   .       (13)
                     1-              - N (1) - C (1 -  )    -         
                                                              N (1) - C (1 -  )

    The expressions 1/ [ - N (1) - C (1 -  )] and 1/ [ - 
    14
                                                              N (1) - C (1 -  )] can be interpreted as the
valuation ratios of the two consumption streams, as shown by Martin (2013). Because V < 0, a higher value
of  implies a higher value of V . However, we treat  as fixed and ignore how it might be determined.


                                                   12
The WTP to avoid this catastrophe is the value of wc that equates (12) and (13):

                                           (1 - wc )1- = A × B × C                                       (14)

where
                                    -         
                                      N (1) - C (1 -  )
                        A =                                                                              (15)
                                    - N (1) - C (1 -  )

                                              - N (1) -      C (1 -  )
                        B =                                                                              (16)
                                    - N (1) 1 -  - (1 -  )
                                                        1 -             
                                                                N (1) - C (1 -  )

                                    - N (1)1- - (1 - 1- ) N (1) - C (1 -  )
                        C =                                                 .                            (17)
                                             - N (1) - C (1 -  )
    What is the WTP to avoid only the death catastrophe? If a fraction wd of consumption
is sacrificed to avert this catastrophe, welfare is
                   
                            (1 - wd )1- Nt Ct1-            (1 - wd )1-             1
 Vd = E               e-t                       dt     =                                              . (18)
               0                   1-                         1-           - N (1) - C (1 -  )

Equating (12) and (18), wd satisfies

                                               (1 - wd )1- = C .                                         (19)

And if a fraction wc,d of consumption is sacrificed to avert both catastrophes, welfare is
                                       (1 - wc,d )1-                 1
                              Vc,d =                                               .                     (20)
                                           1-          -     N (1)   - C (1 -  )

Equating (12) and (20), wc,d satisfies

                                            (1 - wc,d )1- = A × C .                                      (21)

   Now we can compare expressions (14), (19), and (21) for the WTPs wc , wd , and wc,d .
We assumed that  > 1, so (i) A > 1, (ii) B < 1 < C , and (iii) BC > 1, using the facts
that                            
      C (1 -  ) < C (1 -  ), N (1) > N (1), and 
                                                    1- 
                                                        > 1 (for  > 1).15 These inequalities
imply that wc,d > max {wc , wd } and, more interestingly (using the fact that BC > 1),

       (1 - wc,d )1- < (1 - wc )1- (1 - wd )1- ,           or (equivalently) wc,d < wc + wd - wc wd .

Note that the WTPs do not add, and the two catastrophes are interdependent.16
  15
       This implies, for example, that N (1)1- + N (1)(1 - 
                                                            1-
                                                               ) < N (1).
  16
    The inequality in Martin and Pindyck (2015) (page 2957) that applied to two types of consumption
catastrophes (1 and 2) said only that w1,2 < w1 + w2 ; in fact the stronger result that w1,2 < w1 + w2 - w1 w2
also applies in that context.


                                                       13
4    Impact Distributions and WTPs
Our results so far are quite general, in that the CGFs of eqns. (8) and (10) apply to any
probability distributions for the impacts  and  . In order to apply the model, we will
assume that  and  are exponentially distributed. This distribution has often been used to
model catastrophic events, and considerably simplifies the expressions for the WTPs:

             f (x) = c e-c x   for x  0      and f (x) = d e-d x     for x  0.

This is equivalent to assuming that zc = e- and zd = e- , the surviving (post-impact)
                                                                                   c - 1
fractions of consumption and people, follow the power distributions b(zc ) = c zc        for
                             d - 1                                                    -
0  zc  1 and b(zd ) = d zd         for 0  zd  1. Note that E() = 1/c and E(zc ) = E e =
c /(c + 1), and similarly for  and zd . Thus large values of c and d imply small expected
impacts, i.e., small values of E() and E( ) and large values of E(zc ) and E(zd ).
    Given these distributions for  and  , the CGFs are:

                                                     c (1 -  )
                          C (1 -  ) = g (1 -  ) -
                                                     c + (1 -  )
                          C (1 -  ) = g (1 -  )
                                             d
                             N (1) = n -
                                           d + 1
                               
                             N (1) = n

    We can substitute these CGFs into the expressions for the three factors A, B , and C that
are multiplied together in (14) to determine each of the WTPs. Define    - n + g ( - 1).
One can think of  as the discount rate on future total consumption (as opposed to  - n,
the discount rate on future utility). It accounts for the growth of total consumption via n
and also the decline in marginal utility of per capita consumption via g . Also define

                               c  c ( - 1)/(c + 1 -  )                                  (22)

                               d  d /(d + 1)                                            (23)

One can think of c and d as risk- and impact-adjusted arrival rates for the two types of
catastrophes. For example, increasing d reduces the expected impact of a death catastrophe,
which is welfare-equivalent to reducing its expected arrival rate. And c further adjusts
for risk aversion; increasing  increases the utility loss from a catastrophe that reduces
consumption, which is welfare-equivalent to increasing its expected arrival rate.



                                             14
    Substituting the CGFs, c , d , and    - n + g ( - 1) into (15), (16), and (17), the
factors A, B , and C become:
                                         
                                 A =
                                         - c
                                                   + d
                                        B =
                                                  + d  1- 
                                                  + d 1-  - c
                                        C =
                                                   + d - c
  We can use these expressions for A, B , and C to get the WTPs. Recall that (1 - wc )1- =
ABC , (1 - wd )1- = C , and (1 - wc,d )1- = AC . Thus:
                                                                                 1
                                  ( - c )( + d 1- )( + d - c )                   -1
                         wc = 1 -                                                                       (24)
                                    ( + d )( + d 1- - c )
                                                                       1
                                            ( + d - c )                -1
                                  wd = 1 -                                                              (25)
                                           ( + d 1- - c )
                                                                            1
                                       ( - c )( + d - c ) -1
                            wc,d = 1 -                                                    (26)
                                        ( + d 1- - c )
   From eqn. (4), 1- = s( - 1) + 1. Note that wc < 1 (and wc,d < 1) only if  > c . Recall
that  is a discount rate on future consumption, but ignoring consumption catastrophes.
Thus one can think of c as a depreciation rate that accounts for the risk- and impact-
adjusted arrival rate of consumption catastrophes, and thereby reduces the expected future
welfare from consumption. If the net discount rate  - c is zero, the welfare loss from the
catastrophes is unbounded, pushing the WTP to avoid the catastrophes to one.
   Also note that wd /c > 0 and wc /d > 0, i.e., an increase in the likelihood of
catastrophe i increases the WTP to avert catastrophe j . Each potential catastrophe creates
"background risk" that raises the WTP to avert the other catastrophe. As we will see in
the next section when we examine pandemics and consumption contractions, these effects of
"background risk" can be substantial.
   To determine which catastrophes (if any) should be averted, we would also need to
know the cost of averting each one, expressed as a permanent tax on consumption at rates
denoted by c and d . We would then calculate the net (of taxes) welfare of doing nothing
(W0 ), averting only consumption catastrophes (Wc ), averting only death catastrophes (Wd ),
and averting both (Wc,d ), and choose the one that is highest.17 Using eqns. (12), (13), (18),
  17
    Because a death catastrophe divides the population into two groups with different levels of consumption,
Result 2 of Martin and Pindyck (2015) does not hold. Thus we must calculate the net welfare for each possible
policy to find the optimal one.


                                                     15
(20) and the expressions above for the CGFs, the net welfare for each policy is:

                                       1  -s( - 1)   s( - 1) + 1
                             W0 =                  +                                                    (27)
                                     1 -   + d - c      - c

                                   (1 - c )1-  + d (s( - 1) + 1)
                              Wc =                                                                      (28)
                                      1-         ( + d )
                                                   (1 - d )1-
                                         Wd =                                                           (29)
                                                 (1 -  )( - c )
                                              (1 - c )1- (1 - d )1-
                                     Wc,d =                                                             (30)
                                                     (1 -  )
Note from (28) and (29) that an increase in d (and thus d ) reduces Wc , net welfare when
the consumption catastrophe is eliminated, and an increase in c (and thus c ) reduces Wd ,
net welfare when the death catastrophe is eliminated. This is the loss of welfare created
by "background risk," here the risk created by the second catastrophe. (And of course an
increase in d or c also reduces W0 , net welfare when neither catastrophe is eliminated.)


5      Lost Consumption vs. Lost Lives
We turn now to the threat of major pandemics and its interdependence with the threat of
macroeconomic contractions. What is the WTP to avoid each, and the connection between
the two? To address these questions we need values for the mean arrival times d and c ,
the impact parameters d and c , and the parameters s, g, n,  and  .

5.1     Pandemics
According to an assessment by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the
threat of a "mega-virus" that could cause widespread fatalities is considerable: "While we
can't predict exactly when or where the next epidemic or pandemic will begin, we know one is
coming." The main reasons: "Increased risk of infectious pathogens spilling over from animals
to humans; development of antimicrobial resistance; spread of infectious diseases through
global travel and trade; acts of bioterrorism; and weak public health infrastructures."18
  18
    https://www.cdc.gov/globalhealth/healthprotection/fieldupdates/winter-2017. The CDC is especially
concerned with the possibility of a pandemic resulting from mutations of the Asian H7N9 avian influenza
virus: "... the pandemic potential of this virus is concerning. Influenza viruses constantly change and it is
possible that this virus could gain the ability to spread easily and sustainably among people, triggering a
global outbreak of disease." See https://www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/h7n9-virus.htm



                                                     16
   Our experience with major pandemics is (fortunately) limited, making the calibration
of d and d somewhat speculative. During the past century the Spanish Flu was by far
the worst pandemic, but there were several others, though not as severe. For example, the
1957-1958 H2N2 pandemic killed 1.1 million worldwide and 116,000 in the U.S. (for a U.S.
fatality rate of .0064); the 1968 H3N2 pandemic killed about 1 million worldwide and 100,000
in the U.S.(for a U.S. fatality rate of .0006); and the 2009 H1N1 pandemic killed 12,469 in
the U.S. And then there is HIV/AIDS, which killed more than 700,000 in the U.S. since the
epidemic began in 1985, and worldwide close to a million people in 2017 alone.
   Based on these numbers and assuming that the likelihood and potential virulence has
remained about the same, we would set d = .02 (i.e., an event on average every 50 years
and a 33-percent chance of at least one more in the next 20 years) and d = 24 (consistent
with the roughly 4-percent U.S. mortality rate of the Spanish Flu). These numbers would
imply that the probability of a pandemic over the next 20 years with at least a 4-percent
(8-percent) mortality rate is .14 (.05).19 However, epidemiologists have argued that major
pandemics have become much more likely and could be much more virulent. For example,
Jones et al. (2008) analyze 335 "emerging infectious diseases" from 1940 through 2004, and
show sharp increases in the numbers of events over time, after controlling for reporting bias.20
Although these studies do not provide specific estimates of the current likelihood of a major
pandemic or possible mortality rates, a doubling of d to .04, while holding d fixed at 24,
is consistent with the literature. This would imply a 55-percent chance of another pandemic
(of some size) in the next 20 years, and implies that the probability of a pandemic occurring
in the next 20 years with at least a 4-percent (8-percent) mortality rate is .26 (.10).
    Given the uncertainties involved, we consider both of these parameterizations: a "low-
risk" pandemic scenario roughly matching the past century, i.e., with d = .02 and d = 24,
and a "high-risk" scenario with d = .04 and d = 24.
  19
    For Poisson arrivals with mean a arrival rate  and exponentially distributed impact with parameter  ,
the probability of at least one event with loss  L over the horizon T is

                                     P r(T, L) = 1 - exp[-T ((1 - L) ] ,

and the expected total loss over the horizon T is E(L; T ) = 1 - exp[-T /( + 1)].
  20
     Also, in part because of the overuse of antibiotics, strains of bacteria have evolved that are resistant to
most or all antibiotics. See Byrne (2008), Kilbourne (2008) and Enserink (2004), and for a detailed discussion
of the increased likelihood and severity of pandemics, Harvard Global Health Institute (2018). Fan, Jamison
and Summers (2018) point out that most estimates of the costs of pandemics ignore the cost of lost lives.
They estimate that cost using age-specific mortality rates following the 1918 Spanish Flu. However, they
consider a known pandemic as opposed to the random arrival of pandemics, with an increasing arrival rate.




                                                      17
5.2     Consumption Catastrophes
A major recession can be viewed as a pure consumption catastrophe. We want to estimate
the frequency of such events (i.e., the Poisson arrival rate c ) and their average intensity
(i.e., the power distribution parameter c ). This can be done in two different ways.
    The most common approach, used by Barro (2006, 2009), Barro and Urs´    ua (2008), Naka-
mura et al. (2013) and others, is to rely on historical data, e.g., a panel of countries over
the past century. For example, Barro and Urs´   ua (2008), whose results we will use, esti-
mate arrival rates and intensity from a panel of 36 countries (for GDP) from 1870 to 2006.
One problem with this approach is that these catastrophes are, almost by definition, "rare
events," limiting what we can learn from even a century or more of data. Also, many of
the catastrophes that these and other authors have studied are manifestations of just three
global events--World Wars I and II and the Great Depression. Nonetheless, given that this
approach is so widely used, we will draw upon these studies to calibrate c and c .
     A second approach is to ask what arrival rate and impact distribution are implied by
the behavior of economic and financial variables. Martin (2008) shows, for example, that
the economy's consumption-wealth ratio along with the preference parameters  and  are
sufficient to estimate the welfare effects of eliminating or reducing consumption uncertainty,
without knowing the stochastic process for consumption. Pindyck and Wang (2013) develop
an equilibrium model of the economy with shocks to the capital stock, which, as here, are
Poisson events with known arrival rate and exponential impact distribution. Using data
on consumption, investment, output, the risk-free rate, and the first four moments of stock
returns, they determine c and c , as well as  and  , as calibration outputs. They find
  3.1,   .05,  = .73 and  = 23.2, implying that catastrophes are frequent (occurring
about every 1.4 years on average) but with a mean loss of only about 4% (so most shocks
are small and can be viewed as part of the normal fluctuations in the economy).21 Backus,
Chernov and Martin (2011) use the prices of equity index options to infer the characteristics
of consumption contractions; they also find that shocks are more frequent but smaller on
average than suggested by estimates obtained from historical consumption data.
     To calibrate our model, we will draw upon Barro and Urs´     ua (2008). Using world GDP
data, but only including declines of 10-percent or greater, they estimate an annual arrival
rate of c = .036 and average decline of 20.8 percent. Thus for all declines, the parameters

  21
    But as explained in Pindyck and Wang (2013), pp. 320­321, these results are similar to those in Barro
and Jin (2011), and those in Barro and Urs´    ua (2008) using U.S. GDP data. Barro and Jin (2011) and
Barro and Urs´ua (2008) only include contractions greater than .095 and .10 respectively. Transforming their
estimates to account for all contractions yields relatively large numbers for c and c , as shown below.


                                                    18
                    Prob. of at Least 1 Shock over Horizon T = 20 with Loss           L                       Expected Total Loss over Horizon T
                     1                                                                              0.5
                                                           = 0.08       = 7.3                                 c
                                                                                                                  = 0.08   c
                                                                                                                               = 7.3
                                                       c            c
                    0.9                                  = 0.29       = 18.6                       0.45         = 0.29         = 18.6
                                                                                                              c            c
                                                       c            c
                                                         = 0.02       = 24                                    d
                                                                                                                = 0.02     d
                                                                                                                               = 24
                    0.8                                d            d                               0.4
                                                         = 0.04       = 24                                    d
                                                                                                                = 0.04     d
                                                                                                                               = 24
                                                       d            d
                    0.7                                                                            0.35

                    0.6                                                                             0.3




                                                                                          E(L;T)
             Prob




                    0.5                                                                            0.25

                    0.4                                                                             0.2

                    0.3                                                                            0.15

                    0.2                                                                             0.1

                    0.1                                                                            0.05

                     0                                                                               0
                          0       0.1          0.2            0.3               0.4                       0   10               20       30   40    50
                                              Loss L                                                                            Horizon T


Figure 1: Probability of shock of size L or greater during next 20 years, and expected
cumulative loss, for each of four catastrophes.


are c = .079 and c = 7.3.22 These numbers imply a contraction every 13 years on average,
with an average contraction size of 12 percent. They also imply that the probability of a
contraction occurring in the next 20 years of at least 10 percent (25 percent) in magnitude
is .52 (.18). We refer to this calibration as BU1.
    As an alternative, we also use the Barro and Urs´  ua (2008) data for GDP contractions
of 10-percent or more in the U.S. They document 5 such contractions over 137 years with
an average contraction size of 15.5 percent.23 Adding the 2008 recession and its estimated
contraction size of 10 percent24 yields 6 contractions over 149 years, so c = .040, and an
average contraction size of 14.6 percent. Adjusting to allow for contractions of any size yields
c = .29 and c = 18.6, which implies much more frequent (every 3.4 years on average) but
smaller contractions (5 percent on average), and are closer to the results in Pindyck and
Wang (2013) and Backus, Chernov and Martin (2011). This calibration (which we refer to
as BU2) implies that the probability of a contraction in the next 20 years of at least 10
percent (25 percent) is .56 (.03).
    The left-hand panel of Figure 1 plots the probability of a contraction of size L or greater
  22
    E(L|L  .10) = .208, so c = 7.3 is the solution to 1 - .9c /(c + 1) = .208. Likewise, c = .079 is the
solution to 1 - exp(-c (.9)7.3 ) = c = .036 = annual probability of 1 event with loss L  .10.
  23
    From page 270 and Table C2, the contractions were "10 percent in 1908 and 1914 ..., 12 percent in 1921,
29 percent in 1933, and 16 percent in 1947."
  24
       See, e.g., Fernald et al. (2017) and Barnichon, Matthes and Ziegenbein (2018).


                                                                                  19
occurring during the next 20 years for both calibrations, and illustrates how they differ. The
average contraction size in BU2 is much smaller than in BU1, but the greater frequency
of contractions results in a greater expected cumulative loss over time, as shown by the
right-hand panel of Figure 1.25 Thus we treat BU2 as the more "severe" parameterization.
    Figure 1 also includes the pandemic calibrations. It shows the probability of a loss L
or greater during the next 20 years and the expected total loss for both the "low-risk" and
"high-risk" calibrations, i.e., (d , d ) = (.02, 24) and (d , d ) = (.04, 24). Here the loss is the
fraction of the population that dies, so although the expected total loss is much lower than
it is for consumption contractions, that does not make the corresponding WTP lower.

5.3     WTPs
The WTPs also depend on , , g, n and the VSL parameter s. We use values for  and
 broadly consistent with both the macro/finance and "disaster" literatures. Pindyck and
Wang (2013) obtain   3.1 and   .05 as a calibration output of their general equilibrium
model. Using estimates of  and  for historical GDP contractions, Barro and Urs´       ua (2008)
and Barro (2009) find that   3.5 or 4 and   .05 are consistent with an unlevered equity
premium of .05. We will set  = .05 and  = 3, and examine how the WTPs vary with  .
Historical data for the U.S. puts g = .02 and n = .01. We set s = 7, which is the in the
mid-range of most estimates, so 1- = s( - 1) + 1 = 7 - 6. However, estimates of the
VSL (and thus s) vary widely, so we also examine how the WTPs vary with s.
    We calculate the WTP to avert each catastrophe and the WTP to avert both, i.e., wc , wd ,
and wc,d . To gauge the interdependence of the two catastrophes, we also calculate wc and
wd , the WTP to avert one but ignoring the presence of the other. We calculate these
WTPs for two sets of calibrations: (1) (c , c ) = (.08, 7.3) and (d , d ) = (.02, 24); and (2)
(c , c ) = (.29, 18.6) and (d , d ) = (.04, 24). Set (1) can be viewed as relatively "low risk,"
in that the total expected losses for both catastrophes are smaller than for set (2).
    Figure 2 shows the WTPs as functions of  (for s = 7) and s (for  = 3) for the "low-risk"
set of calibrations, and Figure 3 for the "high-risk" set. Three things stand out. First, the
WTPs are large, even for the "low-risk" calibration. Note from Figure 2 that the WTP
to avert a pandemic like the Spanish Flu -- with an annual likelihood of 2 percent -- is
around 10% of consumption. The WTP to avert consumption contractions is around 23% of
consumption for  = 3, and higher for  > 3. This may seem high, but is within the range
  25
    For any horizon T , the expected total loss, E(L; T ) = 1 - exp[-T /( + 1)], is increasing in /( + 1),
which is .0095 for BC1 and .0145 for BC2. We are assuming that contractions are permanent, although
Nakamura et al. (2013) have shown that on average about half of the lost GDP is regained during recoveries.


                                                    20
                                   WTP vs , s = 7                                                  WTP vs s,       =3
         0.45                                                                 0.45

          0.4                                                                  0.4

                                 wc,d                                                              wc,d
         0.35                                                                 0.35

          0.3                                                                  0.3                                      wc

         0.25                                                                 0.25
   WTP




                                                                        WTP
          0.2                                            w'c                   0.2
                                        wc          wd                                   w'c
         0.15                                                                 0.15                            wd

          0.1                                                                  0.1

         0.05                                                                 0.05                                           w'd
                       w'd

           0                                                                    0
                1            2               3      4          5                     2         4          6        8     10        12
                                                                                                              s


                    Figure 2: WTP vs  and s, (c , c ) = (.08, 7.3) and (d , d ) = (.02, 24).


of estimates by others of the welfare costs of consumption uncertainty. For example, Barro
(2009) estimates the welfare cost at about 20% of GDP, Martin (2008) gets an estimate of
about 14% (for  = 4 and  = .03, but about 25% for  = 3 and  = .05), and Pindyck
and Wang (2013) get a WTP of 30% (15%) of consumption to eliminate all contractions
greater than 5% (10%). For the "high-risk" parameterizations in Figure 3, the WTPs are
much higher: 18% (31%) of consumption to eliminate pandemic (consumption) risk.
    Second, the interaction between the two catastrophes is strong, although it depends on  .
For   1.5, a good part of each WTP results from the "background risk" coming from the
threat of the other catastrophe. For example, if  = 3 and s = 7, for the "low-risk" ("high-
risk") parameterizations, consumption risk accounts for about 40 percent (35 percent) of the
10% (18%) WTP to avert pandemics, and pandemic risk accounts for about 13 percent (17
percent) of the 23% (31%) WTP to eliminate consumption risk. This interdependence is
even greater for larger values of  , as illustrated in Figure 4, which shows the ratios wc /wc
and wd /wd as functions of  for the two calibrations. The dependence on  comes about
because the threat of Catastrophe i reduces expected future consumption, which increases
the future marginal utility of consumption by an amount increasing in  , and this raises the
value of averting Catastrophe j , which if it occurs would further reduce consumption.
    Third, the dependence of the WTPs on  is complicated. In Figure 2 both wd and wc


                                                                   21
                             WTP vs , s = 7                                            WTP vs s,      =3
           0.5                                                  0.5
                                wc,d
          0.45                                                 0.45
                                                                            wc,d
           0.4                                                  0.4
                        wc                                                                            wc
          0.35                                                 0.35

           0.3                                                  0.3
                                              w'c
          0.25                                                 0.25
    WTP




                                                         WTP
           0.2                                                  0.2                      wd
                                                                          w'c
          0.15                             wd                  0.15

           0.1                                                  0.1
                          w'd
                                                                                                           w'd
          0.05                                                 0.05

            0                                                    0
                 1       2             3        4   5                 2            4          6        8         10   12
                                                                                                  s


                 Figure 3: WTP vs  and s, (c , c ) = (.29, 18.6) and (d , d ) = (.04, 24).


decrease and then increase with  , and in Figure 3, wd is always decreasing with  and wc is
roughly constant. Increasing  has two off-setting effects. First, it increases the risk- (and
impact-) adjusted arrival rate for the consumption catastrophe, c (but has no effect on the
impact-adjusted arrival rate for the death catastrophe, d ), which increases both wd and wc .
Second, it increases , the effective discount rate on future total consumption, Nt Ct , and
this reduces the WTPs. Thus in general, w/ is indeterminate.

5.4        Implications and Caveats
The high values of wc and wc support earlier studies that found the welfare costs of (un-
predictable) macroeconomic contractions to be large, but they add an important element:
These costs are partly due to the threat of other catastrophes, in this case pandemics. Pan-
demic risk, a problem in its own right, adds to the welfare cost of consumption risk. And
pandemics are just one source of "background risk;" here we are ignoring the other potential
catastrophes (nuclear and bioterrorism, climate, earthquakes, etc.) examined in Martin and
Pindyck (2015). Likewise, macroeconomic risk is an important component of the welfare
costs of pandemics. The WTP to avoid future pandemics would be about a third lower if
we could somehow eliminate macroeconomic fluctuations.
   But even without "background risk" and even for the conservative calibration of Fig-

                                                        22
                            (   c
                                    ,   d
                                            ) = (0.08, 0.02)                                 (   c
                                                                                                     ,   d
                                                                                                             ) = (0.29, 0.04)
                   1                                                                1
                                                               wc/wc                                                            wc/wc
                  0.9                                          wd/wd               0.9                                          wd/wd


                  0.8                                                              0.8


                  0.7                                                              0.7
           w /w




                                                                            w /w
                  0.6                                                              0.6


                  0.5                                                              0.5


                  0.4                                                              0.4


                  0.3                                                              0.3


                  0.2                                                              0.2
                        1   2                  3          4            5                 1   2                  3           4           5


Figure 4: Interdependence of WTPs: wi is the WTP to avert i but ignoring the threat of j .


ure 2, the WTP to avoid pandemics is substantial -- depending on  , at least 5 to 10% of
consumption. For the U.S. in 2018, this translates to around $1 trillion per year, and would
be much higher if we account for consumption risk and use the calibration of Figure 3 (which
assumes that pandemics have become more likely and more virulent).
     As the right-hand panels of Figures 2 and 3 make clear, these high values for wd and
wd are dependent on the VSL parameter s. Reducing s from its base value of 7 to, say, 3
cuts wd roughly in half in both calibrations. So is s = 7 the "correct" value to use for this
parameter? It is in the mid-range of estimates and consistent with the VSL values of $9
to $10 million used by U.S. regulatory agencies, but it values the lives of the entire U.S.
population at about $3,000 trillion, which is some 4 times greater than the roughly $800
trillion present value of U.S. GDP over the next 40 years. When large numbers of lives are
involved -- as is the case with pandemics -- aggregating individuals' VSL values (based on
small reductions in the risk of death) will overstate society's WTP to save lives.
     However, even if we reduce s to 2 or 3, the WTP to avert pandemics is high -- some 4%
to 9% of consumption ($0.5 to $1.3 trillion for the U.S. in 2018), depending on the calibration
and on  . Is this completely unrealistic? Remember that the WTP is a reservation price,
i.e., the maximum fraction of consumption society would be willing to sacrifice to achieve
a policy objective. The cost of achieving this objective might be much lower, and indeed
for pandemics that appears to be the case. Several studies have concluded that pandemic
risk could be greatly reduced (but not eliminated entirely) at a cost well below our WTP
numbers. But these studies also make clear that we should be spending far more than we



                                                                           23
currently are on pandemics, a policy position strongly supported by our results.26


6      Conclusions
In our earlier work we showed that decisions to avert (fully or partially) major catastrophes
are interdependent, even if the catastrophes themselves are independent, and we showed how
to determine which ones to avert. But as with most (if not all) of the literature, we assumed
that catastrophes only cause a reduction in the flow of consumption. Here we have shown
how catastrophes that cause death can be incorporated into our framework. In so doing, we
link the VSL and consumption disaster literatures.
    Because we work with CRRA utility and a constant rate of time preference, consumption
and wealth are proportional to each other, and we have shown that the social welfare loss from
a death is equivalent to the loss that would occur from a drop in wealth (or consumption)
from w to w (or C to C ) for a living person, where  is tied to the VSL via eqn. (4). We use
estimates of the VSL to determine the value of  and thus the utility loss from death. We can
then find the WTPs to avert a "death" catastrophe (wd ), a consumption catastrophe (wc ),
and both (wc,d ). Our general results hold for any probability distributions for the random
reductions  and  of log C and log N , but if  and  are exponentially distributed, these
WTPs are very easy to calculate.
    We used our model to explore the welfare implications of the threat of pandemics, a
threat that epidemiologists argue is substantial and growing. We did this in the context
of macroeconomic uncertainty, and in particular the ongoing threat of sharp consumption
contractions. There is a large literature on consumption disasters, which we used to calibrate
the parameters for the stochastic process for consumption. The literature on pandemics is
more speculative, but sufficient to reasonably calibrate the corresponding parameters. We
find the utility loss from a "death" catastrophe is large, as is the WTP to avert it. Using
middle-of-the-road estimates of the VSL and conservative estimates of the likelihood and
impact distribution, we find the WTP to avert future pandemics to be well over 10% of
consumption. We also found that a good portion of the WTP to avert pandemics comes
from "background risk," here the threat of a consumption catastrophe. Likewise, the threat
of pandemics substantially affects the WTP to avert consumption catastrophes. This is
another example of the policy interdependence of major catastrophic threats.
    One could argue that middle-of-the-road estimates of the VSL are unrealistically large
  26
   See, for example, National Academy of Medicine (2016) and Harvard Global Health Institute (2018).
The entire FY 2018 budget for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was about $8 billion.


                                                24
when applied to catastrophes that could kill many people. But even a much smaller value
for the VSL results in a WTP to avert pandemics that is far large than current expenditures.
   An important caveat to this paper is our starting assumption in eqn. (1) that social
welfare is proportional to the size of the population N . How should we think about the
welfare effects of changes in population? This question has received considerable attention
by economists and philosophers, but there is no consensus regarding the social value of more
or fewer people.27 As a practical matter, society spends considerable resources to save lives,
including the lives of the very old and very young, and prevent life-threatening disasters
large and small. Consistent with this, a catastrophic loss of life reduces social welfare in
our model. On the other hand, an increase in the natural rate of population growth reduces
welfare in our model, consistent with the views of some environmentalists who are concerned
about congestion and environmental stress.




References
Aldy, Joseph E. 2019. "Birds of a Feather: Estimating the Value of a Statistical Life from
 Dual-Earner Families." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25708.

Andersson, Henrik, and Nicolas Treich. 2009. "The Value of a Statistical Life."
 Toulouse School of Economics Working Paper 09-015.

Arrow, Kenneth J., and Marcel Priebsch. 2014. "Bliss, Catastrophe, and Rational
 Policy." Environmental and Resource Economics, 58: 491­509.

Arthur, W.B. 1981. "The Economics of Risks to Life." American Economic Review,
 71(1): 54­64.

Ashenfelter, Orley. 2006. "Measuring the Value of a Statistical Life: Problems and
 Prospects." The Economic Journal, 116: C10­C23.

Backus, David, Mikhail Chernov, and Ian Martin. 2011. "Disasters Implied by Equity
 Index Options." Journal of Finance, 66(6): 1969­2012.

Barnichon, Regis, Christian Matthes, and Alexander Ziegenbein. 2018. "The Fi-
 nancial Crisis at 10: Will We Ever Recover?" FRBSF Economic Letter, 1­4.
  27
    See, e.g., Razin and Sadka (1995), Golosov, Jones and Tertilt (2007), Broome (2004) and Blackorby,
Bossert and Donaldson (2005).


                                                 25
Barro, Robert J. 2006. "Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century."
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121: 823­866.

Barro, Robert J. 2009. "Rare Disasters, Asset Prices, and Welfare Costs." American
 Economic Review, 99: 243­264.

Barro, Robert J. 2014. "Environmental Protection, Rare Disasters, and Discount Rates."
 Economica, 82(325): 1­23.

Barro, Robert J., and Jos´ e Urs´ua. 2008. "Macroeconomic Contractions since 1870."
 Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 255­335.

Barro, Robert J., and Tao Jin. 2011. "On the Size Distribution of Macroeconomic
 Disasters." Econometrica, 79(5): 1567­1589.

Becker, Gary S., Tomas J. Philipson, and Rodrigo R. Soares. 2005. "The Quantity
 and Quality of Life and the Evolution of World Inequality." American Economic Review,
 95(1): 277­291.

Blackorby, Charles, Walter Bossert, and David Donaldson. 2005. Population Issues
  in Social Choice Theory, Welfare Economics, and Ethics. Cambridge University Press.

Bohn, Henning, and Charles Stuart. 2015. "Calculation of a Population Externality."
 American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(2): 61­87.

Broome, John. 2004. Weighing Lives. Oxford University Press.

Byrne, Joseph, ed. 2008. Encyclopedia of Pestilence, Pandemics, and Plagues. Greenwood.

Cropper, Maureen L., and Frances G. Sussman. 1990. "Valuing Future Risks to Life."
 Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 19: 160­174.

Enserink, M. 2004. "Avian Influenza: Catastrophe Waiting in the Wings?" Science,
 306(5704): 2016.

Fan, Victoria Y., Dean T. Jamison, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2018. "The Loss
  from Pandemic Influenza Risk." In Disease Control Priorities, 3rd ed., Volume 9. , ed.
  D.T. Jamison, et al, 347­358. World Bank.

Fernald, John G., Robert E. Hall, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson. 2017.
  "The Disappointing Recovery of Output after 2009." Brookings Papers on Economic Ac-
  tivity, 1­58.

Golosov, Mikhail, Larry E. Jones, and Mich`   ele Tertilt. 2007. "Efficiency with En-
 dogenous Population Growth." Econometrica, 75(4): 1039­1071.

                                          26
Greenstone, Michael, Stephen P. Ryan, and Michael Yankovich. 2012. "The Value
 of a Statistical Life: Evidence from Military Retention Incentives and Occupation-Specific
 Mortality Hazards." Unpublished manuscript.

Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. 2007. "The Value of Life and the Rise in Health
 Spending." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122: 39­72.

Harvard Global Health Institute. 2018. "Global Monitoring of Disease Outbreak Pre-
 paredness: Preventing the Next Pandemic." Harvard University Report.

Johnson, Niall P.A.S., and Juergen Mueller. 2002. "Updating the Accounts: Global
  Mortality of the 1918-1920 `Spanish' Influenza Pandemic." Bulletin of the History of
  Medicine, 76(1): 105­115.

Jones, Charles I. 2016. "Life and Growth." Journal of Political Economy, 124(2): 539­578.

Jones, Kate E., Nikkita G. Patel, Marc A. Levy, Adam Storeygard, Deborah
  Balk, John L. Gittleman, and Peter Daszak. 2008. "Global Trends in Emerging
  Infectious Diseases." Nature, 451(7181): 990­993.

Kaplow, Louis. 2005. "The Value of a Statistical Life and the Coefficient of Relative Risk
 Aversion." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 31(1): 23­34.

Kilbourne, Edwin Dennis. 2008. "Plagues and Pandemics: Past, Present, and Future."
                                                            ´
 In Global Catastrophic Risks. , ed. Nick Bostrom and Milan Cirkovi´
                                                                   c. Oxford Univ. Press.

Martin, Ian W.R. 2008. "Disasters and the Welfare Cost of Uncertainty." American Eco-
 nomic Review, 98(2): 74­78.

Martin, Ian W.R. 2013. "Consumption-Based Asset Pricing with Higher Cumulants."
 Review of Economic Studies, 80: 745­773.

Martin, Ian W.R., and Robert S. Pindyck. 2015. "Averting Catastrophes: The Strange
 Economics of Scylla and Charybdis." American Economic Review, 105(10): 2947­2985.

Martin, Ian W.R., and Robert S. Pindyck. 2017. "Averting Catastrophes that Kill."
 National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23346.

Nakamura, Emi, Jon Steinsson, Robert Barro, and Jos´       e Urs´
                                                                ua. 2013. "Crises and
 Recoveries in an Empirical Model of Consumption Disasters." American Economic Jour-
 nal: Macroeconomics, 5(3): 35­74.

National Academy of Medicine. 2016. The Neglected Dimension of Global Security: A
 Framework to Counter Infectious Disease Crises. National Academies Press.


                                            27
Pindyck, Robert S., and Neng Wang. 2013. "The Economic and Policy Consequences
  of Catastrophes." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4): 306­339.

Pratt, John W., and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 1996. "Willingness to Pay and the Dis-
 tribution of Risk and Wealth." Journal of Political Economy, 104(4): 747­763.

Razin, Assaf, and Efraim Sadka. 1995. Population Economics. MIT Press.

Rohlfs, Chris, Ryan Sullivan, and Thomas Kniesner. 2015. "New Estimates of the
 Value of a Statistical Life Using Air Bag Regulations as a Quasi-Experiment." American
 Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1): 331­359.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2014. "Guidelines for Preparing Economic
 Analyses." U.S. Government Report.

Viscusi, W. Kip. 1993. "The Value of Risks to Life and Health." Journal of Economic
 Literature, 31(4): 1912­1946.

Viscusi, W. Kip. 2018. Pricing Lives: Guideposts for a Safer Society. Princeton University
 Press.

Viscusi, W. Kip, and Joseph E. Aldy. 2003. "The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical
 Review of Market Estimates Throughout the World." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
 27: 5­76.

Voigtl¨
      ander, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2013. "The Three Horsemen of Riches:
 Plague, War, and Urbanization in Early Modern Europe." Review of Economic Studies,
 80(2): 774­811.

Young, Alwyn. 2005. "The Gift of the Dying: The Tragedy of AIDS and the Welfare of
 Future African Generations." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120: 423­466.




                                           28
