                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PASSIVE VERSUS ACTIVE GROWTH:
    EVIDENCE FROM FOUNDER CHOICES AND VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENT

                                        Christian Catalini
                                         Jorge Guzman
                                           Scott Stern

                                       Working Paper 26073
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26073


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019

We thank Theresa Amabile, Tania Babina, Iain Cockburn, Shane Greenstein, Hugo Hopenhayn,
Bruce Kogut, Josh Lerner, Ramana Nanda, Damon Phillips, Manju Puri, Tim Simcoe, and Jane
Wu for helpful comments, as well as participants at the Dartmouth Venture Capital and Private
Equity Conference, the NBER Productivity Lunch, the Kauffman Scholars Conference, the IFN
Stockholm Conference, and seminar participants at Brandeis University, Wharton School of
Management, Michigan University, Kellogg School of Management, and Columbia Business
School. Yupeng Liu provided excellent research assistantship. We also acknowledge and thank
the Kauffman Foundation for their support of our research agenda, including the Uncommon
Methods and Metrics Grant and the Kauffman Dissertation Fellowship, as well as the Jean
Hammond (1986) and Michael Krasner (1974) Entrepreneurship Fund and the Edward B. Roberts
(1957) Entrepreneurship Fund at MIT. All errors and omissions are of course our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26073.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Christian Catalini, Jorge Guzman, and Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Passive Versus Active Growth: Evidence from Founder Choices and Venture Capital Investment
Christian Catalini, Jorge Guzman, and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 26073
July 2019
JEL No. L25,L26

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper develops a novel approach for assessing the role of passive learning versus a proactive
growth orientation in the entrepreneurial growth process. We develop a simple model linking
early-stage founder choices, venture capital investment and skewed growth outcomes such as the
achievement of an IPO or significant acquisition. Using comprehensive business registration data
from 34 US states from 1995-2004, we observe that firms that register in Delaware or obtain
intellectual property such as a patent or trademark are far more likely to ultimately realize
significant equity growth, and these choices also predict early-stage venture capital investment.
Moreover, the estimated probability of receiving venture capital as reflected in early-stage
founder choices predicts growth even for firms that do not receive venture capital. We use these
findings to estimate bounds on the fraction of proactive versus passive firms among firms that
ultimately achieve significant equity growth. While nearly half of all firms that achieve modest
equity growth (> $10M) are consistent with passive learning (as they neither make early-stage
founder choices nor receive venture capital), 78% of firms experiencing an equity growth event
greater than $100M are associated with active founder choices and/or venture capital investment,
and these firms are concentrated in geographic hubs such as Silicon Valley. Finally, our approach
offers a novel approach for estimating the private returns to venture capital, matching on founder
choices rather than demographics; consistent with prior studies, venture-backed firms are
approximately 5X more likely to grow, with heterogeneity across location and time period.

Christian Catalini                              Scott Stern
MIT Sloan School of Management                  MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-480                        100 Main Street, E62-476
Cambridge, MA 02142                             Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER                                        and NBER
catalini@mit.edu                                sstern@mit.edu

Jorge Guzman
Columbia Business School
Uris Hall, 711
116th St & Broadway
New York, NY 10027
jag2367@gsb.columbia.edu
I.     INTRODUCTION
       The skewed nature of firm growth outcomes is a striking feature of the process through
which entrepreneurship shapes broader economic performance. Only one in 1000 firms achieves
a successful financial exit such as an IPO or high-value acquisition, and a very small fraction of
firms is ultimately responsible for the vast majority of growth in revenues and employment
(Decker, et al, 2014). This striking heterogeneity in firm outcomes reflects two distinct sources of
heterogeneity among firms. First, firms differ markedly at their moment of founding in their
potential and ambition to grow. Most founders intend to operate a small business, and only a small
fraction of founders state an intention to operate as a growth-oriented venture at the time of
founding (Hurst and Pugsley, 2011). Second, regardless of the founders' intentions at founding,
entrepreneurship is associated with significant uncertainty that is only resolved over time through
market experience, including the realized level of demand and productivity, and more informal
feedback through consumers and suppliers. The resolution of uncertainty over time induces some
small business-oriented entrepreneurs to learn from positive market feedback about their
underlying growth potential (and the potential financial returns from business expansion), while
many (indeed most) growth-oriented entrepreneurs are unable to achieve significant growth
despite their founding motivation.
       Consider Amazon and Chipotle, both founded in the mid-1990s, and each now employing
well over 50,000 employees. On the one hand, when Jeff Bezos left the financial firm D.E. Shaw
to start Amazon, his intention was to build a high growth startup by taking advantage of the nascent
Internet to support electronic commerce (Stone, 2013). Not simply hindsight bias, the proactive
growth orientation of Bezos is reflected in choices made in 1994 (the time of founding), including
early registration of copyrights, patent filings, and organizing the firm as a Delaware corporation
to facilitate external investment (Amazon in fact attracted venture capital financing from Kleiner
Perkins in 1996). In contrast, Steve Ells, a recent cooking school graduate and sous chef at a local
restaurant, received a small loan in 1993 (from his parents) to open a single Mexican grill
restaurant, which he hoped would be successful enough to allow him to found a follow-on single-
location fine-dining establishment. However, the unanticipated market success of the first Chipotle
prompted Ells to focus his efforts on establishing a chain of "fast casual" Mexican restaurants,
growing to more than 2000 locations by 2017.




                                                                                                  3
       This distinction between passive versus active growth is central to our theoretical
understanding of the nature of business dynamics. Starting with Gibrat (1931), economists have
grappled with the empirical relationship between the distribution of firm-level growth and the
resulting (skewed) distribution of firm size (Iriji and Simon, 1977; Gabaix, 2009; see Sutton, 1997,
for a synthetic review). On the one hand, skewness in the firm size distribution can result directly
from initial heterogeneity among firms in their productive efficiency, and learning through market
interactions about relative costs over time (Jovanovic, 1982). Under this conceptualization, the
distribution of firm size and profits results not from active choice by firms or strategic investments,
but from market selection pressure that leads inefficient firms to exit and more productive firms to
attract larger market shares and a higher share of industry rents. Alternatively, if founders
understand their relative potential at the time of founding (and have the ambition to grow),
skewness can result from differences among firms in their strategic investment choices (Ericson
and Pakes, 1995; Klette and Kotrum, 2004). As emphasized by Akcigit and Kerr (2018), firms
with heterogeneous innovations choose to invest more or less in growth based on the underlying
quality of their idea; as such, it is the combination of initial differences in potential and active
choice by entrepreneurs (and investors) that results in the skewed distribution of growth outcomes.
       Not simply a matter of economic theory, the relative importance of "active" versus
"passive" entrepreneurs for overall business dynamism has implications for policy. If business
dynamism results from the choices of proactive growth firms at the time of founding, then the
economic case for targeted opt-in interventions (such as entrepreneurial accelerators) or favorable
tax treatment (e.g., for venture capital investment) would be enhanced, since such focused policies
might have a disproportionate impact on improving overall economic activity. On the other hand,
if the bulk of realized growth arises from firms whose founders were unaware of the prospects for
growth at founding, then policy might be oriented towards simply encouraging a higher level of
entrepreneurial experimentation (e.g., through simplified and low-cost business registration and
subsidized provision of small business loans).
       Despite its importance for theory and policy, the empirical nature of firm growth has
remained elusive. The principal barrier is a fundamental measurement challenge: among the
millions of new firms founded each year, how would one "assign" firms to be classified as active
versus passive at founding? Systematic administrative data capturing the population of businesses,
such as the Longitudinal Business Database, tend to have limited information about the initial



                                                                                                     4
growth orientation of new firms, and by and large infer growth through observed employment,
revenue or productivity dynamics (Davis and Haltiwanger, 1992). While administrative data
provide direct insight into the consequences of firm heterogeneity (and how dynamism varies
across time, place and sector), ex post observations of growth cannot in isolation identify the
relative importance of a proactive growth orientation on the part of founders at the time of
founding. A separate stream of research focuses more directly on growth-oriented firms by
abstracting away from the full population of establishments to focus on carefully constructed
samples of firms, most notably those in receipt of venture capital (Lerner, 1994; Hellman and Puri,
2000; Chemmanur, Nandy, and Krishnan, 2011). Tracing the impact of such firms offers
significant insight into the role of active growth firms on the economy. For example, although the
venture capital industry only funds approximately one thousand ventures per year in the United
States, firms linked to venture capital account for between 30% to 70% of start-up IPOs (Kaplan
and Lerner, 2010; Ritter, 2016). While offering significant insight into the incidence and nature of
growth among active firms, these careful studies of venture-financed companies throw into sharp
relief how little we know about those firms that grow without receiving venture capital.
       This paper breaks through this impasse by developing and estimating a model linking early-
stage founder choices (across the full population of founders), venture capital investment, and
growth outcomes in a way that allows us to estimate bounds on the relative importance of active
versus passive firms in the growth process. Our approach takes advantage of three interrelated
insights. First, building on Guzman and Stern (2015, 2016, 2017), if firm governance choices at
the time of founding reflect founder beliefs about the growth potential of the firm, then these
choices should themselves predict growth (though with significant noise). For example, if one sign
of an "active" growth firm is investment in formal intellectual property protection such as a
trademark or patent, then, across the full population of new firms, the probability of growth should
be higher for firms that invest at founding in formal intellectual property protection relative to
those that do not. While this growth prediction is of course not causal, the observation that choices
at founding consistent with the ambition to grow also predict growth is consistent with the
hypothesis that founder choices are informed by (true) growth potential. Second, relative to non-
equity investors such as banks whose primary concern is the likelihood of default (i.e., the
likelihood of failure), equity-oriented investors such as venture capitalists are explicitly selecting
firms based on their potential to grow (and their own ability to enhance such potential). As such,



                                                                                                    5
those founder choices that predict firm growth should, all else equal, predict the likelihood of
attracting venture capital investment, and, the likelihood of receiving venture capital should be
positively associated with the probability of growth even for firms that do not receive venture
capital. Moreover, given that there are also some firms that do ultimately grow through passive
learning (and so would have been unlikely to have made early-stage choices consistent with a
growth orientation at birth), the empirical relationship between early founder choices and venture
capital is likely to be tighter than the relationship between founder choices and overall growth.
Finally, to the extent that we are able to establish a linkage between founding choices that predict
growth and venture capital, then we can also develop a categorization of firms in terms of their
growth orientation: simply put, a lower bound on the fraction of "active" growers is equal to the
fraction of firms that ultimately grow that (a) make founding choices consistent with a growth
orientation, (b) receive venture capital, or (c) both. In addition, this approach allows us to establish
an estimate for an upper bound for the returns to venture capital, where we can match firms based
not on demographic information such as industry or location, but on the observed choices of their
founders at birth.
        We put these ideas to work using data covering the full population of new US companies
registered between 1995 and 2005 in 34 US states (covering 95% of US VC financing). Extending
the data developed in the Startup Cartography Project (Guzman and Stern, 2016), we consider
three core measures reflecting early-stage founder choices, including the choice to register as a
Delaware corporation (a more expensive form of corporate governance offering advantages to
growth-oriented firms), apply for or acquire a US patent or apply for a US trademark within the
first year after founding. We then combine these founder choice data with information about
significant firm equity growth, including the realization of an IPO or significant acquisition within
10 years of founding. In line with the theoretical model, a small number of firm choices consistent
with active growth offer a sharp predictive analytic for equity growth: firms whose founders
register in Delaware, and acquire both patent and trademark protection are 278 times more likely
to achieve an equity growth event than firms that are associated with none of these choices.
Moreover, this measure of entrepreneurial quality is also predictive of the receipt of venture
capital: 65% of all venture-backed firms are in the top 5% of its distribution. Analogously, the
same founder choices predict venture capital receipt directly (e.g., firms whose founders register
initially in Delaware are more than 8 times more likely to receive venture capital), and, more



                                                                                                      6
importantly, the likelihood of receiving venture capital (as reflected by founder choices) is
predictive of growth even for those firms that do not receive venture capital. Furthermore, those
firms that grow with venture capital are drawn from a distribution of firms with a more active
growth orientation: the distribution of entrepreneurial quality for venture-backed growth firms
first-order stochastically dominates the distribution of growth firms without venture capital.
       We then use this information to assess the relative role of proactive versus passive learning
in the overall growth process in the economy. On the one hand, when we simply examine firms
experiencing modest equity growth (IPO or > $10M acquisition), we find that approximately half
of all growth firms make choices and experience early-stage investment consistent with proactive
growth. However, when we examine firms experiencing "extreme" equity growth (IPO or >
$100M acquisition), we find that at least 78% are associated with a proactive growth orientation,
and that these firms are particularly concentrated in entrepreneurial hubs such as Silicon Valley.
       We use these findings to provide insight into the returns to venture capital, using an
approach where we match on founder choices rather than demographics: consistent with earlier
estimates such as Puri and Zarutskie (2012), venture-backed firms are approximately 5X more
likely to grow. Interestingly, in our data, the returns to venture capital are lower in the upper tail
of the VC-likelihood distribution (e.g., firms in the top 0.05% of the distribution are only 2.4X
more likely to grow after receiving venture capital), within startup hubs, and when follow on
capital is more likely to be scarce (returns are highest during the early stages of the Internet boom).
       The paper proceeds as follows. Section II develops our theoretical model. Section III
introduces the data on US business registrations and the venture capital industry. Sections IV
through VI discuss the core empirical findings. Section VII concludes.


II.    PICKING WINNERS: SELECTION          INTO   VENTURE CAPITAL       AND THE    DISTRIBUTION     OF

       ENTREPRENEURIAL PERFORMANCE
       Our analysis is motivated by the simple (but often implicit) insight that the key distinction
between alternative models of firm growth reflects differences in the ability of founders to forecast
their growth potential at (or near) the time of founding. Under the theory of passive growth,
founders are relatively uninformed about the growth potential of their venture, and so any choice
they make at founding is unlikely to be predictive of growth itself. Not simply an informational
constraint of founders, early-stage investors are also uninformed about growth potential; if early-



                                                                                                     7
stage investing is governed by (essentially) random assignment, then the returns to venture capital
would be equal to the difference in outcomes between firms that rely on their funding, and those
that do not. In other words, when founders and investors cannot forecast the potential for growth,
founder choices should be uninformative about future growth, and inferring the returns to early-
stage investment will be uncontaminated by selection bias.
         In contrast, under a proactive growth model, entrepreneurs observe early signals of growth
potential and make informed decisions based on them. These early-stage choices include the firm's
corporate form (i.e., governance), investment (i.e., whether to seek out and accept risk capital
investment), and whether to establish formal intellectual property protection over their ideas
through patents and trademark.              If founders receive informative signals about their growth
potential, their choices would reflect those signals, and so will be predictive of growth itself.
Investors, likewise, would be able to extract some information about the true, underlying quality
of a venture and allocate risk capital based on those signals; as a result, the observed returns on
investment would reflect the combination of selection (as only higher potential firms receive their
capital) and the impact of capital investment on the growth process. 2
         To clarify the economic implications of these alternative perspectives on growth, we build
a simple model linking early-stage governance and investor choices to long-term firm
performance. Our analysis first focuses on the interplay between founding choices, the choices of
venture capital investors, and equity growth outcomes. In particular, we use the model to
decompose the prediction problem facing founders and venture capitalists (and the
econometrician), and evaluate the potential to predict growth based on founder choices at or just
after the time of founding.
         We start by considering a newly formed value-maximizing and risk-neutral firm that
observes a signal of its underlying quality   {  ,   ;   >   }, where the firm is of quality  
with probability , and   with probability 1 ­  . The model proceeds in three stages. First, the
startup chooses a level of corporate governance,   {0,1}, where a higher level of corporate


2
  If ventures are heterogeneous not only in their underlying growth potential but also in their ability to observe this
potential at founding, firm growth patterns may reflect the presence of both proactive investment and passive learning.
To the extent that some ventures and investors are able to observe growth potential at an early stage, investors such
as venture capitalists would likely invest primarily in firms where high potential quality is observable, while some
portion of firms that grow without active investors would reflect the passive growth trajectory. In the extreme, if the
venture capital industry were efficient in allocating capital to all firms with observable high-growth potential, then all
firms that grow without venture capital would be drawn from the pool of passive learners.


                                                                                                                        8
governance enhances the growth potential of the firm, is costly to adopt, and is a complement to
the underlying quality of a firm (i.e. better forms of governance are disproportionately helpful for
higher quality firms). The next stage involves a choice by a venture capitalist to invest or not in
the firm (  {0,1}), where we focus only on the extensive margin of whether the VC industry
chooses to invest in the firm. 3 Similar to the corporate governance choice, we assume that venture
capital investment is complementary to underlying quality and involves an idiosyncratic fixed cost
(reflecting search or transaction costs). Last, conditional on initial quality, governance, and
investor choices, the firm achieves an equity growth outcome through the realization of an
independent stochastic component,  , distributed log-logistic (i.e., ln() ~; () = 1).
Hence, startup performance is simply:
                           = (, )                                                                          (1)
where (,) accounts for the impact of governance and venture capital financing choices on
expected performance, and is (weakly) monotonically increasing in  and  . To the extent that
most of the variance in performance among firms results from the realization of , equation (1) is
fully consistent with the passive learning model (as in Jovanonic), while if a significant fraction
of the variance arises from differences in , then equation (1) would be more consistent with a
proactive model of firm growth (as in Ericson and Pakes).
        Stage 1: The governance choice. The founders choose whether to adopt a higher level of
corporate governance at the time they set up the firm. Their choice is based on their perception of
the underlying quality of the firm, their expectation about whether they are likely to receive venture
capital or not, the adoption cost of the governance form ( > 0), and the cost venture capitalists
face when making investments ( > 0). Both costs are randomly allocated. 4 Entrepreneurs know
 , and the distribution of  , though not its realized value.  influences the startup choices by
shaping their assessment of their probability of raising venture capital. The startup chooses  by
solving:
           max (, [|, ]) [] -  = (, [|, ]) -                                                      (2)
        ={0,1}




3
  We therefore abstract away from the level of investment and the distribution of equity, and assume that positive
VC investment reflects a willingness to invest, a willingness by the founders to accept the terms of the investment,
and terms that depend on the idiosyncratic bargaining positions of the VC and the founders.
4
  Specifically, the draws of  and  are idiosyncratic to each firm  , but we suppress the index  for expositional
clarity.


                                                                                                                  9
        To sharpen our focus on the role of proactive investment choices g iven a firm's self-
perceived growth potential, we assume that firms that receive a signal that they have extremely
low potential will not find it worthwhile to adopt K regardless of adoption costs or venture capital
financing (  (1,1) < min( )).5 However, to account for heterogeneity in corporate governance
choices among firms of high quality, we also assume that firms that receive a signal that they are
of high potential will only adopt K when adoption costs are not too high (   (1,1) < max( ) ).
Hence, the fraction of firms choosing K=1 conditional on  =   is  :
                                    
                           = min( )
                                    ( ) ,   =   (1, [|1,   ])                                             (3)
                                        

        Stage 2: The venture capitalist's choice. The (profit-maximizing) venture capitalist
observes the same signal of  as the startup. It also observes the startup's choice of K, and the
transaction cost of investment  > 0. Analogous to the startup governance choice, the venture
capitalist chooses whether to invest a fixed amount (normalized here to 1) in the company by
solving:
                            max  = (, ) - (1 +  )                                                         (4)
                          ={1,0}

We assume that it is never worthwhile to invest in a firm unless the potential of the firm is high
(  (1,1) - 1 < min( )), but that even when the signal is high it is not worthwhile to invest if
transaction costs are high (  ( ,1) - 1 < max( )). As mentioned earlier, we abstract away
from the precise level, staging or terms of the investment, and assume that when the cost of
transacting is low and observable quality is high, the VC and the firm can reach an agreement to
maximize value. The fraction of firms receiving venture capital is therefore  :


                       =1                              =0          =1
            =   
               min( )
                      ( ) + (1 -                            ( )) ,    =   (1,1) - 1                    (5)
                                                      

                                                                    =0
                                                                  ,    =   (0,1) - 1
        Stage 3: Firm Performance. Conditional on firm quality, corporate governance, and VC
investment, the startup's financial performance is realized according to (1). Given the skewed
nature of firm growth outcomes, we focus on whether firms achieve an "extreme" growth outcome
(in our empirical work, this will be whether the firm achieves an IPO or is acquired above a



5
 This type of behavior would be consistent with the empirical findings of Hurst and Pugsley (2011), in which the
most founders neither anticipate nor invest in growth.


                                                                                                                   10
threshold value). Specifically, we will consider the observation of performance in a latent variable
framework, where  is equal to 1 if  is greater than some threshold   and 0 otherwise.
       We develop four propositions from this setup. First, we show that entrepreneurial quality
can be partially estimated from founding choices, and that the resulting estimate also predicts the
ability to raise venture capital. Second, we show that the likelihood of receiving VC funding can
also be partially estimated from the same founding choices, and that the resulting VC likelihood
in turn predicts follow-on performance even among firms that never take VC. Third, the quality
distributions of firms that grow with and without venture capital are different, with the quality of
growth with VC being higher (first-order stochastic dominance) than growth without VC.
       We then leverage these insights to show how the observability of founding choices at birth
and the availability of data on realized venture capital investments allow us to conceptually
differentiate between passive and proactive firms at time of founding. To do so, we extend the
model by: 1) allowing  to be continuous rather than binary (thus enabling firms to differ
significantly between themselves, as in Guzman and Stern, 2015); and 2) by considering
 founding choices  = {1, ... ,  } rather than a single one. Using this framework, we propose a
method to empirically estimate the share of proactive growers in the economy, and highlight how
downward bias makes this measure a lower bound of the true share. Finally, for our fourth
proposition, we show that this approach also allows us to use the founding choices to account for
selection (on observables) into venture capital, and estimate an upper bound on the returns to this
source of funding.
       From Entrepreneurial Quality to Selection into Venture Capital. We build on Guzman and
Stern (2015, 2016, 2017) and explore how founding choices can reveal valuable information about
a firm's underlying quality even when quality itself is unobservable.
Lemma 1. Startup Choices Inform Entrepreneurial Quality. Define  () as the information of
some variable on . Then, there exists a function ()   such that

                        () > 
                              (),  = () ,  =                                                (8)
Proof. In appendix.
       Lemma 1 indicates that there is information about a firm's underlying quality that can be
estimated from founder choices. The intuition for this comes from the startup maximization
function. As discussed in equation (2),  is only adopted by startups of high quality. Therefore
 = 1 is informative about a startup's underlying quality (i.e. we learn that  =   even though


                                                                                                  11
quality itself is not observed). Lemma 1 directly links the choices startups make at founding with
their underlying unobservable quality, and, gives us an empirical model for estimating . Since
VCs also care about entrepreneurial quality, this empirical measure should also predict the receipt
of venture capital.
Proposition 1. Estimated Quality Predicts Venture Capital.
                                      (     = 1|)
                                                    >0                                      (9)
                                           

Proof. In appendix.
       Proposition 1 creates an empirical linkage of a theoretical relationship in the model: firms
of higher quality are more likely to raise VC. The logic is simple. VCs invest in high quality firms
to maximize the returns of their portfolio. The value of Proposition 1 is that it moves from simple
quality, to an empirical measure estimated from founding choices (that is, from  to ). The key

assumption needed for this link is that  itself is informative (which we show in Lemma 1).
       `VC Likelihood' and its Role in Predicting Performance Even in the Absence of VC. We
now take an alternative perspective and consider the role of founding choices in directly predicting
VC financing.
Lemma 2. Startup Choices Inform Venture Capital. Define  = ( = 1), and  () as the
information of some variable on . Then, there exists a function ()   such that
                               () > 
                                     (),  = (),  = []                               (10)
Proof. In appendix.
       Lemma 2 constructs a parameter, , which we refer to as the ` VC Likelihood'. It is the
underlying probability that a firm will receive VC financing given its founding fundamentals
(quality and governance). This summary statistic is positive for all firms, but could vary widely
across them. Using a similar logic to the one used in Lemma 1, Lemma 2 shows that an empirical
version of the VC likelihood,  , can be estimated from founding choices . Better governance
both indicates a higher underlying quality, and is useful in and of itself. We use Lemma 2 to
consider whether the VC likelihood predicts growth among startups that do not receive VC. One
of the motivating stylized facts for our paper is that most IPOs and acquisitions occur without VC
(Ritter, 2017), and a key question is whether these are simply passive or proactive growers. Firms
that attract VC capital -- i.e. that have high  -- due so because of their underlying fundamentals.
At the same time, in the VC choice equation (eq. (4)), venture capitalists can get draws of



                                                                                                  12
investment costs that are too high for them to invest even if the startups are intrinsically of high
quality. When this happens, these high potential firms will not receive VC, but will still be more
likely to perform well because of their high quality (although they may face a penalty because of
the lack of VC funding, mentorship and support).
Proposition 2. VC Likelihood Predicts Growth in Firms Without VC.
                               (    = 1| ,  = 0)
                                       
                                                   >0                                        (11)
                                       

Proof. In appendix.
       Proposition 2 states that when a company is attractive to VCs and therefore has high
VC-likelihood, it will be high performing even if it does not attract VC funding. This links the
process of selection into venture capital to a more fundamental model of proactive growth,
independent of funding source.
       The Quality Distribution of Firms that Grow With versus Without VC. It is important to
note that, among the growers in the non-VC sample, some are drawn from the group of passive
growers (i.e., those who received the low-quality signal). For these companies, growth is
completely random, and therefore would not be reflected through variation in  . This bounds the
informativeness of  in terms of the potential for growth without VC:

Proposition 3 Among firms that grow, the initial distribution of quality of firms with VC is higher
(in the sense of first order stochastic domination) than the distribution of quality of firms that do
not receive VC.
               ( > | = 1,  = 1) > ( > | = 1,  = 0)                                           (12)
Proof. In appendix.
       Whether quality is higher or lower for VC growers than non-VC growers depends on the
balance of two opposing effects. On the one hand, there is positive selection into VC. Since higher
quality firms are more likely to get VC, it follows that within growth firms the probability that a
firm has received VC increases as we move up in the quality distribution. However, there is also a
positive treatment of VC. Because VCs directly improve the performance of venture-backed firms,
it is possible that VCs move lower quality firms above a `growth threshold'. Pos itive VC treatment
could lead us to observe a lower founding quality for firms that grow with VC. However, under
our assumption that VC financing is complementary to firm quality, the value-added of VC would
be higher as quality increases. As a result, VC funding would have a relatively small effect on


                                                                                                    13
moving low quality ventures above the growth threshold, and would have a larger impact on
helping already high quality firms increase their chances of growth. Due to this complementarity,
the overall distribution of quality of VC-backed growth firms should be more selective in initial
quality than the distribution of quality of firms that do not receive VC.
         Estimating the Share of Passive and Proactive Growth in the Economy. Building on this
structure, we can distinguish the growth of startups across several distinct groups depending on
their quality, their choices of governance at founding, and their use of venture capital. Normalizing
  to 1 for simplicity, and defining   as the share of low-quality startups, and 
                                                                                 as the share of
high-quality startups with specific governance choices  and financing  , we can define the share
of startups that grow under each group as a function of the logistic conditional distribution function
 , as:
                           1
  =      
            ( = 1|  ) = 
                          × (1 - (  ))
         
         00                                   1                                         

00 =     
            (   = 1|  ,  = 0,  = 0) = 
                                       [(1 - )(1 -  )(1 -  )] × (1 -  ( ))
         

         10                              1                                        

10 =     
            (   = 1|  ,  = 1,  = 0)=
                                     [(1 - ) (1 -  )] × (1 -  (      ))                       (13)
                                                                (1,0)

         01                               1                                       

01 =     
            (   = 1|  ,  = 0,  = 1)= 
                                      [(1 - )(1 -  ) ] × (1 -  (      ))
                                                                 (0,1)

         11                              1                                   

11 =     
            (   = 1|  ,  = 1,  = 1)=
                                     [(1 - )  ] × (1 -  (      ))
                                                          (1,1)

         It is useful to make some observations on how these five groups capture different parts of
the process of firm growth. The model suggests that firms who receive a signal that they are of the
low type (or equivalently do not receive a signal that they are of the high type), will not engage in
costly investments in corporate governance, nor will they attract venture capital. However, despite
the lack of a positive signal or any proactive growth choice on their part, a small fraction of these
firms will still grow because of random luck through  (the firms in   ). Among the firms that
receive positive signals, only a fraction will invest in corporate governance or receive venture
                   
capital (00 , 01 , 10 ). Overall, the potential for growth will be highest among firms that are not
                                                                                              
only of high intrinsic quality, but also receive favorable cost draws for both K and V (i.e., 11 ).




                                                                                                     14
       We use these 's to structure our understanding of the observability of the passive and
proactive growth models of startup performance. Passive growth is the growth that is reflected in
the share   , while proactive growth in   . The incidence of proactive growth is exactly
                                                
                               = 00 + 10 + 01 + 11                                            (14)
This value is not estimable directly by the econometrician, because the econometrician cannot
                                
empirically distinguish between 00 (high quality startups with no founding choices) and   (low
quality startups). What can be estimated instead is a lower bound of the incidence of passive
                         
growers by assuming that 00 is zero:
                              Lower Bound:  = 10
                                                   
                                                 + 01   
                                                      + 11
       However, this can be improved by considering how high quality firms take or avoid
governance among VC-funded firms and non-VC-funded firms. Specifically, we can define a
coefficient  as the ratio of the governance-non governance odds for VC and non-VC-funded firms
as:
                             
                                                                  
                           ( 00
                              )           (1-(  ))         (1-(       ))
                            10                                  (0,1)
                       =    
                                    =(               )/(               )                      (15)
                                                                  
                           ( 01 )        (1-(       ))     (1-(       ))
                             11               (1,0)             (1,1)

                                                                           01
Where 00
       is the odds that a non VC growth firm takes governance, and              is the odds that a VC
        10                                                                 11
                                                                  
firm takes it. Then, depending on the value of  , we can estimate 00 . For example, if  = 1 (i.e.,
                                                                                           
the odds of taking governance or not are the same with and without VC), then  00 = 10 11 / 01 .
                                                 
However, if  is less than 1, then this value of  00 is only an upper bound of the estimate.
Proposition 4 (Upper Bound Estimates for  )
                                                       
                                     < 1  00 < 10 11 / 01
Proof: In Appendix
       The insight in Proposition 4 is that because the ratio  is less than 1, then we are able to
recover an upper value for the share of companies without governance or VC by looking at the
relative incidence of the other three groups. Intuitively, while the benefit of governance is
independent by assumption, the jump in probability space of the likelihood of achieving growth
                                                 
from 00 to 01 is higher than the jump from 10 to 11 due to decreasing marginal returns in the
coverage of the probability. Therefore, we can estimate an upper bound as:
                                                 
                                                10 11
                        Upper Bound:  = (                        
                                                   ) + 10 + 01 + 11
                                                01


                                                                                                     15
        Estimating the Returns to VC Financing. Last, we build on this setup to interpret estimates
of the returns to VC financing using the VC likelihood,  , to control for selection on observables.
We first note that since the true VC likelihood is a sufficient statistic for the observable part of
selection into VC, we can interpret estimates of the returns to VC as a propensity score model,
equivalent to Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) and subsequent literature. In this setup, the returns to
VC, , are identified as the difference between two potential outcomes, conditional on this
selectivity.
                                       = [(1) - (0)|]
        Of course, we do not have a measure of  , but instead only an empirical estimate,  . We
follow Imbens and Rubin (2016) by doing matching on  to improve balance in our sample. Yet,
because the ability to control for selection is imperfect (we cannot control for unobservable quality
or growth potential),  does not perfectly capture  , leading to positive bias.


Proposition 5 (Upper Bound Estimates of the Returns to VC)
                                          [ | ]  [|]
                                         
Proof. In appendix.
That is, any estimate of the returns to venture capital controlling for founding choices is simply an
upper bound of the true effect.
        Putting all of this together, we can make a number of predictions that summarize the key
propositions of our model. First, estimated quality from founding choices predicts venture capital
financing. Second, the VC likelihood of a firm predicts performance also among non-venture-
backed firms. Third, the quality distribution of venture-backed firms that grow is higher than the
quality of firms that grow without VC (first order stochastic dominance). Fourth, our approach
allows us to estimate an upper bound and a lower bound for the incidence of active growth startups
in the economy. And fifth, the method can be used to control for selection into venture capital
through founding choices and estimate an upper bound to the returns to VC.




                                                                                                  16
III. EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK6
        We build on our earlier work (Guzman and Stern, 2015, 2016, 2017) to propose an
empirical approach that uses founding choices, growth outcomes, and VC financing events to
create measures of entrepreneurial quality and VC likelihood. While our prior work only focused
on estimating quality, in this paper we extend this to consider venture capital financing and the
interaction between the two.
        Our approach combines three interrelated insights. First, as the challenges to reach a growth
outcome or receive venture capital financing as a sole proprietorship are extremely high, a practical
requirement for any entrepreneur to achieve growth is business registration (as a corporation,
partnership, or limited liability company). This practical requirement allows us to form a
population sample of entrepreneurs "at risk" of growth at a similar (and foundational) stage of the
entrepreneurial process. Second, we are able to observe additional founding choices at or close to
the time of registration. For example, we can measure whether the firm is organized in order to
facilitate equity financing (e.g., registering as a corporation or in Delaware), or whether the firm
seeks intellectual property protection (e.g., a patent or trademark). Third, though rare, we observe
venture capital financing events and growth outcomes (such as achieving an IPO or high-value
acquisition). Combining these insights, we estimate entrepreneurial quality by estimating the
relationship between observed growth outcomes and startup characteristics, and estimate VC
likelihood as the relationship between venture capital and the same startup characteristics. For a
firm i born at time t, with at-birth startup characteristics , , we observe growth outcome ,+ s
years after founding and estimate:
                  , = (,+ |, ) = ( +  , )                                                       (16)
And use the predicted value, , of this regression as our measure of entrepreneurial quality.
        Similarly, for a firm i born at time t, with at-birth startup characteristics , , we observe
venture capital event ,+ ' years after founding and estimate:
                  , = (,+ |, ) = ( +  , )                                                       (17)
And use the predicted value of this regression as our measure of VC likelihood.
        As long as the process by which startup characteristics map to growth outcomes remains
stable over time (an assumption which is itself testable), this mapping allows us to calculate an

6
  As appropriate, some portions of Section III and Section IV borrow (often verbatim) from the descriptions of the
same approach and the data in Guzman and Stern (2016).


                                                                                                               17
estimate of entrepreneurial quality at founding and VC likelihood for any business registrant within
our sample (even for firms that never seek venture-capital financing). In our analysis, we will use
empirical measures of quality and VC likelihood (  and  ) and their relationships to  and  to
test our underlying model of firm growth.


IV. D ATA
        Our analysis uses business registration records, venture capital financing events, and equity
growth outcomes. By linking these three datasets together, we are able to create profiles of new
firms and their early choices at the time of founding, and connect these to the subsequent receipt
of venture capital (or not), and to equity growth outcomes. We perform this matching for all new
companies registered between 1995 and 2005 in 34 U.S. states,7 accounting for 95% of all venture
capital financing. The resulting dataset, containing over 10 million firms, allows us to characterize
the growth process of startups from founding to the receipt of VC, and equity growth (IPO or
valuable acquisition). We now describe each of the components of the dataset and how it relates
to our theoretical framework.
        Business Registration Records. 8 Business registration records are public records created
when an individual registers a new business as a corporation, LLC or partnership (Guzman and
Stern, 2015; 2016; 2017). We use all registrations from 1995 to 2005 in 34 US states, representing
95% of the United States venture capital market in 2014 (SSTI, 2015, see Figure A1). While it is
possible to found a new business without appearing in these data (e.g., a sole proprietorship), the
benefits of registration are substantial, and include limited liability, various tax benefits, the ability
to issue and trade ownership shares, and credibility with customers. Furthermore, all corporations,
partnerships, and limited liability companies must register with a Secretary of State (or
Commonwealth) in order to take advantage of these benefits, as the act of registering the firm
triggers the legal creation of the company. As such, these records reflect the population of
businesses that take a form that is a practical prerequisite for growth. Our analysis draws on the
complete population of firms satisfying one of the following conditions: (a) a for-profit firm in the


7
   Arizona, California, Colorado, Florida, Iowa, Idaho, Illinois, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Maine, Michigan,
Minnesota, North Carolina, North Dakota, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Virginia, Washington.
8
  This section draws heavily from our prior work, where we introduce business registration records and some of the
measures used in this paper.


                                                                                                               18
local jurisdiction, or (b) a for-profit firm whose jurisdiction is Delaware but whose principal office
address is in the local state. In other words, our analysis excludes non-profit organizations as well
as companies whose primary location is not in the state. The resulting dataset contains 10,451,896
observations. The founding documents contain the name of the firm, its president, CEO, or
manager,9 its address, date of registration, and jurisdiction, amongst others. For each observation
we construct measures of founding observables based on choices that are observable in the
registration record itself, or in USPTO filings that are contemporaneous to the registration of the
company.
    A key founding choice, the choice of jurisdiction -- specifically whether to register the firm
in Delaware or under the local jurisdiction -- exhibits the characteristics of the quality-related
choices described in our model: while its value increases with the quality of the firm, the costs
only partially increase with firm quality. In the process of choosing a jurisdiction, founders benefit
from registering in Delaware for several reasons, including: (1) that the Delaware General
Corporate Law provides a long cannon of decisions that are useful in assessing the predictability
of complex contracts; (2) that the state of Delaware has an advanced institutional setup to deal
with corporate arbitration including its highly reputed Court of Chancery; and (3) that the decisions
and legal framework of Delaware is generally regarded as pro-business. These benefits are more
useful for startups that have growth ambitions, and for those that interact with investors, including
VCs.10 Registering in Delaware also implies the need to have one more registration in addition to
the state of operation, which introduces fees that a business that expects to stay small is likely to
deem unnecessary. 11 As such, we expect Delaware registration to be a useful variable for
identifying proactive growers, and a good predictor for both the receipt of venture capital and
equity growth.
    We also document several other firm observables at founding which do not necessarily exhibit
the characteristics discussed in the model. Corporation, is an indicator equal to 1 if a startup is
registered as a corporation, rather than an LLC or partnership, and 0 otherwise. A corporation is
the only legal form that allows the sale of shares to venture capitalists for investment. Our next


9
   We have several states in which the president name is not present. More generally, our models will include state
fixed-effects to account for this and other systematic differences in the process of registration across states.
10
   In fact, venture capitalists often require that portfolio companies are in Delaware because their contracts are
specifically written for Delaware corporate law.
11
   We estimate these at about $4,000 dollars.


                                                                                                                19
two measures relate to how the founders choose to name the company. Eponymous is an indicator
equal to 1 if the firm is registered after the name of the founder (e.g. `Mike's Pastries'). Belenzon
et al (forthcoming) build on Guzman and Stern (2015) to show that while eponymy is predictive
of higher productivity (Belenzon et al, 2017), it is inversely predictive of growth due to financing
channels. The second indicator is based on our qualitative observation that successful startups in
the studied time period usually have short distinctive names (such as `Spotify' or `Google'), rather
than longer, industry specific names. Short Name is a measure equal to 1 if the startup name is 3
words or less, and zero otherwise.
    We also create several measures based on how the firm name reflects the industry or sector
within which the firm is operating, taking advantage of the industry categorization of the US
Cluster Mapping Project ("US CMP") (Delgado, Porter, and Stern, 2016) and a text analysis
approach. We develop seven such measures. The first three are associated with broad industry
sectors and include whether a firm can be identified as local ( Local), traded (Traded) or resource
intensive (Resource Intensive). The other five industry groups are narrowly defined high
technology sectors that are typically associated with high growth firms, including whether the firm
is within the biotech (Biotech Sector), e-commerce (E-Commerce), other information technology
(IT), medical devices (Medical Devices) or semiconductors (Semiconductor) space.
    Intellectual Property Measures. We construct two measures related to quality based on
whether the firm has a patent or a trademark as reported by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
The value of intellectual property is increasing in the market potential of the underlying ideas (i.e.
the quality of the firm), but the costs of filing and maintaining this intellectual property do not
increase at the same rate (at least as a first approximation). Patent is equal to 1 if a firm holds a
patent application within the first year and 0 otherwise. We include patents that are filed by the
firm within the first year of registration and patents that are assigned to the firm within the first
year from another entity (e.g., an inventor or another firm). Hsu and Ziedonis (2013) highlight the
role of patents as `dual advantages' in the performance of companies. They provide an intellectual
property protection benefit to startups, but also facilitate transactions with venture capitalists (also
Hellman and Puri (2000) and Gans et al (2008)). As such, we expect patents to be predictive of
both performance and the receipt of venture capital. Our second measure, Trademark, is equal to
1 if a firm applies for trademark protection within a year from registration. Firms with an active




                                                                                                     20
trademark could use the sales of products and services to bootstrap their growth without relying
on external funding.
         Venture Capital Financing. We collect information on Series-A venture capital financing
for all startups in our sample from AngelList, CapitalIQ, Preqin, and Thompson Reuters
VentureXpert. Our main variable, Venture Capital, is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the
company receives venture capital in any of these datasets, and zero otherwise.
         A central challenge in measuring venture capital events is the fact that existing VC
databases are incomplete (Kaplan and Lerner, 2017). We try to limit the impact of this issue in
three ways. First, we highlight that our VC variable is dichotomous and represents only the
existence of VC financing. While there is often concern that VC databases do not adequately
measure some of the details of individual VC deals, the existence of any financing (or its absence)
is much more reliable. Second, we use multiple databases to both get a comprehensive set of VC
events and compare the observability of these events across databases. We find almost all of the
VC-backed firms we identify in VentureXpert are also in our other three databases and vice-versa.
Finally, most of the data issues with VentureXpert are related to more recent years, and the data
from our period is typically considered to be of much higher quality (Kaplan and Lerner, 2017).
However, we may miss some venture capital events either because of our matching procedure or
because of it not being observed in the data we use. The analysis can therefore include some Type-
I errors on the presence of VC funding, but we believe it is unlikely to contain Type-II errors (firms
that are classified as VC-funded, but that do not receive any). Our econometric approach bounding
the returns to VC is consistent with this type of measurement error.
         Growth Outcomes. Last, we consider growth outcomes that capture the same outcomes that
venture capitalists care about when making their investment decisions. Growth is a binary measure
equal to 1 if the firm has an initial public offering (IPO) or is acquired at a meaningful positive
valuation within 10 years of registration as reported in the Thomson Reuters SDC database.12
Between 1995 and 2005, we identify 13,292 firms that achieve growth, representing 0.13% of the

12
   Although the coverage of IPOs is likely to be nearly comprehensive, the SDC data set excludes some acquisitions.
SDC captures their list of acquisitions by using over 200 news sources, SEC filings, trade publications, wires, and
proprietary sources of investment banks, law firms, and other advisors (Churchwell, 2016). Barnes, Harp, and Oler
(2014) compare the quality of the SDC data to acquisitions by public firms and find a 95% accuracy (Nette,
Stegemoller, and Wintoki (2011), also perform a similar review). While we know this data not to be perfect, we believe
it to have relatively good coverage of `high value' acquisitions. We also note that none of the cited studies found
significant false positives, suggesting that the only effect of the acquisitions we do not track will be an attenuation of
our estimated coefficients.


                                                                                                                      21
total sample of firms. We also experiment with different thresholds for defining what a successful
acquisition represents.
         Descriptive Statistics. Table 1 reports summary statistics. There are 10,451,896 firms on
our data: 0.13% of these firms achieve an equity growth outcome within ten years from
incorporation, and 0.08% receive venture capital (0.05% within 2 years) 13. 0.2% of firms have a
patent (within 1 year from birth), and 0.09% have a trademark. 59% of firms are corporations, 47%
have a short name, 7.9% are eponymous and 3.6% are registered in Delaware.
         In Table 2, we directly compare the share of firms in our sample that grow with versus
without VC: although only 0.13% of non-VC-funded firms achieve growth, this share is 27.6% for
VC-funded firms. If we only focus on IPOs, whereas 1 out of 28 VC-funded firms achieves this
milestone, among the remaining firms it is only 1 every 10,000 firms. Similarly, while
approximately 1 out of 4 VC-funded firms is successfully acquired, only 1 out of 769 non-VC-
funded firms does so.


V. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
ENTREPRENEURIAL QUALITY              AND THE     RECEIPT    OF   VENTURE CAPITAL. We begin our empirical
analysis by studying Proposition 1, whether entrepreneurial quality -- as estimated from choices
at birth -- predicts venture capital. To do so, we first estimate quality by implementing our
predictive analytics approach discussed in Section III. We train a predictive logit model that maps
the three measures of quality-oriented founding choices (Delaware, Patent, and Trademark) to
equity growth events using a 50% random sub-sample (a training sample). The predicted value of
this model is our empirical estimate of Entrepreneurial Quality-- in the theoretical framework.
We use this estimate to evaluate the role of underlying quality (as reflected in founding choices)
in the receipt of venture capital in the remaining 50% of the data (the test sample).


13
   This number of investments is not comparable with the number of investments in these states within those years for
at least three reasons. First, we only include firms registered after 1995, but investments occurring in the early part of
our sample could be on firms registered earlier than 1995, which we do not observe. Second, we only include local
firms, but some regions such as Silicon Valley or Boston, have a history of firms that are not local but instead move
to these locations after receiving venture capital financing, and might receive follow-on financing in these regions.
For example, many Israeli firms move to the United States after receiving their first round of financing. Our dataset
is designed to exclude these firms. Finally, naturally, our matching cannot be perfect. While we have applied to
matching improvements developed by Balasubramanian and Sivadasan (2008) and Kerr and Fu (2008), our focus has
intently been on avoiding as many false-positives as possible. We have high confidence that the investments we
observe reflect the true investment as stated in Thompson Reuters VentureXpert. Through manual checks, we do not
believe the number of false-positives to be many.


                                                                                                                      22
         Table 3 is our predictive logit model. 14 (3-1) considers each effect entering the regression
independently. (3-2), in contrast, includes interactions of Delaware and Patent. Our preferred
specification is (3-3), which considers each possible combination of these parameters
independently, effectively creating a non-parametric estimator. The relationship between our
observables and equity growth is sizable, and increases when we introduce interactions suggesting
complementarity between these choices. A startup registered in Delaware, for example, is 9.7 times
more likely to grow than a startup registered in a local jurisdiction. However, this effect increases
to 176 times when considering startups that both register in Delaware and have a patent, and to
119 for those that register in Delaware and have a trademark around founding. The largest effect
is for startups that exhibit all of the three choices: a Delaware startup, with a patent and a
trademark, is 279 times more likely to grow than a startup without any of these characteristics.
Together, these results suggest a highly predictive value of founding governance choices and
intellectual property on follow-on performance. As is clear in the theoretical framework, these
relationships are not causal, but instead reflect choices made by the entrepreneurs at founding
based on their own ambitions and assessment of the startup's potential. Specifi cation (3-4) is a
robustness test where we include additional founding choices. Though there are some small
changes in the coefficients, the magnitudes remain similar.
         The predicted value of (3-3) is our measure of Entrepreneurial Quality. It has a mean of
0.0013 and standard deviation of 0.0064. It is also highly skewed, with a skewness coefficient of
38. To consider its relationship to venture capital financing, we begin by performing an out of
sample ten-fold cross validation procedure. In Figure 1, we plot the average out of sample share
of all VC-backed firms located in each of twenty 5-percent bins in the distribution of quality. This
graph provides a useful visual representation of the incidence of venture capital across our
estimated entrepreneurial quality distribution, and constitutes a descriptive analysis of Proposition
1. The graph shows that VC funding is mostly concentrated among startups of extremely high
entrepreneurial quality: 65% of all venture-backed firms are in the top 5% of the quality
distribution, and another 13% in the next 5%.
         To sharpen these results, we perform a regression analysis in Table 4. We estimate linear
probability and logit models on the 50% test sample using Venture Capital as our dependent


14
  It is equivalent to the one used in Guzman and Stern (2017) to estimate entrepreneurial quality, which also use the
same sample of US firms.


                                                                                                                  23
variable, and estimated entrepreneurial quality as the independent variable. In (4-1), we use the
estimated quality without any controls. The coefficient is positive and significant, with a value of
0.82. This suggests that a 10 percentage-point increase in predicted quality at founding is
associated with a 8 percentage-point increase in the probability of growth. To mirror the structure
of our model (where each of the terms interacts multiplicatively, with log-logistic error), we
estimate a log-linear relationship in (4-2). The mean of this variable is -8.9 and the standard
deviation 1.35. We also include state and year fixed-effects to control for the most obvious sources
of heterogeneity. The main coefficient is 0.0067 and significant. An increase of one standard-
deviation in log quality is associated with a 0.9 percentage-point increase in the probability of
raising venture capital. With a mean outcome of 0.08%, this difference is substantial. Given two
firms that have a difference in estimated quality at founding of 1 standard deviation, the one of
higher quality has an 11X higher probability of receiving venture capital. (4-3) performs the same
analysis but in a logit model. The reported coefficient is an IRR, with a value of 3.3. In this model,
an increase of 1 standard deviation in log quality is associated with a 4.3X increase in the
probability of growth.
       The skewness and high selectivity of VCs is best observed in (4-4). In this table, we include
indicators for being at different ranges of predicted quality, and report the IRR of each one in a
logit regression using Venture Capital as the outcome. The base category is being in the bottom
50% of the data by estimated quality. The differences increase quickly and are very pronounced at
the upper levels of the quality distribution. Firms in the 50th to 90th percentile are 4.2X more likely
to receive VC than those in the base category. Firms in the 90 th to 95th percentile are 19X more
likely to raise VC, and firms in the 95th to 99th percentile are 63X more likely to raise VC. At the
very top, the effects are particularly salient. Being between the 99 th and the 99.5th percentile is
associated with a 165X increase in the likelihood of raising VC (relative to the baseline), and being
in the top 0.5% with a 645X difference. We interpret these results as supporting Proposition 1:
there exists a positive relationship between a firm's entrepreneurial quality (as measured by its
choices at birth), and the likelihood of raising venture capital financing.


VC LIKELIHOOD      AND   GROWTH WITHOUT VENTURE CAPITAL. We continue our analysis by
evaluating Proposition 2 -- whether a firm's VC likelihood can also predict growth among firms
that do not raise venture capital. This relationship can validate our assumptions on how founding



                                                                                                    24
choices reflect fundamental drivers of growth, and can provide insight as to whether growth
without VC is driven by a passive learning model (e.g. Jovanovic, 1981), or one of proactive
investment and ex-ante differences in founding quality (Pakes and Ericcson, 1995).
       To do so, in Table 5, we estimate a predictive model that relates Venture Capital to
observables at founding. This follows the same logic of Table 3, but with a different dependent
variable. We again divide our sample into a 50% training and a 50% test sample, and present our
coefficients as incidence-rate ratios for ease of interpretation. (5-1) includes each of the three
founding choices we observe for firms independently. (5-2) also interacts Delaware and Patent.
Finally, (5-3) incorporates all the three-way interactions, effectively creating a non-parametric
model. The relationship between our founding observables and the receipt of venture capital is
particularly salient. As in Table 3, we find the odds of VC increase in the interactions, suggesting
these choices are complements. Looking at specification (5-3), we see companies that only register
in Delaware are 17X more likely to achieve a growth outcome, and firms that only have a patent
are associated with an 87X increase in the odds of growth. However, firms with both Delaware
and a patent (but no trademark) are 342X more likely to grow. Specification (5-4) is once again a
robustness test where we include more controls. Though the coefficients change, the magnitudes
remain meaningful, suggesting that our observables at founding are good predictors of venture
capital financing.
       The predicted value from (5-3) is our empirical estimate of the likelihood of raising venture
capital for each firm (  in the model), i.e. the VC Likelihood is estimated as the predicted
probability from this regression. It is important to highlight that we estimate this measure for all
firms in our data, and not only for venture-backed firms (all firms have a non-zero probability of
raising venture-capital).
       To test Proposition 2, we check if the VC Likelihood estimate predicts growth also among
the firms that do not raise venture capital. In Figure 2, we look at this relationship by repeating the
out of sample cross validation procedure used in Figure 1. The estimates inform where in the
distribution of VC Likelihood non-VC-funded growth firms are likely to be found. The relationship
between VC Likelihood and the growth outcomes of non-VC-funded firms is stark, and consistent
with the presence of proactive growers also among these types of firms: 48% of non-VC-funded
growth firms are in the top 5% of VC likelihood, and 11% are in the next 5%. In Table 6, we study
this relationship in a regression using the same format of Table 4. We estimate linear probability



                                                                                                    25
and logit models on the 50% test sample, excluding all venture-backed firms, using Equity Growth
as our dependent variable and the firm's VC likelihood as an independent variable. In (6 -1), we
use the estimated value of VC likelihood without any controls. The coefficient is positive and
significant, with a value of 0.69. The mean for the outcome variable is 0.001, implying a large
difference in growth probability. As can be seen in (6-2), the effect of a one log-point increase in
the log value of VC likelihood is associated with a 0.004 percentage points increase in the
probability of equity growth. Given the mean value, this implies a 4X effect in the odds of growth.
Model (6-3) is a logit model. The coefficient is an odds ratio of 2.3. That is, an increase of one log
point of VC likelihood is associated with a 2.3X increase in the odds of growth. The skewness and
difference of being at the upper tail of the VC likelihood is most visible in (6-4). In this column,
we include individual indicators for being within different ranges of the VC likelihood distribution,
and report the IRR of each one in a logit regression. The base category is being in the bottom 50%
of the data by estimated VC likelihood. The parallels to Table 4 are significant, though all
coefficients are somewhat smaller in magnitude. Differences are quite marked at the upper levels
of the VC likelihood distribution. Firms in the 50th to 90th percentile are 1.7 times more likely to
grow, firms in the 90th to 95th percentile are 9 times more likely, and firms in the 95th to 99th
percentile are 19.4 times more likely to grow. Being between the 99th and the 99.5th percentile is
associated with a 45X increase (relative to the baseline), and being in the top 0.5% with a 162X
difference. We interpret this evidence as supporting proposition 2, i.e. the estimated VC likelihood
at founding predicts performance, even among the non-venture-backed sample.


THE QUALITY DISTRIBUTION OF VC AND GROWTH WITHOUT VC. We now consider Proposition 3,
which predicts that the quality of growers with VC is higher than the quality of growers without
VC (first-order stochastic dominance). This is a prediction that depends on the specific functional
form of our model, and therefore we view it as a validation of the structure we propose. In Figures
3A and 3B, we investigate this by simply plotting the distribution of quality for growth with VC,
and growth without VC. First-order stochastic dominance means that at any point of the
distribution there is more mass to the right of the distribution for VC growers than for non-VC
growers (simply said, the cumulative density distribution (CDF) for VC growers is always below
the CDF for non-VC growers). Figure 3A shows the kernel density and CDF of the founding
entrepreneurial quality of both types of growers. Consistent with our model, the CDF of quality of



                                                                                                   26
firms that grow without VC is always above the quality of non-VC growers, and the PDF crosses
only once (single crossing). That is, the quality of venture-backed growers first-order
stochastically dominate non-venture-backed growers.


ESTIMATING    THE   RELEVANCE    OF   PASSIVE   VS   PROACTIVE GROWTH IN THE ECONOMY. Having
empirically shown the importance of founding choices on selection into venture capital and
growth, we move back to the theoretical description of Section II to evaluate the incidence of
passive and proactive growers in overall equity growth events in the economy. Recall that in the
model the role of proactive growth is defined by:
                                          
                            = 1 -   =   = 00   
                                             + 10   
                                                  + 01   
                                                       + 11
Proactive growth is represented by the share of firms that grow because they are of high quality,
but may or may not receive VC funding. This measure, however, is not observable because we
cannot distinguish between proactive growers that grow without the predictive founding choices
       
or VC (00 ), and passive growth (   ). In Section II, we show that we can estimate a lower bound
                                                                                          
of  under the assumption that 00 = 0, and an upper bound by considering the fact that 00 /10
                      
is not lower than 10 /11 . Here we use our three key indicators, Delaware, Patent, and Trademark,
to represent the type of founding choices that reveal quality in the model (i.e.  = 1). We interpret
as a high quality founding choice the presence of  of the three, and then split all growth firms
into four groups: firms that growth without founding choices nor VC (composed of   + 00
                                                                                     
                                                                                        ),
                                                                                        
growth with founding choices but no VC ( 10 ), growth with VC but no founding choices ( 01 ),
                                              
and growth with both founding choices and VC (11 ).
       Table 7A documents the number of firms in each of these groups and the share they
represent of all growers in the economy in different samples. (7A-1) includes all firms, and we
identify 13,292 growth firms in this set, of which 52% grow with neither founding choices nor
venture capital, while the remaining 48% grows with at least one of the two. Among the latter
group, the majority is represented by firms with founding choices, but no venture capital (31%),
with the remainder split between firms that have both (12%), or only have VC funding (5%). The
fact that this last share is so small is consistent with the idea that early IP and stronger governance
are a complements to venture capital funding (Hellman and Puri, 2002; Gans, Hsu, and Stern,
2008). Bringing these estimates together, we conclude that the lower bound for the share of




                                                                                                    27
proactive growers is 48% of all firms in our sample, and the upper bound is 61%. 15 Conversely,
between 39% and 52% of growth in the economy is passive.
           In (7A-2) and (7A-3), we explore the same shares across different geographies. In
particular, we compare MSAs with firms that are very attractive to venture capitalists and can be
therefore considered "startup hubs" (mean  in the top 10% the distribution, e.g. Silicon Valley),
to non-hubs (mean  in the bottom 25%, e.g. Florida). The differences are striking. Whereas the
share of proactive growers in startup hubs is between 71% and 83%, this drops dramatically to
27% to 34% in non-hubs.16 Interestingly, the difference between these two estimates appears to
stem almost completely from the presence or absence of VC funding, since the share of proactive
growth in the absence of VC is closer (34% vs 21%, respectively). This result is consistent with
the existence of two paths to growth for proactive growers, and with low substitutability between
these two paths.
           Last, in (7A-4) and (7A-5) we study two different economic phases, a boom (1995-1999)
and a bust period (2002-2005). The shares of types between these two periods are similar.
However, the share of non-VC growth, either through passive growth, or through proactive growth
without VC, is higher during the boom period. This result stands in contrast with statements about
an oversupply of venture capital in the late 1990's (Goldfarb et al, 2007), and is instead consistent
with the idea that the supply of startups with growth potential was possibly even higher ­
particularly in regions with less VC presence.
           In Table 7B, we replicate this exercise changing the definition of equity growth. While we
still include IPOs, we now only classify as successful acquisitions those with a valuation greater
than $100 million. The idea is to identify a set of extremely selective growth events that likely
have disproportionate impact on the economy. When we apply this higher threshold for what we
define as a successful growth event, we observe a sizable change in the relative role of passive
versus proactive growth. Only 22% of growth now occurs without founding choices nor venture
capital, and as much as 71% includes founding choices (6% includes VC but no founding choices).


15
     The upper bound is due to an effort to include also the pro-active growth that occurs among firms with no
                                                                                                                 00     
                             
founding choices and no VC ( 00 ). As show in Proposition 4, the estimate of the upper bound depends on               < 01
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                 10     11
                     
                   01
          
so that   00   =    
                      10
                           is an upper bound for this group. Using the estimates in Table 7, this number is 13%, adding it
                    11
to 48% leads to an upper bound estimate of 61%.
                           
16
   The upper estimates of 00 in this case are 12% and 8%, respectively.


                                                                                                                        28
Bringing these estimates together, we conclude that when looking at the right tail of growth events,
the lower bound for the share of proactive growers is 78% of all firms in our sample, and the upper
bound is 94%.17 Conversely, between 6% and 22% of growth is passive. This result is striking,
and highlights the prevalence of proactive growth choices among those firms associated with the
highest level of growth.


OTHER OUTCOMES. A potential concern with our analysis thus far is that it has focused on financing
outcomes that reflect only one of many measures of firm growth. While the financing outcomes of
IPO or a high value acquisition reasonably indicate wealth created for the entrepreneur (and its
investors), the nature of firm growth on outcomes such as employment or productivity, which drive
the critical process of economic reallocation and business dynamism (Decker et al, 2014; Decker
et al, 2016), could be different. In Table 8, we study the relationship between our founding
observables and growth employment and revenue outcomes, and the role of active versus passive
growth in driving them. To do so, we match all our business registrations to the annual snapshot
files of the business database Reference USA/Infogroup (a competitor of Dunn and Bradstreet).
We then create indicators for all firms that have reached certain thresholds of economic activity
within the first 10 years in that sample: whether the firm has more than 500 employees in any of
the first 10 years, whether the firm has more than 1000 employees, and whether the firm has sales
higher than $100 million dollars. While we recognize that the Reference USA data is noisy and
imperfect, this noise is more likely to exist for smaller firms; we assume that, conditional on being
identified by Reference USA as having more than 500 or 1000 employees (or sales over $100 M),
a firm's employment (or sales) level is likely to be high and above this threshold. 18
        Our results in Table 8 indicate striking similarities between equity growth success and other
high growth outcomes--particularly employment growth. Panel A replicates our nonparametric
model of (3-3) for these outcomes. The coefficients of (8A-1), (8A-2), and (8A-3), are all highly
positive and significant, and show the same pattern of increasing (and very high returns) to the
presence of multiple indicators of founding growth intent. Panel B uses the employment outcome
(employment over 500) to estimate the incidence of proactive growth using this outcome. Using



                                  
17
  The upper bound estimates of 00   is 16%.
18
  We study the relationship at the macroeconomic level between models predicted indexes using high employment
in Reference USA and equity growth in Guzman and Stern (2016).


                                                                                                           29
our lower-bound estimate, we find that at least 44% of all firms are proactive growers, close to the
48% estimated in equity growth.
        Bringing these together, we conclude that our analysis on the nature of firm growth
indicates a systematic regularity about the role of both passive and proactive growth in the US
economy (during our time period), and is not sensitive to the definition of growth itself.


AN UPPER BOUND OF THE RETURNS              TO   VENTURE CAPITAL FINANCING. In this last section, we
compare proactive growers with versus without VC financing to estimate an upper bound to the
returns to VC (Proposition 4). In particular, Table 9 runs a logit model with Equity Growth as the
dependent variable and introduces our founding choices and additional variables to control for
selection (on observables) into VC. Results are reported as incidence rate ratios, and standard
errors are clustered at the state-year pair level (all the remaining tables in the paper only use the
50% random subsample we did not use to develop the predictive approach).
        Column 1 of Table 9 reports the correlation between the presence of VC and equity growth
without any controls. Firms that raise VC are 452 times more likely to grow relative to those that
do not. Columns 2 through 4 introduce our measures of founding choices, first independently, then
as interactions. The table also includes fixed-effects for geography (state fixed-effects), and time-
periods (year fixed-effects). The estimated coefficient drops to 36X in Column 2, and then slightly
in (8-3). In Column 5 we instead introduce the log odds of VC Likelihood with the estimate
dropping further to 32X. It is interesting to note that this estimate is an order of magnitude smaller
than the initial naïve correlation, but continues to be quite large. In Column 6 we extend the
approach by performing an exact matching procedure on the empirical likelihood of VC.19 For
each VC-backed firm, we randomly select a non-VC-backed firm founded in the same year and
geographic region, with the same exact value of observable VC Likelihood. The matching is at the
same zip code level for 86% of firms, with the remaining firms being matched at the MSA and
state level. After matching, we estimate the differences in the odds of achieving an equity growth
outcome between firms that received VC funding and firms that did not raise VC funding (but that
have exactly the same VC Likelihood of doing so at birth). The incidence rate ratio drops from 32
to 11. This estimate is significant: conditional on the VC Likelihood, firms that raise VC are still


19
   Our rationale for using matching comes from Imbens and Rubin (2015), who recommend using matching after
estimating a propensity score (such as our measure) to further improve balance on estimating treatment effects.


                                                                                                            30
11 times more likely to achieve an equity growth outcome than non-VC-funded firms. However,
while significant, the coefficient is also two orders of magnitude lower than the original estimate
from Column 1. While the gap is meaningful, 99% of the difference in outcomes between VC-
backed and non-VC-backed firms is accounted for by simple choices that are observable at
founding.
         Table 10 extends the previous table by introducing a series of additional fixed effects to
control for regional and micro-geographic heterogeneity in our matching estimator. Consistent
with the idea that unobservables may be less of a concern after we perform our matching on VC
Likelihood, adding state-year pair fixed effects, MSA fixed effects, or controls for the average
quality of the zip code level neighbors of the focal firm does not change our estimates: in Columns
2 through 4, VC-funded firms continue to be approximately 10 to 11 times more likely to grow
than their counterparts. Column 5 also includes the additional observables at founding beyond
Delaware, patent, and trademark, and the coefficient drops again to 6.9, suggesting these
observables do account for some potential variation in founding differences even after controlling
for fine-grained geographic and time controls. Interestingly, our estimate is comparable to those
of Chemmanur et al. (2011) and Puri and Zarutskie (2002), even though there are important
differences in the specifications and samples we use since we start from the full population of
incorporated firms.
         Taken together, results from Tables 9 and 10 highlight just how much of the initial
difference in the probability of growth between VC-funded-firms and other firms is driven by
selection. Whereas in the naïve estimation VC-funded firms are 452 times more likely to grow
than other firms, this estimate is reduced to only 6.9 times using our matching approach and
founding observables. This is consistent with our descriptive results on selection presented in
Figures 2 and 3, and confirms that VCs select firms that are already of very high quality based on
observables.20 Our exercise places an upper bound on how much value, on average, VCs may be
adding to the firms they invest in.
         In Table 11 we divide the sample by startup hubs versus not (Columns 2 to 4), and over
economic cycles (Columns 5 to 7). Estimates are higher outside of hubs, where VC-funded firms



20
  In terms of the type of growth outcomes we observe, VCs are associated with a larger increase in the probability of
an acquisition than in the probability of an IPO, which is consistent with them supporting their portfolio firms in the
search for potential buyers through their professional network.


                                                                                                                    31
are 7 times more likely to grow than their counterparts, and when follow-on capital is more likely
to be available (as in the .com boom). The first effect suggests that the marginal VC-funded
company in a non-hub region may be of higher quality than the marginal VC-funded firm in a hub,
and is consistent with the results Catalini and Hui (2017) find when looking at US equity
crowdfunding investments.
       Last, In Table 12, we estimate the same relationship for the right tail of the observable VC
Likelihood distribution (firms in the top 5%, 1%, 0.1% and 0.05%). As we move up the
distribution, the contribution of VCs to growth is drastically reduced. For firms that exhibit
extremely high, observable quality at incorporation (Column 4 and 5), VC-funded firms are only
3 times more likely to grow than similar firms that do not receive VC funding. This group
represents a sizable share of all VC funded firms (34%).


VI. CONCLUSION
       Though venture capitalists are often considered central to the process of firm growth, a
significant portion of the firms that IPO or are acquired do not rely on venture capital financing.
In this paper, we benchmark two competing models of firm growth, passive growth and learning
(Gibrat, 1931; Jovanovic, 1982; Gibrat, 1931; Iriji and Simon, 1977; Cohen and Klepper, 1992;
Luttmer, 2007; Gabaix, 2009) versus proactive growth (Aghion and Howitt, 1992; Ericson and
Pakes, 1995; Klette and Kortum, 2004), to understand their relative contribution to growth in the
economy, and to assess if multiple paths to growth exist for proactive growers, independent of how
they fund their scaling. In particular, we use a parsimonious model to show how entrepreneurs and
VCs optimizing for equity growth make choices at (or near) the time of founding that are
informative of underlying quality, and thus predictive of both selection into VC and performance.
These founding choices allow us to separate firms of high potential and with growth ambitions
from the rest of firms that might grow through a passive model or ex-post market interactions.
       The model offers four interrelated predictions on the relationship between founding
observables, VC financing, and firm growth. First, entrepreneurial quality estimated from firm
choices at birth is a good predictor of VC financing. Second, the same founding choices can also
be used to predict VC financing, and the resulting "VC-likelihood" in turn predicts performance
even among non-VC-backed firms. Third, the distribution of quality for firms that grow with VC
is higher (first-order stochastic dominance) than the quality of firms that grow without VC. This,



                                                                                                 32
in turn, allows us to recover a lower bound of the incidence of passive growth in the economy (and
also estimate an upper bound under certain assumptions about the distribution of payoffs). Last,
using the VC-likelihood to control for selection into VC (on observables) we are able to recover
an upper bound on the effect of VCs on proactive growers.
        We test these predictions in the context of the US venture capital industry, from 1995-
2005. The data allows us to observe all companies at founding independent of financing, and
follow three key paths to growth: passive growth, proactive growth with venture capital financing,
and proactive growth in the absence of venture capital. Consistent with the model, founding
choices are good predictors of both VC funding and equity growth, and the estimated VC-
likelihood also predicts growth within the non-VC sample, which suggests that proactive growers
share commonalities irrespective of how they fund their growth. Once VC-funded firms are
benchmarked against a more comparable set of other proactive growers that did not raise VC
(instead of the full population of firms), we are able to estimate an upper-bound to the returns to
VC, which corresponds to a 6X increase in the chances of overall growth, and a substantially
smaller 3X increase for proactive growers in the top 0.05% of the entrepreneurial quality
distribution.
        Our results also highlight that an astonishing 78% to 94% of high impact equity growth
events in the economy -- IPOs or acquisitions above $100 million -- comes from a proactive
growth process in which founders and investors make deliberate choices and investments based
on a firm's potential, with the finding being even more pronounced within innovative MSAs.
Moreover, across regions and time periods, approximately 50% of proactive growth events comes
from firms that never raise venture capital, suggesting that while this source of capital plays a
major role in accelerating a sizable fraction of proactive growers in the economy, it is not the only
path to growth for them.




                                                                                                  33
                                       REFERENCES
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt. 1992. "A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction."
    Econometrica.
Akcigit, Ufuk, and William R. Kerr. 2018. "Growth through heterogeneous innovations."
    Journal of Political Economy 126.4: 1374-1443
Balasubramanian, N, and J Sivadasan. 2008. "NBER Patent Data-BR Bridge: User Guide and
    Technical Documentation." Working Paper. ftp://tigerline.census.gov/ces/wp/2010/CES-
    WP-10-36.pdf (May 18, 2014).
Barnes, Beau Grant, Nancy L. Harp, and Derek Oler. 2014. "Evaluating the SDC Mergers and
    Acquisitions Database." Financial Review 49(4): 793­822.
Belenzon, Sharon, Aaron Chatterji, and Brendan Daley. 2017. "Eponymous Entrepreneurs."
    American Economic Review 107(6): 1638-55.
Belenzon, Sharon, Aaron Chatterji, and Brendan Daley. forthcoming. "Choosing Between Growth
    and Glory". Management Science.
Catalini, Christian, and Xiang Hui. 2017. "Online Syndicates and Startup Investment". SSRN
     Working Paper #2997710
Chemmanur, Thomas J, Karthik Krishnan, and Debarshi K Nandy. 2011. "How Does Venture
    Capital Financing Improve Efficiency in Private Firms? A Look be neath the Surface." Review
    of Financial Studies 24(12): 4037­90.
Cohen, W.M. and Klepper, S., 1992. "The anatomy of industry R&D intensity distributions." The
    American Economic Review, pp.773-799.
Cynthia Churchwell. 2016. "Q. SDC: M&A Database". Baker Library ­ Fast Answers. Url:
    http://asklib.library.hbs.edu/faq/47760. Accessed on January 17, 2017.
Davis, Steven and John Haltiwanger. 1992. "Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
    Employment Reallocation". The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 107(3): 819-863
Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2014. "The role of
    entrepreneurship in US job creation and economic dynamism." Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 28 (3): 3-24.
Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2016. "Declining business
    dynamism: What we know and the way forward." American Economic Review 106, no. 5:
    203-07.
Ericson, Richard, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. "Markov-perfect industry dynamics: A framework for
     empirical work." The Review of Economic Studies 62 (1): 53-82.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2009. "Power laws in economics and finance." Annual Review of Economics. 1
    (1):255-294.
Gans, Joshua S, David H Hsu, and Scott Stern. 2008. "The Impact of Uncertain Intellectual
    Property Rights on the Market for Ideas: Evidence from Patent Grant Delays." Management
    Science. 54 (5): 982-997.




                                                                                            34
Gibrat, Robert. 1931. Les inégalités économiques; applications: aux inégalités des richesses, à la
    concentration des entreprises, aux populations desvilles, aux statistiques des familles, etc.,
    d'une loi nouvelle, la loi de l'effet proportionnel. Paris: Librairie du Recueil Sirey.
Goldfarb, Brent, David Kirsch, and David A. Miller. 2007. "Was there too little entry during the
    Dot Com Era?." Journal of Financial Economics 86.1: 100-144.
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern. 2015. "Where Is Silicon Valley?" Science 347(6222): 606­9.
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern. 2017. "Nowcasting and Placecasting Entrepreneurial Quality and
   Performance." NBER/CRIW Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and
   Challenges conference (December): 67.
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern. 2016. "The State of American Entrepreneurship: New Estimates
   of The Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship for 32 US States, 1988-2014." NBER
   Working Paper.
Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri. 2000. "The Interaction Between Product Market and
    Financing Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital." The Review of Financial Studies 13(4):
    959­84.
Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri. 2002. "Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-
    Up Firms: Empirical Evidence." The Journal of Finance. 57 (1): 169-197.
Hsu, David H., and Rosemarie H. Ziedonis. 2013. "Resources as dual sources of advantage:
    Implications for valuing entrepreneurialfirm patents." Strategic Management Journal 34.7:
    761-781.
Hurst, Erik and Benjamin W. Pugsley. 2011. "What do small business do?" Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity. 43 (2): 73-142.
Imbens, Guido W., and Donald B. Rubin. 2015. Causal inference in statistics, social, and
    biomedical sciences. Cambridge University Press.
Iriji, Yuji and Herbert Simon. 1977. Skew Distributions and the Sizes of Business Firms. North-
       Holland Pub. Co.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1982. "Selection and the Evolution of Industry." Econometrica: Journal of
the Econometric Society: 649-670.
Kaplan, Steven N, and Josh Lerner. 2010. "It Ain't Broke: The Past, Present, and Future of Venture
    Capital." Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 22(2): 36­47.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Josh Lerner. 2017. "Venture Capital Data." Measuring Entrepreneurial
    Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges 75: 413.
Klette, Tor Jakob, and Samuel Kortum. 2004. "Innovating firms and aggregate innovation."
     Journal of Political Economy 112 (5): 986-1018.
Kerr, William, and Shihe Fu. 2008. "The Survey of Indu strial R&D--patent Database Link
     Project." The Journal of Technology Transfer 33(2): 173­86.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R.W., 1998. "Law and finance."
    Journal of Political Economy, 106(6), pp.1113-1155.




                                                                                               35
Lerner, Josh. 1994. "Venture Capitalists and the Decision to Go Public." Journal of Financial
    Economics. 35 (3): 293-316.
Lerner, Josh. 1995. "Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms." The Journal of
    Finance. 51 (1): 301-318.
Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, Stanislav Sokolinski, and Karen Wilson. 2018. "The
    globalization of angel investments: Evidence across countries. " Journal of Financial
    Economics. 127 (1): 1-20.
Lucas Jr, Robert E. 1978. "On the size distribution of business firms." The Bell Journal of
    Economics: 508-523.
Luttmer, Erzo GJ. 2007. "Selection, growth, and the size distribution of firms." The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 122.3: 1103-1144.
Puri, Manju, and Rebecca Zarutskie. 2012. "On the Life Cycle Dynamics of Venture-Capital- and
     Non-Venture-Capital-Financed Firms." The Journal of Finance 67(6): 2247­2293.
Ritter, Jay. 2016. "Initial Public Offerings: VC-backed IPO Statistics Through 2015". Working
     Paper.
Rosenbaum, Paul R., and Donald B. Rubin. 1983. "The central role of the propensity score in
    observational studies for causal effects." Biometrika 70.1 : 41-55.
Stone, Brad. 2013. The Everything Store: Jeff Bezos and the Age of Amazon. Little, Brown, and
    Company. 1st Edition. p. 384.
Sutton, John. 1997. "Gibrat's legacy." Journal of Economic Literature 35.1: 40.




                                                                                           36
                                                                              TABLE 1
                                                                           Summary Statistics
              Measure                         Source                                         Description                                       Mean    Std. Dev.
Firm Outcomes

Venture Capital                         Multiple               1 if the firm receives venture capital financing, 0 otherwise.                 0.0008     0.028
                                                               1 if the firm receives venture capital financing within 2 years of
Venture Capital (2 years)               Multiple                                                                                              0.0005     0.023
                                                               founding, 0 otherwise.
Equity Growth (IPO or                   SDC Platinum
                                                               1 if firm has an equity growth event in the first 10 years.                    0.0013     0.036
Acquisition)                            IPO and M&A.
Growth-Oriented Initial Choices

Delaware                                Business Reg.          1 if the firm's jurisdiction is Delaware                                        0.036     0.186

Trademark                               USPTO                  1 if the firm acquires for a trademark within 1 year of founding.              0.0009     0.031
                                                               1 if the firm acquires for a patent application within 1 year of
Patent                                  USPTO                                                                                                 0.0020     0.045
                                                               founding.
Other Founding Choices

Corporation                             Business Reg.          1 if a firm is a corporation (not an LLC or partnership)                        0.589     0.492
                                                               1 if the firm's name length is 3 words or less (including firm type
Short Name                              Business Reg.                                                                                          0.468     0.499
                                                               (e.g. "inc."))

Eponymous                               Business Reg.          1 if the firm's name includes the president or CEO first or last name.          0.079     0.270

                                                               If firm name is associated to an industry group (see Appendix for
Industry Dummies                        Business Reg.
                                                               details).

Observations                                                                                                                                   10,451,896
This table represents our full dataset, comprised of all registered firms registered within the years 1995 and 2005 in 34 US states. These states account for 83%
of US GDP and 95% of US venture capital investments in 2015. All measures defined in detail in Section III of this paper. Venture capital outcomes are taken
for all firms reported in Thompson Reuters VentureXpert, Prequin, Capital IQ, and AngelsList. Business registration records are public records created
endogenously when a firm registers as a corporation, LLC, or partnership. IP observables include both patents and trademarks filed by the firm within a year of
founding, as well as previously filed patents assigned to the firm close to founding. All business registration observables, IP observables, and industry measures,
are estimated at or close to the time of firm founding. Further information on all measures and our approach more generally, can be found in Guzman and Stern
(2018). Growth IPOs include only `true' startup IPOs; we exclude all financial IPOs, REITs, SPACs, reverse LBOs, re-listings, and blank check corporations.


                                                                              TABLE 2
                                                           Venture Growth with and Without Venture Capital

                                                                         Equity Growth=1          Equity Growth=0                 Fraction that Grow

                     Firms with Venture Capital                                2,280                      5,984                         28%

                     Firms without Venture Capital                            11,012                  10,432,620                       0.11%


                     Fraction of Firms with Venture Capital                  17%                    0.06%
                     Firms within our sample that achieve equity growth by distribution of Venture Capital financing. IPOs are taken from SDC
                     Capital and exclude all re-listings, reverse LBOs, SPACs, REITs, blank check companies, and financial IPOs.




                                                                                                                                                             37
                                                                 TABLE 3
                                                Predictive Analytics Model of Equity Growth
                                                    Dependent Variable: Equity Growth
                                                Training Sample (50% Random Sub-Sample)
                                                Logit model. Incidence Rate Ratios Reported
                                                                               (1)               (2)               (3)        (4)
Independent Effects
  Delaware                                                                  8.823***
                                                                             (0.270)

  Patent                                                                    20.36***
                                                                             (0.977)

  Trademark                                                                 6.793***          6.544***
                                                                             (0.670)           (0.609)
Delaware, Patent Interactions
  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0                                                                    9.848***
                                                                                               (0.302)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1                                                                    37.52***
                                                                                               (2.476)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1                                                                    146.3***
                                                                                               (7.945)
Delaware, Patent, Trademark Interactions
  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0, Trademark = 0                                                                      9.683***     8.754***
                                                                                                                (0.304)      (0.284)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1, Trademark = 0                                                                      42.83***     22.36***
                                                                                                                (2.740)      (1.522)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 0, Trademark = 1                                                                      21.34***     15.76***
                                                                                                                (2.620)      (1.963)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1, Trademark = 0                                                                      176.4***     82.76***
                                                                                                                (9.095)      (4.686)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0, Trademark = 1                                                                      118.8***     75.21***
                                                                                                                (11.72)      (7.876)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1, Trademark = 1                                                                      78.85***     42.75***
                                                                                                                (19.65)      (11.29)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1, Trademark = 1                                                                      279.4***     135.8***
                                                                                                                (41.24)      (21.99)

Other Controls                                                                  No               No                No         Yes

N                                                                            5225947            5225947           5225947   5225947
pseudo R-sq                                                                    0.158              0.159            0.162     0.203
                                Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01




                                                                                                                                       38
                                                 TABLE 4
                               Does Entrepreneurial Quality Predict VC Financing?
                                      Dependent Variable: Venture Capital
                                               50% Test Sample
                                               (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)
                                              OLS                 OLS                Logit             Logit
Entrep. Quality ( )                         0.823***
                                            (0.0246)

Ln(Entrep. Quality) ( ln())                                    0.00666***           3.268***
                                                               (0.000144)           (0.0299)
Distribution of Quality
Baseline: < 50%. (  < .0006)


 50% - 90%                                                                                           4.169***
(  [.0006 , .00018])                                                                                  (0.405)

 90% - 95%                                                                                           18.65***
(  [.0018, .0026])                                                                                    (2.057)

 95% - 99%                                                                                           62.51***
(  [.0026 , .014])                                                                                    (5.872)

 99% - 99.5%                                                                                         164.6***
(  [.014 , .022])                                                                                     (17.86)

 > 99.5%                                                                                             645.0***
(  [.022 , .45])                                                                                      (65.49)

State F.E.                                      No                Yes                 Yes               Yes
Year F.E.                                       No                Yes                 Yes               Yes
Observations                                   5225949             5225949            5225949          5225949
R-squared                                       0.036               0.014
Pseudo R-squared                                                                        0.262            0.244
Log-Likelihood                                                                        -24373.5         -24990.6
VC Likelihood is the predicted probability that a firm gets venture capital given its characteristics at founding,
predicted from (3-3). It has a mean of .0005 and a standard deviation of .0064. Standardized VC Likelihood changes
this measure to have a standard deviation of 1. The mean value of the outcome variable is 0.0004. Robust standard
errors reported. *** p < .001.




                                                                                                                     39
                                            TABLE 5
                       Predictive Analytics Model of Venture Capital Financing
                                 Dependent Variable: Venture Capital
                             Training Sample (50% Random Sub-Sample)
                             Logit model. Incidence Rate Ratios Reported
                                                   (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
Independent Effects
  Delaware                                       13.25***
                                                  (0.503)

  Patent                                         28.39***
                                                  (1.507)

  Trademark                                      2.071***      2.164***
                                                  (0.307)       (0.284)
Delaware, Patent Interactions
  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0                                     16.64***
                                                                (0.629)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1                                     80.72***
                                                                (5.432)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1                                     297.4***
                                                                (17.24)
Delaware, Patent, Trademark Interactions
  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0, Trademark = 0                                    16.52***     15.62***
                                                                              (0.633)      (0.632)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1, Trademark = 0                                    86.87***     40.01***
                                                                              (5.792)      (2.886)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 0, Trademark = 1                                    19.29***     13.15***
                                                                              (3.457)      (2.398)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1, Trademark = 0                                    342.4***     137.9***
                                                                              (19.11)      (8.595)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0, Trademark = 1                                    100.4***     54.24***
                                                                              (13.76)      (8.054)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1, Trademark = 1                                    52.27***     24.44***
                                                                              (20.52)      (10.32)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1, Trademark = 1                                    164.5***     62.38***
                                                                              (34.90)      (14.98)

Other Controls                                      No            No            No          Yes

N                                                 5225947        5225947        5225947   5225947
pseudo R-sq                                         0.248          0.252         0.256     0.332
Robust standard errors reported in parenthesis. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01




                                                                                                     40
                                                 TABLE 6

                         Does VC Likelihood Predict Equity Growth for non-VC Firms?
                                     Dependent Variable: Equity Growth
                               50% Test Sample, excluding all VC-backed firms.
                                              (1)                (2)                (3)                  (4)
                                             OLS                OLS               Logit                 Logit
VC Likelihood (  )                        0.689***
                                           (0.0262)

Log VC Likelihood ( ln( ))                                      0.00407***           2.334***
                                                                (0.000101)           (0.0201)
Distribution of VC Likelihood
Baseline: < 50%. ( < .0002 )

             50% - 90%                                                                                2.708***
         (  [.0002 , .0011])                                                                           (0.197)

             90% - 95%                                                                                10.16***
         (  [.0011 , .0015])                                                                           (0.899)

             95% - 99%                                                                                20.44***
          (  [.0015 , .012])                                                                           (1.474)

            99% - 99.5%                                                                               44.64***
          (  [.012 , .022])                                                                            (4.300)

              > 99.5%                                                                                 161.5***
           (  [.022 , .39])                                                                            (13.74)

State F.E.                                        No                  Yes                  Yes             Yes
Year F.E.                                         No                  Yes                  Yes             Yes
Observations                                   5221901              5221901             5221901         5221901
R-squared                                       0.015                0.006
Pseudo R-squared                                                                          0.124           0.113
Log-Likelihood                                                                          -38046.5        -38550.4
VC Likelihood is the predicted probability that a firm gets venture capital given its characteristics at founding,
predicted from (5-3). It has a mean of .0005 and a standard deviation of .0064. Standardized VC Likelihood changes
this measure to have a standard deviation of 1. The mean value of the outcome variable is 0.0004. Robust standard
errors reported. *** p < .001.




                                                                                                                     41
                                                               TABLE 7A
                                      Estimates of the Incidence of the Passive and Proactive Firm Growth Models
                                            Based on Founding Choices and the Receipt of Venture Capital
                                                               Number of Growth Firms
                                                                                                                   Bottom                         Bust:
                                                                                                Top 10%            25%             Boom:          2002-
                                                                               All Firms          MSAs             MSAs          1995-1999        2005
                                                        Model
                                                                                  (1)               (2)               (3)            (4)           (5)
                                                       Variable
Category
                                                     + 00
                                                             
                                                          + 10
                                                          
  All Firms                                        + 01 + 11                    13,292             1,348            1,574           6,423          4,352
                                                                                (100%)            (100%)           (100%)          (100%)         (100%)

  No Founding Choices, No VC
                                                         + 00
                                                           
                                                                                 6,934             396              1,156          3,501          2,282
                                                                                 (52%)            (29%)             (73%)          (55%)          (52%)

  Only Founding Choices
                                                          
  (Delaware, Patent, or Trademark)                        10                     4,078             453               329           1,800          1,384
                                                                                 (31%)            (34%)             (21%)          (28%)          (32%)

  Only VC                                                 
                                                          01                      667              136                23             460           125
                                                                                 (5%)             (10%)              (1%)           (7%)          (3%)

  Both Founding Choices and VC                            
                                                          11                     1,613             363                66            662            561
                                                                                 (12%)            (27%)              (4%)          (10%)          (13%)
   Share of Proactive Growers
   Lower Bound                                                                        0.48               0.71              0.27        0.45          0.48
   Upper Bound                                                                        0.61               0.83              0.34        0.65          0.55
 Represents all firm growth events (IPO or acquisition within 10 years of founding) across multiple different regimes of fundi ng and early governance
and IP choices. Founding choices are those firms that make choices at founding that are indicative of high growth intention. We define these choices are
taking either a Delaware registration, or registering intellectual property near founding, either as a patent or a trademark. Top 10% MSAs are the 10% of
MSAs with highest average VC likelihood. Bottom 25% MSAs are the bottom 25% by average VC likelihood. For all cases, we create 50 bootstrap
samples of our complete dataset, and estimate the mean value for each column. Reported standard errors (in parenthesis) are taken as the standard
deviation of this sample. In Panel B, the difference is the value of the column minus the value of the row.




                                                                                                                                             42
                                                               TABLE 7B
                                      Estimates of the Incidence of the Passive and Proactive Firm Growth Models
                                For High Value Growth Outcome (IPO or Acquisition with Equity Value > $100 Million)
                                            Based on Founding Choices and the Receipt of Venture Capital
                                                                Number of Growth Firms
                                                                                                                 Bottom                           Bust:
                                                                                                Top 10%          25%               Boom:          2002-
                                                                               All Firms          MSAs           MSAs            1995-1999        2005
                                                        Model
                                                                                   (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)           (5)
                                                       Variable
Category
                                                     + 00
                                                             
                                                          + 10
                                                          
  All Firms                                        + 01 + 11                     1962               260              166            1139            513
                                                                                (100%)            (100%)           (100%)          (100%)         (100%)

  No Founding Choices, No VC
                                                         + 00
                                                           
                                                                                  439               25                73            273            119
                                                                                 (22%)            (10%)             (44%)          (24%)          (23%)

  Only Founding Choices
                                                          
  (Delaware, Patent, or Trademark)                        10                      1002             132                68            538            281
                                                                                 (51%)            (50%)             (41%)          (47%)          (54%)

  Only VC                                                 
                                                          01                      126               23                 5             103           16
                                                                                 (6%)              (9%)              (3%)           (9%)          (3%)

  Both Founding Choices and VC                            
                                                          11                      395               82                21            230            104
                                                                                 (20%)            (31%)             (13%)          (20%)          (20%)
   Share of Proactive Growers
   Lower Bound                                                                        0.78               0.90              0.56        0.76          0.77
   Upper Bound                                                                        0.94               1.05              0.66        0.97          0.85
 Represents all firm growth events (IPO or acquisition within 10 years of founding) across multiple different regimes of fundi ng and early governance
and IP choices. Founding choices are those firms that make choices at founding that are indicative of high growth intention. We define these choices are
taking either a Delaware registration, or registering intellectual property near founding, either as a patent or a trademark. Top 10% MSAs are the 10% of
MSAs with highest average VC likelihood. Bottom 25% MSAs are the bottom 25% by average VC likelihood. For all cases, we create 50 bootstrap
samples of our complete dataset, and estimate the mean value for each column. Reported standard errors (in parenthesis) are taken as the standard
deviation of this sample. In Panel B, the difference is the value of the column minus the value of the row.




                                                                                                                                             43
                                                            TABLE 8
                                   PANEL A. Predictive Analytics Model of Growth: Other Outcomes
                                           Training Sample (50% Random Sub-Sample)
                                           Logit model. Incidence Rate Ratios Reported
                                                                                  (1)                        (2)                       (3)
Dependent Variable                                                         Employment > 500           Employment > 1000          Sales > $100M
  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0, Trademark = 0                                      12.18***                   13.83***                  6.719***
                                                                                (0.948)                    (1.791)                   (0.378)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1, Trademark = 0                                        51.61***                   114.8***               17.63***
                                                                                  (7.979)                    (22.04)                (2.607)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 0, Trademark = 1                                        46.35***                   12.24***               18.32***
                                                                                  (10.11)                    (8.708)                (3.722)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1, Trademark = 0                                        174.4***                   173.5***               61.40***
                                                                                  (22.75)                    (39.45)                (7.144)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0, Trademark = 1                                        164.6***                   146.7***               71.73***
                                                                                  (33.38)                    (53.73)                (12.84)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1, Trademark = 1                                        218.4***                   384.0***               135.4***
                                                                                  (85.33)                    (198.1)                (39.64)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1, Trademark = 1                                        415.2***                   621.7***               89.44***
                                                                                  (110.2)                    (232.9)                (28.25)

Other Controls                                                                     No                         No                     No
N                                                                                5106501                    5024117                5115879
pseudo R-sq                                                                       0.115                      0.118                  0.067


                               PANEL B. Estimates of the Incidence of the Passive and Proactive Firm Growth Models
                                         Based on Founding Choices and the Receipt of Venture Capital
                                                            Number of Growth Firms
                                                      GROWTH = EMPLOYMENT > 500


                                                                              Top 10%           Bottom 25%             Boom:         Bust:
                                                               All Firms        MSAs                MSAs             1995-1999     2002-2005
                                       Model Variable              (1)           (2)                 (3)                (4)           (5)
Category
  All Firms                              + 00
                                                 
                                              + 10               2311             78                 422                1070           838
                                                                (100%)          (100%)             (100%)              (100%)        (100%)
                                       + 01 + 11

  No Founding Choices, No VC                  + 00
                                                
                                                                 1295              18                287                598           490
                                                                (56%)            (23%)              (68%)              (56%)         (58%)
  Only Founding Choices
                                             
  (Delaware, Patent, or Trademark)           10                  960               50                129                443           335
                                                                (42%)            (64%)              (31%)              (41%)         (40%)

  Only VC                                    
                                             01                   17               2                  2                 13              4
                                                                 (1%)            (0%)               (0%)               (1%)           (0%)

                                             
  Both Founding Choices and VC               11                   39               8                  4                 16              9
                                                                 (2%)            (10%)              (1%)               (1%)           (1%)
  Share of Proactive Growers
  Lower Bound                                                    0.44             0.77               0.32               0.44          0.42
  Upper Bound                                                    0.62             0.93               0.47               0.78          0.59




                                                                                                                                    44
                                                                        TABLE 9
                                    Venture Capital and Growth Outcomes Controlling for Observables and VC Likelihood
                                                            Dependent Variable: Equity Growth
                                                                                                                                        Exactly Matched
                                                                          All Firms                                                       Sub-sample
                                               (1)              (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)                                  (6)
Venture Capital (2 Years)                   451.5***         35.78***      34.56***     32.99**        31.69***                            10.61***
                                             (47.06)          (4.687)       (4.449)        *
                                                                                        (4.242)         (2.363)                             (1.103)
Independent Effects
  Delaware                                                   7.364***
                                                              (0.722)

  Patent                                                     11.06***
                                                              (0.994)

  Trademark                                                  7.131***      7.144***
                                                              (0.768)       (0.739)
   Delaware, Patent Interactions
  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0                                                 8.182***
                                                                            (0.801)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1                                                 22.68***
                                                                            (2.081)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1                                                 62.54***
                                                                            (7.804)
Delaware, Patent, Trademark
Interactions
   Delaware = 1, Patent = 0,                                                            8.322**
Trademark = 0                                                                              *
                                                                                        (0.838)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1,                                                             26.09**
Trademark = 0                                                                              *
                                                                                        (2.443)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 0,                                                             21.11**
Trademark = 1                                                                              *
                                                                                        (3.550)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1,                                                             71.66**
Trademark = 0                                                                              *
                                                                                        (9.256)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0,                                                             64.38**
Trademark = 1                                                                              *
                                                                                        (9.743)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1,                                                             43.89**
Trademark = 1                                                                              *
                                                                                        (13.01)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1,                                                             257.1**
Trademark = 1                                                                              *
                                                                                        (43.69)

Entrepreneurial Quality Controls
  Log-Odds of VC Likelihood                                                                            2.476***
                                                                                                       (0.0255)

State F. E.                                       No            Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes                                  Yes
Year F.E.                                         No            Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes                                  Yes
N                                              5225949        5225949       5225949      5225949         5225949                               5248
pseudo R-sq                                     0.085          0.189          0.190        0.191           0.191                               0.175
We estimate the relationship between entrepreneurial quality indicators and firm equity growth. All regressions are run on a 50% test sample drawn separately
from the 50% training sample used to VC-Likelihood in (5-3).




                                                                                                                                                     45
46
                                                                 TABLE 10
                                                 VC Financing and Equity Growth Outcomes
                                                Dependent Variable: Equity Growth Outcome.
                                       Logit Regression, Matched Firms. Incidence-Rate Ratios Reported.
                                              Baseline Model                            Extra Controls                         Preferred Model
                                                    (1)                        (2)             (3)                 (4)                (5)
  Venture Capital (2 Years)                      10.61***                 11.16***           11.35***          10.85***             6.86**
                                                  (1.103)                  (1.198)            (1.212)            (1.131)             (0.77)
  Year F. E.                                        Yes                                         Yes                Yes                Yes
  State F. E.                                       Yes                                                                               Yes
  State X Year F. E.                                                           Yes
  MSA F. E.                                                                                    Yes                Yes
  Control for Average Neighbor Quality                                                                            Yes
  Other Controls                                                                                                                      Yes
  N                                                5248                4922                    4848               5248               5248
  Pseudo R-sq                                      0.175               0.184                   0.189             0.182               0.204

  Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Matching approach uses exact quality values to match firms. All regressions run only on the 50% test
  sample not included in training the entrepreneurial quality model in Table 3. Some observations dropped when including State X Year Fixed
  Effects, MSA Fixed Effects, and average neighbor quality. Control for neighbor quality is natural log of the average quality of the ZIP Code
  excluding the focal firm. Matching algorithm matches each company that gets VC finance to another company with the same quality, born in
  the same year and ZIP Code. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < .01




                                                                 TABLE 11
                                                  VC Financing and Equity Growth Outcomes.
                                                       Dependent Variable: Equity Growth.
                                       Logit Regression, Matched Sample. Incidence-Rate Ratios Reported.
                                                           Place Heterogeneity                             Time Heterogeneity
                                                                                              .com Boom          .com Crash             Recovery
                                                  Silicon        Startup     Non Startup         Born:              Born:                Born:
                                 All Firms        Valley          Hubs           Hubs       1995-Sept, 1999 Sept, 1999-2001            2001-2005
                                     (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)                (6)                   (7)
Venture Capital (2 Years)          6.862***         5.812***      6.521***       8.117***            11.42***             5.203***        5.679***
                                    (0.774)          (0.980)       (0.891)        (1.632)             (2.501)              (0.905)         (1.145)
State F.E.                            Yes                                                               Yes                  Yes             Yes
Year F.E.                             Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes
N                                    5248             1856          3120           2128                1372                 2220            1435
Pseudo R-sq                          0.204            0.194         0.198          0.193               0.241                0.167           0.193
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. State fixed effects excluded from regressions that vary location, year fixed effects excluded from
regressions that vary time, to allow differences in each dimension to show in the coefficient Matching algorithm matches each company that gets
VC finance to another company with the same quality, born in the same year and ZIP Code. A company is in a Startup Hub if it is in the CBSAs
of Boston-Cambridge-Quincy, MA-NH, New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island, NY-NJ-PA, San Francisco-Oakland-Fremont, CA, San
Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA, Austin-Round Rock, TX, or Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < .001




                                                                                                                                              47
                                                           TABLE 12
                                            VC Financing and Equity Growth Outcomes
                                           Dependent Variable: Equity Growth Outcome.
                                  Logit Regression, Matched Firms. Incidence-Rate Ratios Reported.
                                   All Firms                                         Within the Quality Distribution
                                                                      Top 5%           Top 1%           Top 0.1%         Top 0.05%
                                      (1)                               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)
Venture Capital (2 Years)          6.862***                          5.987***         4.868***          3.818***          3.527***
                                    (0.774)                           (0.702)          (0.619)           (0.578)           (0.623)
N                                    5248                              3849             2648              1269               850
Pseudo R-sq                           0.204                               0.196             0.161              0.131            0.112
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. State fixed effects and year fixed effects included in all regressions. Matching algorithm
matches each company that gets VC finance to another company with the same quality, born in the same year and ZIP Code. In about
20% of the sample, we do not find a match in the same ZIP Code and use a match in the same MSA instead. Incidence rate ratios
reported. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p < .01




                                                                                                                                        48
                                                                   FIGURE 1




Notes: Figure 1 reports the out of sample incidence of venture capital events in the predicted quality distribution. Predicted quality is the predicted
probability of equity growth, according to model (3-3). We estimate this model 10 times for 10 60% random samples of our data, then document
the location of the VC events across the quality distribution in the remaining 40% of our data. The height of the bar is the mean estimated incidence
of VC events, while the range displayed are the maximum and minimum of this estimate.




                                                                                                                                                   49
                                                                  FIGURE 2




Notes: Figure 2 reports the out of sample incidence of equity growth events in the predicted venture capital distribution, for firms that never raise
venture capital. Predicted venture capital is the predicted probability of raising VC, according to model (5-3). We estimate this model 10 times for
ten 60% random samples of our data, then document the location of the growth events across the VC distribution in the remaining 40% of our data,
after excluding VC funded events in this test sample. The height of the bar is the mean estimated incidence of growth, while the range displayed
are the maximum and minimum of this estimate.




                                                                                                                                                 50
FIGURE 3




           51
FIGURE 4




           52
                                         MODEL PROOFS

Lemma 1 (Startup Choices Inform Entrepreneurial Quality) There exists a function ()  

such that given a function  (), representing the information on a variable on ,
                                 () > 
                                       (),  = () ,  =  []                                       (A1)
Proof. Consider first the maximization function of the startup to choose , when there is only one
choice ( = {1}). The startup chooses 1 = 1 if (1 , [|1 , ,  ]) > 1 1 . Some firms
choose 1 = 1 and others do not (by the model's assumption). The question is if
                               [|1 = 1] > [|1 = 0]                                          (A2)
If this is true, then we know 1 has information on . We proceed in two steps. We first assume
that the probability of VC is a constant value  for all firms. In this case, the firm simply solves
                                                                                        1
1 = 1{(1 ,  ) > 1 1 } and it is easy to see that there is a threshold value of (1,          )
                                                                                              above
                                                                                             
which it chooses 1. In this case, the presence of 1 indicates being above a certain threshold, and,
therefore, (A2) is true. Though this threshold is randomly allocated (due to a random 1 ) but it
nonetheless still separates any firm by quality at some value. Now, we can instead consider what
happens when  depends on the quality of the firm  (, ) = [|, ,  ]. Note that 
increases with quality. The net effect of this is that the threshold is lowered for firms of high
quality, which makes them even more likely to take  . That is, for high quality, the potential noise
effect of  is muted when VC comes into the picture, making the use of  as a signal for quality
even cleaner. Finally, to consider these for many choices, remember that  is positively increasing
in  for all . Therefore, if the above relationship holds with one  ( = 1), it would hold with
many.

Proposition 1 (Estimated Quality Positively Predicts Venture Capital)
                               (     = 1|)
                                             >0                                       (A3)
                                    

Proof. This is straightforward from the VC's maximization choice. The probability that a VC
invest given a true  is ( = 1|) = ((, ) > (1 +  )). Since  is random and
independent of , then it is straightforward that inequality is more likely to be true at higher values
          ( = 1|)
of , i.e.             > 0. The next question is how this relates to   . For (A3) to be true we need
              
 to be informative of . This is already established in Lemma 1, and, therefore, is it. 


Lemma 2 (Startup Choices Inform Venture Capital) Define  = ( = 1), and  () as the
information of some variable on . Then, there exists a function ()   such that

                        () > 
                                            
                              (),  = (),  =  []                                       (A4)
Proof. The logic begins in a similar way to Lemma 1. Consider first the maximization function of
the VC to choose  with a single choice 1  {0,1} that has already been made. The VC chooses
 = 1{(,  ) > (1 +  )}.
The question that we would like to know is if
                               [| = 1] > [| = 0]                                        (A5)


                                                                                                       53
If this is true, then we know  has information on  . As in Lemma 1, for any firm, there is a
threshold value  above which investment profitable. This threshold is lowered when the quality
of the firm is higher which, in turn, means that firms with higher quality are more likely to raise
VC. Since  is informative of quality, it is therefore also informative of  .



Proposition 2 (VC Likelihood Predicts Growth in Firms Without VC)
                                    ( = 1| ,  = 0)
                                             
                                                      >0                                         (A6)
                                           
Proof. Similar to Proposition 1. Since performance is  = (, ), and growth is  =
1{ >   }. We can write the function of (A6) as ((, ) >   ) = ( = 1|). Since
 = ([(, 1) - (, 0)] > (1 +  )) (from (5)), then it is easy to see that  increases when
either quality or governance increases. Because these are also the main components of
performance then firms with higher  (i.e. better quality or governance) are also more likely to
grow.
                            ( = 1| )
                                         >0                                            (A7)
                                 
Whether this also holds for the non-VC subsample ( = 0) requires one more condition. If all
                                                         
non-VC growth is through  (i.e. 00           = 0 and 10    = 0) then it would not hold, but this scenario
is trivial. Instead, if either of these is positive, then (A7) is true even in the non-VC sample. Finally,
to consider if this holds with the empirical VC Likelihood, we simply need  to be informative,
but this is already established in Lemma 2. 

Proposition 3 (Quality of growth with VC is higher (first order stochastically dominates) than
quality of growth with VC)
                      ( > | = 1,  = 1) > ( > | = 1,  = 0)  
Proof. The condition for this to be true is that, conditional on growth, the probability of  = 1 is
                          ( = 1| = 1,  )                                      ( = 1| )
increasing in . That is,                       >   0. We  already  know  that             > 0, since
                                                                                  
this follows directly from the VC choice equation (eq. (4)). But we would like to know if this
                                                        
                            ( = 1|(, ) >  ,  )
changes when we consider                                      > 0. This can only happen if (, )
                                           
has a higher value for lower quality firms, which would require a heterogeneous (, ) that is
unrealistic and not an assumption of our model. 

Proposition 4 (Upper Bound Estimates for  )
                                                              
                                            < 1  00 < 10 11 / 01                                 (A8)
                             
                                                                   
                           ( 00
                              )           (1-(  ))         (1-(      ))
                            10                                  (0,1)
Proof. Recall that  =       
                                    =(               )/(                  ) and that  is distributed
                                                                   
                           ( 01 )        (1-(       ))     (1-(      ))
                             11               (1,0)             (1,1)

logistic and that it being considered under a growth threshold model where the value inside the
                                                            
function is the threshold. Also, assume that the value of  (1,1) (and consequently all others) is to
                                                                                    
the right of the mean (i.e. they are all relatively rare events). Define  =   (,) as the threshold



                                                                                                        54
value of  . Because governance and VC are independent by assumption, the setup of the model
naturally implies that the value-add of VC is constant for both regimes on performance
                                                  
                                          00     01         
                                            =  = 1/
                                          10     11
Yet, this is not the case in probability space. Namely, for any constant  > 1,
                            () ()
                                  >          ,   >  and  < ()
                             ()        ()

Translating this to the right-tail of the distribution and inverting the terms, it means that
                        1 - ()          1 - ()
                                    <               ,   <  and  > ()
                       1 - () 1 - ()
               
And since 01 < 00 this implies  < 1.

Proposition 5 (Upper Bound Estimates of Returns to VC)
                                           [ | ]  [|]
                                          
Proof. This is easiest to see as an omitted variable. Consider  = 1  + 2  , where both  and 
are correlated with  , and assume
                                 =  +  +  +                                            (A9)
is correctly specified. If we instead estimate  =  +  +   +  then [ ] =  + 2  which
is higher. 




                                                                                                55
                                                     ONLINE APPENDIX



                                                           TABLE A1
                                              Summary Statistics of industry measures
                               Source                                    Description
       Measure                                                                                             Mean      Std. Dev.
USCMP Name Based Industry Measures
Local Industry                  Business Reg.         If firm name is associated to a local industry.      0.194       0.396
Traded Industry                 Business Reg.         If firm name is associated to a traded industry.     0.535       0.499
                                                      If firm name is associated to a resource intensive
Resource Intensive Industry     Business Reg.                                                              0.130       0.337
                                                      industry.
                                                      If firm name is associated to the IT industry
IT                              Business Reg.                                                              0.025       0.156
                                                      cluster.
                                                      If firm name is associated to the Biotechnology
Biotechnology                   Business Reg.                                                              0.002       0.044
                                                      industry cluster.
                                                      If firm name is associated to the E-Commerce
E-Commerce                      Business Reg.                                                              0.052       0.222
                                                      industry cluster.
                                                      If firm name is associated to the Medical
Medical Devices                 Business Reg.                                                              0.030       0.172
                                                      Devices industry cluster.
                                                      If firm name is associated to the Semiconductor
Semiconductor                   Business Reg.                                                              0.0005      0.023
                                                      industry cluster.
Observations                                                                                                   10,451,896
This table represents our full dataset, comprised of all registered firms registered within the years 1995 and 2005 in 34 US
states. These states account for 83% of US GDP and 95% of US venture capital investments in 2015. All measures defined
in detail in Section III of this paper. Venture capital outcomes are taken for all firms reported in Thompson Reuters
VentureXpert, Prequin, Capital IQ, and AngelsList. Business registration records are public records created endogenously
when a firm registers as a corporation, LLC, or partnership. IP observables include both patents and trademarks filed by the
firm within a year of founding, as well as previously filed patents assigned to the firm close to founding. All business
registration observables, IP observables, and industry measures are estimated at or close to the time of firm founding. Further
information on all measures can also be found in Guzman and Stern (2015), Guzman and Stern (2016), and Guzman and
Stern (2017). Growth IPOs include only `true' startup IPOs, we exclude all financial IPOs, REITs, SPACs, reverse LBOs,
re-listings, and blank check corporations.




                                                                                                                           56
                                                            TABLE A2

                    Comparison of Means Between Growth, No Growth, VC Backed and Non VC Backed firms.
                     No Equity     Equity                                                No Equity               Equity
                      Growth       Growth      All                                         Growth                Growth    All

Corporation                                                                 Eponymous

  No VC Financing      0.589         0.788       0.589                        No VC Financing            0.079   0.017    0.079

  VC Financing         0.901         0.954       0.909                        VC Financing               0.009   0.005    0.009

  All                  0.589         0.824                                    All                        0.079   0.015



Delaware                                                                    Patent

  No VC Financing      0.035         0.478       0.036                        No VC Financing            0.002   0.163    0.002

  VC Financing         0.518         0.629       0.533                        VC Financing               0.207   0.341    0.225

  All                  0.036         0.510                                    All                        0.002   0.201



Short Name                                                                  Trademark

  No VC Financing      0.468         0.742       0.468                        No VC Financing            0.001   0.065    0.001

  VC Financing         0.886         0.920       0.890                        VC Financing               0.034   0.046    0.036

  All                  0.468         0.780                                    All                        0.001   0.061

                                                            TABLE A3

                                          Share of firm in IPO and Acquisition Samples
                                                    that Raise Venture Capital
                                                                           IPO         Acquisition
                               Firms with VC Financing                     288            1,091
                               (Share)                                    (33%)          (20%)
                               Firms without VC Financing                  590            4,390
                                (Share)                                   (67%)           (80%)
                               Our estimates are based on firms founded between 1995 and 2005 in
                               our sample of states that eventually IPO. Reitter (2015) estimates that
                               the average VC incidence for firms that IPO between 1990 and 2015
                               as 37%. Kaplan and Lerner (2010) show this highly fluctuates through
                               time.




                                                                                                                    57
                                  TABLE A4
     Full Specification Including Other Controls for VC and Quality Models
                                                     (1)               (2)
Dependent Variable                            Equity Growth      Venture Capital
Delaware, Patent, Trademark Interactions
  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0, Trademark = 0         8.754***          15.62***
                                                   (0.284)           (0.632)

     Delaware = 0, Patent = 1, Trademark = 0    22.36***            40.01***
                                                 (1.522)             (2.886)

     Delaware = 0, Patent = 0, Trademark = 1    15.76***            13.15***
                                                 (1.963)             (2.398)

     Delaware = 1, Patent = 1, Trademark = 0    82.76***            137.9***
                                                 (4.686)             (8.595)

     Delaware = 1, Patent = 0, Trademark = 1    75.21***            54.24***
                                                 (7.876)             (8.054)

     Delaware = 0, Patent = 1, Trademark = 1    42.75***            24.44***
                                                 (11.29)             (10.32)

     Delaware = 1, Patent = 1, Trademark = 1    135.8***            62.38***
                                                 (21.99)             (14.98)
Other Controls
Corporation                                     2.151***            5.493***
                                                (0.0705)             (0.304)

Short Name                                      3.158***            5.966***
                                                (0.0983)             (0.310)

Eponymous                                       0.292***            0.158***
                                                (0.0251)            (0.0263)
Industry Controls
Local                                           0.415***            0.324***
                                                (0.0265)            (0.0350)

Traded                                           1.091**            0.764***
                                                 (0.0317)           (0.0286)

Resource Intensive                                0.966             0.655***
                                                 (0.0383)           (0.0415)

IT                                              2.274***            3.219***
                                                 (0.113)             (0.189)

Biotechnology                                   2.628***            2.509***
                                                 (0.272)             (0.313)

e-commerce                                      1.569***            1.642***
                                                (0.0718)             (0.105)

Medical Devices                                 1.329***            1.225**
                                                (0.0738)            (0.0831)

Semiconductor                                    1.725**            2.397***
                                                 (0.306)             (0.433)

N                                                5225947            5225947
pseudo R-sq                                       0.203              0.332




                                                                                   58
                                                TABLE A5
                               Does Entrepreneurial Quality Predict VC Financing?
                                     Regressions Including Other Controls
                                      Dependent Variable: Venture Capital
                                               50% Test Sample
                                               (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)
                                              OLS                 OLS                Logit             Logit
Entrep. Quality ( )                         0.813***
                                            (0.0246)

Ln(Entrep. Quality) ( ln())                                    0.00658***           2.769***
                                                               (0.000143)           (0.0267)
Distribution of Quality
Baseline: < 50%. (  < .0006)


 50% - 90%                                                                                           3.437***
(  [.0006 , .00018])                                                                                  (0.326)

 90% - 95%                                                                                           13.79***
(  [.0018, .0026])                                                                                    (1.533)

 95% - 99%                                                                                           49.84***
(  [.0026 , .014])                                                                                    (4.877)

 99% - 99.5%                                                                                         108.8***
(  [.014 , .022])                                                                                     (11.83)

 > 99.5%                                                                                             301.3***
(  [.022 , .45])                                                                                      (30.92)

State F.E.                                       No                  Yes                 Yes              Yes
State F.E.                                       No                  Yes                 Yes              Yes
Other Controls                                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes              Yes
Observations                                   5225949             5225949            5225949          5225949
R-squared                                       0.037               0.015
Pseudo R-squared                                                                        0.330            0.325
Log-Likelihood                                                                        -24373.5         -22135.9
VC Likelihood is the predicted probability that a firm gets venture capital given its characteristics at founding,
predicted from (3-3). It has a mean of .0005 and a standard deviation of .0064. Standardized VC Likelihood changes
this measure to have a standard deviation of 1. The mean value of the outcome variable is 0.0004. Robust standard
errors reported. *** p < .001.




                                                                                                                     59
                                                TABLE A6
                         Does VC Likelihood Predict Equity Growth for non-VC Firms?
                                    Regressions Including Other Controls
                                     Dependent Variable: Equity Growth
                               50% Test Sample, excluding all VC-backed firms.
                                              (1)                (2)                (3)                  (4)
                                             OLS                OLS               Logit                 Logit
VC Likelihood (  )                        0.680***
                                           (0.0262)

Log VC Likelihood ( ln( ))                                      0.00400***           2.127***
                                                                (0.000101)           (0.0190)
Distribution of VC Likelihood
Baseline: < 50%. ( < .0002 )

             50% - 90%                                                                                2.460***
         (  [.0002 , .0011])                                                                           (0.174)

             90% - 95%                                                                                8.382***
         (  [.0011 , .0015])                                                                           (0.735)

             95% - 99%                                                                                16.07***
          (  [.0015 , .012])                                                                           (1.164)

            99% - 99.5%                                                                               33.98***
          (  [.012 , .022])                                                                            (3.222)

              > 99.5%                                                                                 95.65***
           (  [.022 , .39])                                                                            (8.034)

State F.E.                                        No                  Yes                  Yes             Yes
Year F.E.                                         No                  Yes                  Yes             Yes
Other Controls                                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes              Yes
Observations                                   5221901              5221901             5221901         5221901
R-squared                                       0.016                0.007
Pseudo R-squared                                                                          0.159           0.151
Log-Likelihood                                                                          -38046.5        -36544.2
VC Likelihood is the predicted probability that a firm gets venture capital given its characteristics at founding,
predicted from (5-3). It has a mean of .0005 and a standard deviation of .0064. Standardized VC Likelihood changes
this measure to have a standard deviation of 1. The mean value of the outcome variable is 0.0004. Robust standard
errors reported. *** p < .001.




                                                                                                                     60
                                                                        TABLE A7
                                    Venture Capital and Growth Outcomes Controlling for Observables and VC Likelihood
                                                                Including Other Controls
                                                            Dependent Variable: Equity Growth
                                                                                                                                        Exactly Matched
                                                                          All Firms                                                       Sub-sample
                                               (1)              (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)                                  (6)
Venture Capital (2 Years)                   580.8***         13.65***      14.08***     12.81**        10.53***                             6.86**
                                             (90.80)          (3.234)       (2.956)        *
                                                                                        (2.733)         (1.412)                              (0.77)
Independent Effects
  Delaware                                                   19.39***
                                                              (3.348)

  Patent                                                     16.15***
                                                              (2.657)
                                                                           5.781***
  Trademark                                                  5.735***       (0.950)
                                                              (0.998)
   Delaware, Patent Interactions                                           26.20***
  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0                                                  (3.565)

                                                                           75.61***
  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1                                                  (12.64)

                                                                           289.2***
  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1                                                  (58.93)

Delaware, Patent, Trademark
Interactions
   Delaware = 1, Patent = 0,                                                            26.85**
Trademark = 0                                                                              *
                                                                                        (3.802)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1,                                                             84.04**
Trademark = 0                                                                              *
                                                                                        (14.26)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 0,                                                             43.85**
Trademark = 1                                                                              *
                                                                                        (15.94)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1,                                                             347.5**
Trademark = 0                                                                              *
                                                                                        (74.44)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 0,                                                             225.4**
Trademark = 1                                                                              *
                                                                                        (55.04)

  Delaware = 0, Patent = 1,                                                             321.8**
Trademark = 1                                                                              *
                                                                                        (131.7)

  Delaware = 1, Patent = 1,                                                             1072.4*
Trademark = 1                                                                             **
                                                                                        (290.7)

Entrepreneurial Quality Controls
  Log-Odds of VC Likelihood                                                                            3.357***
                                                                                                       (0.0769)

State F. E.                                       No            Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes                                  Yes
Year F.E.                                         No            Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes                                  Yes
Other Controls                                    Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes                                  Yes
N                                              5225949        5225949       5225949      5225949         5225949                               5250
pseudo R-sq                                     0.118          0.303          0.309        0.311           0.307                               0.204
We estimate the relationship between entrepreneurial quality indicators and firm equity growth. All regressions are run on a 50% test sample drawn separately
from the 50% training sample used to VC-Likelihood in (5-3).




                                                                                                                                                     61
