                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             SHOULD ELECTRIC VEHICLE DRIVERS PAY A MILEAGE TAX?

                                         Lucas W. Davis
                                         James M. Sallee

                                       Working Paper 26072
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26072


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




This paper was presented at the NBER Environmental and Energy Policy and the Economy
conference held May 16th, 2019 in Washington DC. We are grateful to Matthew Kotchen, James
Stock, and Catherine Wolfram for helpful comments. The authors do not have any financial
relationships that relate to this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Lucas W. Davis and James M. Sallee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Should Electric Vehicle Drivers Pay a Mileage Tax?
Lucas W. Davis and James M. Sallee
NBER Working Paper No. 26072
July 2019
JEL No. D12,L62,Q41,Q54,Q55

                                          ABSTRACT

In many countries the revenue from gasoline taxes is used to fund highways and other
transportation infrastructure. As the number of electric vehicles on the road increases, this raises
questions about the effectiveness and equity of this financing mechanism. In this paper, we ask
whether electric vehicle drivers should pay a mileage tax. Though the gasoline tax has been
traditionally viewed as a benefits tax, we take instead the perspective of economic efficiency. We
derive a condition for the optimal electric vehicle mileage tax that highlights a key trade-off. On
the one hand, there are externalities from driving including traffic congestion and accidents that
imply a mileage tax is efficient. On the other hand, gasoline tends to be underpriced, so a low (or
even negative) mileage tax might be justified to encourage substitution away from gasoline-
powered vehicles. We then turn to an empirical analysis aimed at better understanding the current
policy landscape for electric vehicles in the United States. Using newly available nationally-
representative microdata we calculate that electric vehicles have reduced gasoline tax revenues by
$250 million annually. We show that the foregone tax revenue is highly concentrated in a handful
of states and is highly regressive, as most electric vehicles are driven by high-income households,
and we discuss how this motivates and informs optimal policy.


Lucas W. Davis
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu

James M. Sallee
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of California, Berkeley
207 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, California 94720-3310
and NBER
sallee@berkeley.edu
1     Introduction

In many countries the revenue from gasoline taxes is used to fund highways and other
transportation infrastructure. In the United States, for example, the federal gasoline
tax of 18 cents per gallon goes to the U.S. Highway Trust Fund and is used to pay for
interstate highways, large infrastructure projects, and public transportation. Most
U.S. states have a similar direct link between their gasoline tax and spending on
transportation infrastructure.

Electric vehicle drivers do not pay the gasoline tax. Thus, as the number of electric
vehicles on the road increases, this raises questions about the effectiveness and
equity of this financing mechanism. Several states have considered implementing a
mileage tax on electric vehicle drivers to make up for the lost revenue. However,
there has been little economic analysis, either evaluating the economic efficiency of
potential policy responses, or quantifying the revenue shortfall.

In the first half of the paper, we ask whether electric vehicles should pay a mileage
tax. Though the gasoline tax has been traditionally viewed as a benefits tax, we
take the perspective of economic efficiency. We write down a model of driving that
incorporates externalities from gasoline-powered and electric vehicles, pre-existing
markups in energy prices, and other features. We then use the model to derive a
condition for the optimal electric vehicle mileage tax.

This exercise highlights a key trade-off. On the one hand, there are externalities
from driving including traffic congestion and accidents that make it efficient to
have a positive mileage tax on electric vehicles. On the other hand, gasoline tends
to be underpriced, so a low (or even negative) mileage tax might be justified to
encourage substitution away from gasoline-powered vehicles. We present relevant
estimates from the empirical literature to shed light on the relative magnitudes of
these two effects.



                                          1
Then in the second half of the paper, we turn to an empirical analysis aimed at
better understanding the current policy landscape for electric vehicles in the United
States. Using newly available nationally-representative microdata we calculate that
electric vehicles have reduced gasoline tax revenue in the United States by about
$250 million annually. We show how much of this is federal versus state and local
gasoline tax revenue, and we perform sensitivity analysis to show how this estimate
changes with alternative assumptions.

We find that the foregone gasoline tax revenue is highly concentrated in a small
number of states. In California alone, for example, we calculate $90 million in
foregone gasoline tax revenue. This concentration reflects the uneven geographic
distribution of electric vehicles across states, as well as the fact that states with
more electric vehicles tend to have higher-than-average gasoline taxes (correlation
0.46, p -value <.01).

With our microdata, we are also able to examine distributional impacts. We show
that electric vehicles are disproportionately driven by high-income households, with
more than two-thirds of all foregone gasoline tax revenue coming from households
with $100,000+ in annual income. This pattern is consistent with previous re-
search showing that electric vehicles are highly concentrated among high-income
households (Borenstein and Davis, 2015).

Our analysis has implications for the U.S. Highway Trust Fund (HTF) which in
recent years has faced chronic revenue shortfalls (Langer et al., 2017). Since 2008,
the U.S. Treasury has transferred $140 billion in general funds to the HTF in order
to keep it solvent (Congressional Budget Office, 2016). Increased electric vehicle
adoption threatens to further erode the financial viability of the HTF, so under-
standing and quantifying the impact of electric vehicles on U.S. federal gasoline tax
revenue is a policy priority.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 considers the normative question of


                                         2
whether electric vehicles should pay a mileage tax. We talk about the history
of the gasoline tax as a benefits tax, discuss first-best policy, and derive a condition
describing the optimal electric vehicle mileage tax. Section 3 introduces the data
and presents descriptive statistics about the U.S. electric vehicle sector. Section 4
then calculates the foregone gasoline tax revenue from U.S. electric vehicles, as well
as distributional impacts. Section 5 concludes.




2     Economic Efficiency

In this section we take a normative perspective and ask whether electric vehicles
should pay a mileage tax. From an economic perspective, is it efficient that elec-
tric vehicles avoid paying a gasoline tax? Would a mileage tax on electric vehicles
increase economic efficiency? Under what conditions? We discuss various consid-
erations that determine the answer to these questions. We begin by describing the
gasoline tax as a benefits tax on road use and derive the implications for taxing
electric vehicles. We then discuss how externalities influence this view. We then
provide a discussion and a mathematical model of second-best considerations that
posit how favorable treatment of electric vehicles might be rationalized when the
tax on conventional vehicles is too low. We conclude by considering how knowledge
spillovers (learning by doing) might influence the optimal tax.



2.1    The Gasoline Tax as a Benefits Tax

The gasoline tax in the United States originated as a benefits tax. The idea of a
benefits tax is that publicly provided goods and services should be paid for by the
beneficiaries. The purpose of the gasoline tax was to fund transportation infras-
tructure. Thus, the gasoline tax is a classic benefits tax because the beneficiaries of
transportation infrastructure are those who drive. The more one drives, the more

                                           3
one benefits and the more tax one will pay.

The gasoline tax was adopted in lieu of a mileage tax due to its administrative and
compliance advantages. When the U.S. federal gasoline tax was first introduced in
1932, it was simply not technologically feasible to tax mileage. The gasoline tax
has always been an imperfect proxy for a mileage tax. In particular, fuel economy
differs across vehicles, so the implicit tax per mile driven is lower for fuel-efficient
vehicles. But the gasoline tax is poised to become a much worse proxy as non-
gasoline vehicles gain market share.

According to this benefits view, the fact that electric vehicles do not pay an equiv-
alent road tax is an accident of instrument design. Electric vehicles benefit from
transportation infrastructure in the same way as conventional gasoline-powered ve-
hicles and, from a benefits perspective, should contribute proportionally to the
funding of the public good. Exempting electric vehicles from the mileage tax that
is proxied by the gasoline tax is akin to allowing electric vehicles to skip the toll-
booth on a toll road.

It is in the spirit of a benefits tax that several states are now considering implement-
ing a mileage tax.1 Oregon, for example, passed legislation allowing 5,000 voluntary
motorists to pay a mileage tax of 1.7 cents per mile, in lieu of gasoline taxes.2 Cal-
ifornia, Washington, and Illinois are conducting mileage tax pilots.3

Does this approach make sense? Should electric vehicles pay a mileage tax? Or, is
there an economic argument for exempting electric vehicles from road charges? To
understand the possible answers to these questions, it is necessary to think about the
   1
     Langer et al. (2017) argue that a mileage tax is more efficient than a gasoline tax, which would
add an efficiency argument to the benefits rationale for shifting to a mileage tax.
   2
     See http://www.myorego.org/. Participants in the Oregon program receive a refund for all
gasoline taxes paid in exchange for participating in the program. Oregon previously conducted
two pilot experiments for mileage taxes.
   3
     See      https://waroadusagecharge.org/,              http://www.dot.ca.gov/road_charge/
resources/final-report/, and http://ilga.gov/legislation/BillStatus.asp?DocTypeID=
HB&DocNum=2864&GAID=15&SessionID=108&LegID=119167.




                                                 4
gasoline tax as not just a benefits tax but also a tax that targets externalities.



2.2     Externalities from Driving

Historically the gasoline tax was conceived as an appropriate funding mechanism
for transportation infrastructure, but to an economist there is a happy coincidence
that the gasoline tax also operates as a tax on externalities from driving. Driving
creates several negative externalities, which we briefly review here.

First, there are several environmental externalities from driving. In general, driving
causes (i) greenhouse gas emissions and (ii) local air pollution. With gasoline-
powered vehicles, fuel is combusted in the vehicle and emissions come from the
tailpipe. For electric vehicles, fuel use takes place at the power plant. Electric
vehicles may be dirtier or cleaner per mile of use, depending on how the electricity
is generated. In the United States, fossil-fuel plants are almost always the marginal
source of electricity generation so even as more solar and wind capacity is added,
it still makes sense to think about electric vehicles being powered by fossil fuels
(Holland et al., 2016).4

In addition, driving causes (iii) traffic congestion and (iv) accidents. Previous at-
tempts to quantify these externalities have found these to be quite substantial,
probably larger in magnitude than the environmental externalities (Harrington et
al., 2007).5 Coady et al. (2018), calculates that the optimal tax for gasoline vehi-
cles in the United States would be $2.23 per gallon, which includes $0.60 per gallon
for environmental externalities plus $1.63 per gallon for traffic congestion and ac-
cidents. This second class of externalities tends to be similar across electric and
   4
     This is true for any marginal vehicle or marginal mile traveled, which increases electricity
demand to be met with the existing stock of power plants. Increased demand for electricity from
EVs may alter investment in new generation, which might be renewable or may be new fossil
generation.
   5
     Relatedly, economists have long pointed out that pay-as-you-go vehicle insurance can be wel-
fare improving by reducing mileage-related externalities (Parry, 2005).



                                               5
gasoline-powered vehicles. Thus, while adopting an electric vehicle can potentially
reduce environmental externalities, it does very little to reduce these other negative
externalities.



2.2.1    The First-Best Tax


Because driving creates negative externalities, there is a normative case for a cor-
rective tax on driving, regardless of the need for infrastructure funding. First-
best would be to tax all externalities using vehicle-specific, time-varying, location-
varying dynamic prices. For example, the marginal damages from traffic congestion
vary greatly across locations and across time. Driving across a congested bridge
at rush hour, for instance, imposes much larger external costs than driving along a
quiet highway in the middle of the night.

Environmental externalities also vary widely across locations and across time. Driv-
ing a gasoline-powered vehicle in an urban area, for example, is much more damag-
ing than driving in an area with lower population density. With gasoline-powered
vehicles, the level of emissions also varies widely across individual vehicles, reflect-
ing the age of the vehicle and the effectiveness of its emissions control equipment
(Knittel and Sandler, 2018).

Similarly, the environmental externalities from electric vehicles vary across locations
and across time depending on which power plant is on the margin in a given moment.
Because the pollution from electric vehicles occurs upstream, it would make sense
to tax those externalities at the power plant rather than at the "tailpipe." In a
first-best world, electricity would be priced at social marginal cost, reflecting both
the private costs of electricity generation as well as location-varying time-varying
environmental externalities.6
   6
    Recent research shows that U.S. electricity prices differ substantially from this Pigouvian ideal.
Borenstein and Bushnell (2018) find that the price of electricity is too high in some places (e.g.
California), and too low in most other places (e.g. the Midwest). Thus, in general, electricity



                                                  6
Neither gasoline taxes nor mileage taxes are first-best.7 Gasoline taxes, in particu-
lar, are simply not dynamic enough to capture these highly differentiated external-
ities. As technology advances, it is possible that precisely tailored prices for vehicle
use could exist. For example, mileage taxes could be made to be time varying and
location varying. In practice, however, we are unlikely to see this degree of differ-
entiation in the near future. Thus, we abstract from these considerations in the
analysis that follows and derive implications for taxing electric and gasoline vehicle
usage with a focus on the average damages from each.



2.3     Second-Best Considerations

Most economic analyses find that the gasoline tax in the United States is far below
the level of external damages (Parry and Small, 2005; Harrington et al., 2007; Coady
et al., 2018). As we discussed above, for example, Coady et al. (2018), calculates
that the optimal tax for gasoline vehicles in the United States would be $2.23 per
gallon, whereas in October 2018 the average U.S. gasoline tax was only $0.49, less
than one-fourth as large.

If we take as given that gasoline-powered vehicles are undertaxed, how does this
change the optimal tax for electric vehicles? In considering this question, it is useful
to remember that electric and gasoline vehicles are close substitutes. We ignored
this substitution in the discussion of the first-best outcome above because when
gasoline and electric vehicles are both taxed at marginal damages, any induced
substitution between types is economically efficient. Substitution has normative
implications, however, when taxes are not set at the optimal levels.

In the second-best analysis, the inefficiencies in the transportation sector can be
prices fail to efficiently communicate the correct price signals for electric vehicle drivers.
   7
     The second-best uniform tax in the presence of heterogenous damages is a weighted average
of those heterogeneous damages, in which weights depend on who responds more to the tax
(Diamond, 1973). These second-best considerations have been shown to be important for local
pollution (Knittel and Sandler, 2018) and congestion (Martin and Thorton, 2017).


                                              7
divided into two types. First, if the externalities from driving are insufficiently
priced, then there will be too much driving overall (i.e., the "scale" or "market
size" is wrong). Second, assuming that electric vehicles are less harmful than con-
ventional vehicles on the margin, the "composition" of travel--how much of travel
is electric mileage versus gasoline mileage--is incorrect. The market will use too
many conventional vehicles, and not enough electric.

Imposing a mileage tax on electric vehicles thus has two effects. First, holding
fixed gasoline miles driven, a tax will reduce how much electric vehicles are driven
through a price effect. In general, this will increase efficiency because it corrects an
unpriced negative externality from EV use. Second, however, it also causes drivers
to substitute from electric vehicles to gasoline-powered vehicles. If the gasoline tax
is inefficiently low, this will lead to inefficiencies in both scale and composition.
The overall size of the transportation market will still be too large, and too large a
fraction of miles will be driven in gasoline vehicles, as opposed to electric ones.

There could even be an argument made for a mileage subsidy for electric vehicles.
Reducing the mileage tax on electric vehicles will lead to substitution away from
gasoline vehicles, which improves composition. But this will also lower the cost
of driving overall, which may exacerbate the pre-existing distortion in the overall
market size.8 Whether the tax on electric vehicle mileage should be below marginal
damages thus depends on which of these factors dominates.



2.3.1      A Simple Model of the Second-Best Tax


In this section, we develop a simple model to characterize the way that an inad-
equate tax on miles traveled via gasoline vehicles affects the second-best tax on
miles traveled via electric vehicles. We abstract from many important issues in this
domain--including technology change, consumer heterogeneity, the vehicle purchase
  8
      This is similar to the performance standard logic presented in Holland et al. (2009).


                                                  8
decision and the durable goods nature of vehicles-- to deliver clear insight on our
core question about mileage taxes.

Our goal here is to understand how electric vehicle usage should be taxed in a
world in which policy has migrated away from a gasoline tax towards road charges,
and in which the road charge can be different for gasoline and electric vehicles.
We hold constant all other features of policy and the transportation system--road
construction, traffic and safety laws, insurance regimes, etc. are all fixed in the
background.

We model an economy with two goods that cause an externality--miles driven
by electric vehicles (e) and miles driven by gasoline vehicles (g )--along with a
quasilinear numeraire x. The externalities are constant per unit damages of e and
g . Our focus is on cases where 0 < e < g . That is, both goods have a negative
externality, but e is relatively better (relatively "clean").

We assume both goods are produced at constant private marginal cost in competi-
tive markets, so that equilibrium producer prices are Pe and Pg (with the price of
x normalized to 1). This is an abstraction that rules out, for example, markups in
electricity markets; a topic that we return to later. Income in the economy, denoted
Y , is exogenous. Thus, there is no producer surplus and no labor supply distortions.
Welfare is determined only by consumer surplus and the externality.

There is a measure one representative consumer with private utility u(e, g ) + x.
Under the budget constraint, consumers choose e and g to maximize u(e, g ) + (Y -
Pe × e - Pg × g )--i.e., they ignore the externality when making choices. The social
planner accounts for the externality and maximizes social welfare (SWF):


           SW F = u(e, g ) + (Y - Pe × e - Pg × g ) - (g × g + e × e).



In this setting, a planner can achieve the first-best outcome through standard Pigou-


                                           9
vian taxes set equal to marginal damages. Our key question is what the second-best
tax on e would be if, for some reason, the tax rate on g was set at the wrong level.
This is meant to capture the case where gasoline miles are undertaxed. Does this
justify an exemption for electric miles?

Denote taxes on electric miles and gasoline miles as te and tg respectively. The case
of interest is when tg < g and is fixed. The planner chooses only te to maximize
social welfare, taking consumer choices conditional on prices as given. The second-
best te , denoted as tSB
                      e  can be characterized by taking the first-order condition for
the planner's problem and rearranging.

The second-best tax can thus be written as:

                                                   -g/te
                          tSB
                           e  = e + (tg - g ) ×          .                          (1)
                                                    e/te
                                           -
                                                      +


This result features the ubiquitous additivity property for second-best taxes on
externalities (Kopczuk, 2003)--the second-best rate is the Pigouvian tax plus a term
related to interactions of the price of the good with other distorted markets.

This additional term has two factors. The first factor (tg - g ) is the wedge between
private and social costs in the market for g , which is assumed negative in our primary
case (the gasoline tax is too low). The second factor is a ratio of derivatives that
captures how changes in the price of e impacts consumption of g and e. We will
denote this ratio as   -(g/te )/(e/te ). As long as the goods are substitutes,
 will be positive (because of the negative sign in the numerator). (As discussed
further below, its magnitude depends on how an increase in the price of electric
vehicles changes total travel and the composition between e and g .) Thus, the
second term in equation (1) is negative for our case of interest, which means that
the optimal tax on electric miles is attenuated away from its marginal damages.
Moreover, if e is cleaner than g , if gasoline mileage is sufficiently mispriced, and if


                                           10
there is substantial substitution between types of miles, the second-best policy can
be a subsidy to electric mileage.



2.3.2    Discussion of Specific Cases


A couple of specific cases merit additional discussion. First, if there is no substitu-
tion from electric miles into gasoline miles (g/te = 0), then  = 0 and the second
term in equation (1) goes to zero. In this case, the Pigouvian benchmark prevails:
the optimal tax for electric vehicle miles is simply marginal damages. The reason is
that, in this extreme case of no substitution, taxing electric vehicles has no impact
on externalities from gasoline vehicles, so gasoline vehicle mispricing is irrelevant to
the optimal policy for electric vehicles.

Another important case is when -g/te = e/te , so that  = 1. In this case,
a change in the price of e causes a compositional change--gasoline miles rise and
electric miles fall--but there is no scale effect (total travel, e + g , is fixed). With this
type of one-for-one substitution, every reduction in electric vehicle miles travelled
is offset exactly by an increase in miles traveled with gasoline-powered vehicles.
There is precedent for  = 1 in the existing literature; for example, Xing et al.
(2019) assume that annual vehicle-miles-traveled (VMT) is fixed and is the same
for both electric and gasoline-powered vehicles.

When  = 1, the optimal tax on e is less than marginal damages by the amount
that the tax on g falls short of its marginal damages; i.e., tSB
                                                              e - e = tg - g . In

other words, the optimal wedges between private and social cost are equalized across
markets. This result echoes results from the theory of the second best (Lipsey and
Lancaster, 1956), in which one typically wants to spread tax distortions equally
across markets because of the convexity of deadweight loss in tax wedges. In this
case of one-for-one substitution, electric miles should be undertaxed to the same
degree that gasoline miles are undertaxed.


                                             11
One-for-one substitution is a useful baseline for interpreting the model, but there
are reasons to believe that  is less than 1. In particular, some of the reduced
mileage from electric vehicles would likely be offset by increased travel via public
transportation, cycling, walking, and other alternative forms of transportation. In
addition, the overall demand for miles is presumably not perfectly inelastic, so
drivers may take fewer or shorter trips. In the model, these behaviors are captured
by a reduction in the sum g + e, and are represented by the case when  < 1. When
 < 1, then equation (1) reveals that a tax on electric vehicle mileage should be less
than the marginal damage e , but this attenuation should be only some fraction of
the mispricing wedge in gasoline miles (tg - g ).



2.3.3   The Size and Sign of the Optimal Tax on Electric Miles


As a last modeling exercise, we decompose the second-best tax on electric vehicles
into pollution and congestion and accident components. This decomposition facil-
itates a discussion of the plausible sign and magnitude of a tax on electric vehicle
mileage.

As we discussed earlier, analysis of the optimal tax on gasoline has pointed out that
taxing gasoline mileage has several components, including impacts on (i) greenhouse
gas emissions, (ii) local air pollution, (iii) accidents and (iv) congestion. The latter
two are, at least approximately, equal for electric vehicles and gasoline vehicles per
mile traveled. To see how this matters for the optimal tax formula, it is useful to
decompose the externality into components related to pollution p and driving d ,
so that e = p   d                                               p   d
            e + e . Analogously, for gasoline, we can write g = g + g . If

accident and congestion externalities per mile are equal across gasoline and electric
vehicles, then d   d                                         d
               g = e , and we denote these damages as simply  .




                                          12
In that case, we can rewrite equation (1) as:


                         tSB
                          e  = p          d         p
                               e + (1 -  ) +  (tg - g ).                           (2)


This version decomposes the optimal tax on electric miles into three categories.

The first term is a pollution tax. Note that this differs from the formulation in
equation (1) because it is only the pollution component, not the accident and con-
gestion component. Pollution from electric vehicles is located in the power sector.
If all externalities were priced in the electricity market, then this term would be
zero. Electricity prices are typically above private marginal cost because of the
way that fixed costs are recovered in electricity markets. Borenstein and Bushnell
(2018) find that in many parts of the United States electricity prices are above
social marginal cost, while in many other parts electricity prices are below social
marginal cost. Thus it probably does not make sense to pick a single value for this
p
e component and indeed, we would expect the sign of this component to differ

across locations.

The second and third terms embody two factors that are weighted by , which
we expect to be somewhat less than 1. The second term relates to accident and
congestion externalities. If  = 1 (one-to-one substitution), then this term goes to
zero. Intuitively, there is no way to reduce accident and congestion externalities
through a tax on electric miles when there is complete substitution, as total travel
(e + g ) is fixed. Alternatively, when a tax on e has no impact on g , then  = 0
and the full marginal damages from accidents and externalities should be added to
the optimal tax. If only a portion of reduced electric miles reappear as gasoline
miles, then the optimal tax on electric miles will include some proportion of the
marginal damages from accidents and congestion, regardless of whether those ex-
ternalities are taxed for gasoline miles. Note that 1 -  is equal to the change in
total miles (g + e) resulting from an increase in te divided by the change in electric

                                         13
miles resulting from an increase in te . The accident and congestion components of
the optimal tax are generally thought to be substantial (Harrington et al., 2007;
Anderson and Auffhammer, 2014; Coady et al., 2018), so if  is much less than 1,
then this component of the tax will be a large positive value.

The third term is the difference between the tax per mile on gasoline miles and
pollution externalities from gasoline. This reflects the degree of underpricing of
gasoline miles, scaled by the substitution pattern between electric and gasoline
miles (). As we discussed above, for example, Coady et al. (2018), calculates that
for the United States these pollution components (greenhouse gas emissions and
local air pollution) are $0.60 per gallon. In comparison, the average U.S. gasoline
tax in October 2018 was $0.49. Thus at an average fuel economy of 25 miles-per-
gallon, this equates to a relatively small gap, tg - p
                                                     g , of negative 2.4 cents per mile.

In urban areas where local air pollution is more damaging, the gap is again negative,
but in this case potentially quite large.

To summarize, the first term p
                             e is positive in some parts of the United States, and

negative in others. The second term is positive, and potentially quite large. The
third term is close to zero on average in the United States, but is negative and
potentially quite large in places where local air pollution is particularly damaging.
Thus in general it is not possible to say whether the overall mileage tax on electric
vehicles should be positive or negative. Many of these parameters vary across loca-
tions in complicated ways. Also, and perhaps most importantly, we lack guidance
on the substitution pattern summarized in . This suggests a valuable direction for
future research.



2.4    Learning-By-Doing

A final consideration abstracts from the current externalities caused by electric ver-
sus gasoline vehicles and instead emphasizes another externality in the production

                                            14
process of a new good. If there are non-appropriable learning by doing effects, then
there is potentially good reason to subsidize electric vehicle production.

Exempting electric vehicles from a road charge provides an indirect subsidy for
electric vehicle production. From a car buyer's perspective, there are two costs of
an electric vehicle, the up-front purchase price and the operating costs, including
most prominently the cost of fuel. Exemption from a road tax acts as a subsidy
to the fuel cost portion and implicitly subsidizes the purchase of electric vehicles.
This amount could be substantial. A simple back of the envelope suggests that
exempting a road tax equivalent to the national average tax of 52 cents per gallon
has a present discounted value on the order of $1,250 to $2,650.9

If learning by doing is driven by the number of vehicles that roll off of the assembly
line (and not the number of miles driven), then the natural thing is to target the
upfront purchase price, not the per mile fuel cost.10 The reason is that mileage-
related externalities still exist, regardless of learning spillovers. By cutting the
price of a mile, a road tax exemption will exacerbate mileage-related externalities
in exchange for more electric vehicles sold. This mileage distortion is unnecessary
if one can directly target the purchase price through a tax credit.11

Given that there is in fact a generous subsidy on the books for each electric vehicle
purchased, it seems unlikely to us that any optimal tax scheme for electric vehicles
motivated by learning by doing would involve subsidies that come in the form of
   9
     A tax of 52 cents per gallon translates into a tax of 1.8 cents per mile if fuel economy is 28.9
MPG, which we use above. We assume a 5% discount rate and 15,000 miles per year over 13
years, consistent with our baseline calculations above, for the high value. For the low value, we
assume the same number of years but only 7,000 miles per year.
  10
     As an aside, if consumers are myopic in their valuation of future fuel costs, as is sometimes
suggested in the literature on the energy efficiency gap, then it would be fiscally inefficient to
subsidize future fuel costs. One gets more bang for the buck by subsidizing the purchase price
directly.
  11
     One countervailing point is that implicit subsidies for electric vehicles through exemption from
a mileage tax implies that high mileage drivers get a larger subsidy than low mileage drivers. This
might have welfare benefits if it tilts EV adoption towards higher mileage drivers (in contrast
to the current pattern of low mileage adoption (Davis, forthcoming)), though we suspect these
welfare implications are small.



                                                 15
reducing the cost of mileage below social marginal cost. Instead, the strongest
case for exempting electric vehicles from road charges appears to lie in the second-
best considerations stemming from an inefficiently low tax on conventional vehicle
use.




3      Electric Vehicles in the United States

In this section, we turn to the empirical analysis. Focusing on the United States,
we examine the geographic pattern of electric vehicles and compare it to state-level
gasoline tax rates. To estimate the foregone gasoline tax from electric vehicles we
also need information about vehicle miles traveled and fuel economy, and we present
relevant evidence. Our objective in this section is to introduce the policy landscape
for electric vehicles in the United States, including some of the key evidence that
motivates increased policy interest in a mileage tax for electric vehicles.



3.1     Household-Level Microdata

The primary dataset for our analysis is the newly-released 2017 National Household
Travel Survey (NHTS) from the U.S. Department of Transportation. The NHTS is
a large-scale nationally representative household survey with several features that
make it particularly well-suited for this exercise.12
  12
     Later we also compare some of our estimates to a report published by the Department of
Energy based on registered vehicles. Researchers have on occasion worked directly with microdata
on registered vehicles. For example, Archsmith et al. (2017) perform an analysis using California
vehicle registration records from 2001-2007. But data on registered vehicles instead typically take
more aggregated form. For example, Davis and Knittel (2019) uses data from Polk Automotive
on census-tract level vehicle type counts for 2012. Another potential approach would be to use
microdata from vehicle emissions testing. For example, Knittel and Sandler (2018) and Jacobsen
et al. (forthcoming) use data from California's Smog Check program. However, electric vehicles
are exempt from emissions testing, making this data source unhelpful in our context. Moreover,
any analysis using emissions testing data would necessarily be restricted to the states that have
such programs. In contrast, the NHTS is publicly available nationally-representative microdata
with detailed information both on vehicle type and household characteristics.




                                                16
Most importantly, the NHTS has detailed information about all household vehicles.
For our analysis we consider three vehicle categories: (1) all-electric vehicles (e.g.
the Nissan Leaf), (2) plug-in hybrid vehicles which can run on either electricity or
gasoline (e.g. the Chevy Volt), and (3) all other vehicles. The NHTS has much
more information, including the exact make, model, and vintage of all vehicles but
we do not use that information in this analysis.

The NHTS also has information about household characteristics. Each household
reports annual family income--which we use for the distributional analysis. Each
household also reports its state of residence--information which allows us to incor-
porate state-level gasoline tax rates (see Section 3.3).

Surveying for the 2017 NHTS took place during 2016 and 2017, though for exposi-
tional simplicity we describe the results as being for 2017. Prior to the 2017 NHTS,
the most recent NHTS was conducted back in 2009, when there were virtually no
electric vehicles on the road, so this represents one of the first opportunities for such
an analysis.

A nice feature of the 2017 NHTS is the large sample size. In this latest wave of the
NHTS, there are almost 130,000 total households, and 256,000 total vehicles, in-
cluding 400+ all-electric and 400+ plug-in hybrid vehicles. This sample size ends up
being large enough to make relatively precise statements, particularly at a national
level and for large states. The sample for the NHTS is selected using stratified sam-
pling, so sampling weights are used throughout the paper in all calculations.

A notable limitation of the NHTS is the low response rate. The 2017 NHTS has
a lower response rate than previous waves, only 15.6% according to the survey
documentation. The NHTS sampling weights attempt to correct for non-response
by balancing observable household characteristics, but, of course, respondents and
non-respondents can also differ along other dimensions. The implied total number
of electric vehicles in the 2017 NHTS is consistent with aggregate data on electric


                                           17
vehicle sales, so the data seem to provide a reasonable description of the broader
pattern of electric vehicles, but it is impossible to rule out concerns about non-
response bias, so this is worth highlighting as an important caveat.



3.2    The Geographic Pattern of U.S. Electric Vehicles

Figure 1 plots the density of electric vehicles by U.S. states, measured as the number
of electric vehicles per 1000 vehicles. Here and for most of the analysis we include
both all electric vehicles and plug-in hybrids. The figure shows that electric vehicles
are highly concentrated in a relatively small number of states.

Table 1 reports the top U.S. states for electric vehicles. California has by far the
most electric vehicles of any state, with about 40% of all electric vehicles. Another
state near the top of the list is Georgia, where electric vehicles have long received
extra subsidies. Overall, these top ten states account for 75% of the estimated total
782,000 electric vehicles in the United States as of 2017.

With the large sample size in the 2017 NHTS, these statistics are estimated rela-
tively precisely for larger states, but should be interpreted cautiously for smaller
states. The broader pattern in Figure 1 and Table 1 is consistent with data from
vehicle registrations. In particular, the Department of Energy reports electric ve-
hicle registrations by state, and the overall pattern is quite similar with California,
Washington, Arizona, Georgia, and Maryland all having many more electric vehicles
than other states.13
  13
   U.S. Department of Energy, "PEV registrations U.S. Department of Energy Analysis of IHS
Automotive Data," December 10, 2018.




                                           18
3.3    U.S. Gasoline Taxes

Figure 2 plots gasoline taxes by state. This map was constructed using information
on gasoline taxes by state for October 2018 from the American Petroleum Institute.
The figure reports the total combined gasoline tax including the federal tax of 18
cents per gallon as well as all state and local taxes.

Figure 3 plots the distribution of gasoline taxes across states. The average total
combined tax is 52 cents per gallon, but ranges widely from Pennsylvania at 77
cents per gallon to Alaska at 33 cents per gallon. The distribution is modestly right-
skewed, with Pennsylvania, California, Washington, Hawaii, New York, Michigan,
Connecticut and Indiana all charging gasoline taxes at least one standard deviation
above the mean.

We calculate gasoline tax impacts using the actual geographic distribution of elec-
tric vehicles across U.S. states. As Figure 1 shows, this geographic distribution
is highly uneven with, for example, large numbers of electric vehicles in relatively
high gasoline tax states like California, Washington, and New York. The correlation
between the number of electric vehicles per 1000 vehicles and the gasoline tax is
positive, strong (0.46), and statistically significant (p -value <.01).

Figure 4 is a scatterplot of electric vehicles versus the gasoline tax. Each obser-
vation is a U.S. state and the figure includes a least squares regression line from
regressing the number of electric vehicles on the gasoline tax. The figure illustrates
the pronounced positive correlation, with more electric vehicles in states with higher
gasoline taxes.

There is, of course, a plausible causal relationship. Choosing whether to purchase
an electric vehicle is, like most durable good decisions, an intertemporal trade-off
between purchase price and operating costs (Hausman, 1979; Dubin and McFadden,
1984). Gasoline taxes increase the operating cost of gasoline-powered vehicles,


                                           19
making electric vehicles more attractive. Moreover, vehicle buyers have been shown
to be relatively attentive to gasoline prices in choosing which gasoline-powered
vehicle to purchase (Busse et al., 2013; Allcott and Wozny, 2014; Sallee et al., 2016;
Grigolon et al., 2018), so it would make sense that buyers would also pay attention to
gasoline prices when choosing whether to buy a gasoline-powered vehicle at all.

Still the positive correlation likely also reflects omitted variables. Many of the states
in the upper right quadrant of the scatterplot could be characterized as "green,"
mostly democratic states with long-standing support for environmental issues. Pre-
vious research has shown that environmental ideology is a major determinant of
adoption of energy-efficient vehicles (Kahn, 2007), and these preferences likely also
influence opinions about the gasoline tax. Regardless of the exact mechanism, this
positive correlation implies that the total level of foregone gasoline tax is higher
than what would be calculated with a naive estimate ignoring this correlation. We
show in Section 4.4 that this is quantitatively important.



3.4       Vehicle Miles Traveled

To estimate the foregone gasoline tax revenue from electric vehicles, we need to make
an assumption about how much electric vehicles are driven. Or, more specifically,
we need to make an assumption about how much drivers with electric vehicles would
have otherwise driven in gasoline-powered vehicles. For our baseline estimates we
assume that all vehicles are driven 15,000 miles per year, following Holland et al.
(2016).

This level of driving intensity is consistent with several previous studies. For exam-
ple, Archsmith et al. (2015) assume that vehicles have a total lifetime of 159,700
miles, equivalent to about 10 years at 15,000 miles per year. Moreover, Federal
CAFE standards use an assumed lifetime for cars and trucks of 195,000 miles (Leard
and McConnell, 2017), equivalent to 13 years at 15,000 miles per year. Estimates

                                           20
from the U.S. Federal Highway Administration imply that U.S. vehicles are driven
somewhat less, an average of 12,000 miles annually.14

We also report estimates assuming vehicles are driven 7,000 miles per year. This
lower driving intensity comes from data from the 2017 NHTS. NHTS respondents
fill out an "Odometer Mileage Record Form" which requires them to write down
the current odometer reading for all vehicles in the household. Dividing odometer
readings by the age of each vehicle yields 7,000 annual miles traveled for electric
vehicles compared to 10,200 miles traveled for gasoline-powered vehicles. See Davis
(forthcoming) for details.

If indeed it were true that electric vehicles are driven much less than other vehicles,
it would be a bit surprising. Electric vehicles tend to cost less to operate per
mile than gasoline-powered vehicles (Sivak and Schoettle, 2018), so the "rebound
effect" (see, e.g. Borenstein, 2015) implies that drivers should use them more. Still,
several other potential explanations could explain lower miles traveled by electric
vehicles.

Probably the most obvious potential explanation is limited range. The first gen-
eration Nissan Leaf, for example, has a range of less than 80 miles, making it
impractical for longer trips. While public charging stations are becoming more
common, electric vehicle charging remains nowhere near as convenient as filling up
a gasoline-powered vehicle (Li et al., 2017; Li, 2018). Limited range thus could
affect both who buys an electric vehicle and how electric vehicles are used.

Another potential explanation is substitution across vehicles for multiple-vehicle
households. Only 10% of U.S. households with an electric vehicle are single-vehicle
households (Davis, forthcoming). Thus in most cases, electric vehicle drivers are
  14
    U.S. Federal Highway Administration, Highway Statistics 2016 estimates that total U.S. miles
traveled in 2016 were 3.2 trillion. Highway Statistics 2016 reports that in that same year there
were 269 million total registered vehicles in the United States, implying an average of 11,896 miles
traveled per vehicle.




                                                21
able to substitute between electric- and non-electric vehicles.            Multiple-vehicle
households may prefer to use their electric vehicles for short trips, while using
their gasoline-powered vehicles for longer trips.15

A final potential explanation is selection. It could be that the type of households
who tend to buy electric vehicles tends to live in more urban areas, or in areas with
stronger "green" preferences, where people tend to drive fewer miles per year. This
is broadly consistent with the geographic pattern of electric vehicles in Figure 2
with high- numbers of electric vehicles in states like California, Washington, and
New York.



3.5     Fuel Economy

To calculate gasoline tax revenue impacts, we also need to make an assumption
about the fuel economy of the counterfactual vehicle. What would electric vehicle
drivers otherwise be driving? If they otherwise would have been driving highly
fuel-efficient vehicles, this reduces the gasoline tax revenue impact. As mentioned
before, electric vehicle drivers may tend to live in urban areas and be motivated in
part by "green" ideology, so there is reason to believe these counterfactual vehicles
may tend to be smaller and more fuel-efficient than the average U.S. vehicle.

For this assumption we follow a recent working paper aptly titled "What Does an
Electric Vehicle Replace?" which sets out to answer this exact question (Xing et al.,
2019). The paper leverages rich data from a household survey of new vehicle buyers
in which buyers are asked about their second-choice vehicles. Xing et al. (2019)
use this information together with aggregate data on vehicle sales and a random
coefficients discrete choice model to simulate what purchases would have been were
electric vehicles not available.
  15
     In related work, Archsmith et al. (2017) shows that households substitute between vehicle
attributes when deciding which vehicles to purchase. For example, a household with one fuel-
efficient vehicle may be more likely to purchase a second vehicle that is less fuel-efficient.


                                             22
The authors find that electric vehicles replace relatively fuel-efficient vehicles. In
particular, the authors find that electric vehicles replace vehicles with an average
fuel economy of 28.9 miles-per-gallon. As a point of comparison, the authors point
out that among all new U.S. vehicles, the average fuel economy is 23 miles-per-
gallon, so counterfactual vehicles are on average 27% more fuel-efficient than the
national average.

The substitution patterns are interesting too. The authors find that only 12% of
replaced vehicles are conventional hybrids like the Toyota Prius. Instead, they find
that most electric vehicle drivers would have otherwise purchased relatively fuel-
efficient mid-sized cars like the Honda Accord, Honda Civic, and Toyota Corolla,
with few electric vehicle buyers otherwise buying a large SUV or truck. It is worth
noting that their data comes from vehicle model years 2010-2014 before most sales
of the Tesla Model S or the introduction of the Tesla Model X, so substitution
patterns may have changed somewhat since the period of their data.

In the results that follow we use 28.9 miles-per-gallon as our baseline assumption,
while also reporting alternative results for 25 and 35 miles-per-gallon.




4     Foregone Gasoline Tax Revenue from U.S. EVs

4.1    Baseline Estimates of Foregone Tax

We calculate the foregone gasoline tax revenue from U.S. electric vehicles using the
following formula,

                           S
                                                      1
                     R =         {( F + s
                                        S
                                          )  V MT          EVs }
                           s=1
                                                     MP G

where variables are defined as follows:



                                          23
             R        change in annual gasoline tax revenue, in dollars
             F        federal gasoline tax, measured in dollars per gallon
             sS       state gasoline tax in state s, measured in dollars per gallon
             V MT     annual miles driven per vehicle in counterfactual
             MPG      miles per gallon of the vehicle in counterfactual
             EVs      number of electric vehicles in state s.


In our baseline results, we assume that electric vehicle drivers would have otherwise
driven a 28.9 miles-per-gallon vehicle 15,000 miles per year, i.e. M P G = 28.9 and
V M T = 15, 000. In this counterfactual each electric vehicle driver would have
otherwise used 519 gallons of gasoline annually,

                                      1               1
                         = V MT           = 15, 000       = 519.
                                     MP G            28.9


Table 2 reports baseline estimates. Total annual foregone tax revenue is $249 mil-
lion. This is equivalent to $318 annually for each of the 782,000 electric vehicles
in the United States as of 2017. Of this, 30% ($75 million) is foregone federal tax,
and the other 70% ($174 million) is foregone state and local tax. As a point of
comparison, total state fuel tax receipts were $41 billion in 201516 , so this is less
than half of 1%, reflecting the relatively small number of electric vehicles.

Table 3 ranks the top ten most affected states. California is by far the most affected
state, with an estimated $86 million in foregone gasoline tax revenue. The rest of the
top ten are states with large numbers of electric vehicles, states with high gasoline
tax rates, and both. Washington State enters the top three, for example, because
it has both a large proportion of electric vehicles and one of the highest gasoline
tax rates. Altogether these ten states experience 80% of the all foregone state and
local tax revenue.
 16
      U.S. Federal Highway Administration, "Highway Statistics", State Motor Fuel Tax Receipts.




                                               24
4.2    Comparison to Naive Estimate

Table 4 shows how the baseline results change under alternative assumptions. Total
foregone tax revenue is 20% lower ($199 million) under a naive calculation which
ignores the geographic distribution of electric vehicles across states. As we showed
in Figure 4, there is a pronounced positive correlation between gasoline tax rates
and electric vehicles.

Our baseline estimate accounts for the observed positive correlation between s and
EVs , while assuming that the other variables V M T and M P G are the same across
states. In contrast, with the naive estimate we instead use the average U.S. gasoline
tax rate, where weights are equal across states. This results in a smaller estimate
because it ignores the positive correlation between electric vehicles and gasoline
taxes, putting too much weight on states with low gasoline taxes, and too little
weight on states with high gasoline taxes.

Using the standard properties of expectations,


                    E (  EV ) = E ( )  E (EV ) + Cov (, EV ).


The expectation of the product of two variables is only equal to the product of the
expectations if the two variables are independent. In this case, the two variables
have a positive covariance so our baseline estimate using E (  EV ) is larger than
the naive estimate using E ( )  E (EV ).



4.3    Alternative Assumptions

Table 4 also shows results for a variety of additional alternative parameters. Perhaps
the two hardest factors to verify empirically are the counterfactual mileage V M T
and miles-per-gallon M P G. If we assume drivers would have otherwise driven only


                                           25
7,000 miles annually (instead of 15,000), then the estimate of foregone tax is much
smaller, only $116 million. This underscores that electric vehicles reduce gasoline
tax revenues to the degree to which their adoption reduces driving in gasoline-
powered vehicles.

The table also performs sensitivity analyses about the M P G assumption. If we
assume electric vehicle drivers would have otherwise been driving a 35 miles-per-
gallon vehicle (rather than 28.9 miles-per-gallon), this reduces the foregone tax to
$206 million. In contrast, if electric vehicles are replacing relatively fuel-inefficient
gasoline-powered vehicles (25 miles-per-gallon rather than 30), then the foregone
gasoline tax revenue is $288 million.

Foregone tax scales linearly with V M T and GP M (i.e. the inverse of MPG).
Accordingly, when we use V M T which is 53% lower (7,000 instead of 15,000), the
foregone tax revenue is 53% lower. Similarly, when we use GP M which is 16%
higher (1/25 instead of 1/28.9), the foregone tax revenue is 16% higher. Thus for
these two parameters it is relatively straightforward to scale the effects with regard
to alternative scenarios. In contrast, the other parameters vary by state and thus
are more difficult to scale.

Finally, our baseline estimate treats all-electric vehicles (e.g. the Nissan Leaf) and
plug-in hybrid vehicles (e.g. the Chevy Volt) equivalently. But, plug-in hybrids
can also be operated using gasoline. We have not seen any systematic evidence on
driving behavior by plug-in hybrid drivers, i.e. the fraction of miles driven using
electricity and gasoline. Our baseline estimate implicitly assumes that these plug-
in hybrids are always driven using electricity but in the final sensitivity analysis in
the table we instead assume that plug-in hybrids are driven 50% of the time using
gasoline. About half of the electric vehicles in our data are plug-in hybrids, so this
change reduces the estimate by about 25% to $192 million.

Table 4 provides a sense of how our results vary with alternative assumptions,


                                           26
but the table is also useful for thinking about how tax revenue impacts might
change in the future. For example, if we expect electric vehicles in the future to
increasingly substitute for high-VMT vehicles (e.g. taxi fleets), this will increase
the impact on gasoline tax revenues. Or, as another example, if the overall stock of
gasoline-powered vehicles continues to become more fuel-efficient, this will decrease
the implied gasoline tax revenue impacts of electric vehicles.



4.4     Distributional Impact

Finally, Figures 5 and 6 describe the distributional pattern. As illustrated in Figure
5, high-income households are much more likely to drive electric vehicles. Electric
vehicles as a percentage of all vehicles increases from close to 0% for annual incomes
below $25,000, to 1% for annual incomes $75,000-$125,000, to 4% for annual incomes
above $200,000.17

The pattern for foregone tax revenue in Figure 6 is very similar. The average fore-
gone gasoline tax is less than $2 per household annually for households with annual
income below $100,000, increasing to $12 per household annually for households
with annual income above $200,000. In terms of aggregate impacts, more than two-
thirds of all foregone tax comes from households with $100,000+ in annual income.
Moreover, the very top income category ($200,000+) is responsible for 31% of all
foregone tax despite representing only 5% of U.S. households.

In related work, Muehlegger and Rapson (2018) measure the effect of subsidies on
electric vehicle adoption using evidence from a California program aimed at low-
and middle-income households. They find that demand for electric vehicles is less
elastic than previous estimates in the literature for conventional hybrid vehicles
  17
    This pattern is consistent with previous evidence on income tax credits for electric-vehicles.
In particular, Borenstein and Davis (2015) find that the top income quintile received 90% of
all U.S. federal electric vehicle tax credits between 2009 and 2012. For previous studies on the
distributional impact of gasoline taxes see, for example, Poterba (1991), West (2004), Bento et al.
(2009), and McMullen et al. (2010).


                                                27
(Chandra et al., 2010; Gallagher and Muehlegger, 2011), perhaps reflecting range
anxiety and other barriers that exist with electric vehicles but not conventional
hybrids. Results from Muehlegger and Rapson (2018) imply that large subsidy
increases would be necessary for electric vehicle adoption to spread widely beyond
high-income households.




5      Conclusion

Almost one million electric vehicles have now been sold in the United States.18 Some
industry observers expect this to accelerate. California, for example, aims to have
1.5 million electric vehicles on the road by 2025, and 5 million electric vehicles on
the roads by 2030 (California Office of the Governor, 2018). Internationally, there
is perhaps even greater enthusiasm. A recent report from the International Energy
Agency (IEA), for example, highlights a goal of 30% electric vehicle penetration by
2030 (International Energy Agency, 2017).

We provide an economic analysis of what this growth could mean for gasoline tax
revenue. Even though U.S. gasoline taxes are the lowest among all OECD countries
(Knittel, 2012), each electric vehicle still results in $300+ in foregone gasoline tax
revenue annually, according to our calculations. Electric vehicles are still less than
1% of all U.S. registered vehicles so the aggregate impacts are relatively modest
($250 million annually), but this could scale quickly under rapid increased adoption
of electric vehicles.

For example, the International Energy Agency's reference scenario has the global
stock of electric vehicles increasing 2x by 2020, 6x by 2025, and 12x by 2030 (In-
ternational Energy Agency, 2017). Assuming a proportional increase in the United
  18
    Inside EVs estimates total cumulative U.S. electric vehicles sales to be 930,000 as of December
31, 2018. See https://insideevs.com/monthly-plug-in-ev-sales-scorecard-historical-charts/. This
includes plug-in hybrids and all-electric models.



                                                28
States, and holding everything else equal, this would increase the annual gasoline
tax revenue impacts to $500 million, $3 billion, and $6 billion, respectively. It is
always hard to make accurate predictions about emerging technologies but it is
worth noting that this is the least optimistic of the scenarios considered by IEA,
with other scenarios predicting 20x, 30x and even 40x increases by 2030.

The more important and probably more interesting question is whether electric
vehicles should be exempt. We ask, in particular, whether electric vehicles should
pay a mileage tax, along the lines of Oregon's OreGO program in which participants
pay 1.7 cents per mile in lieu of paying the gasoline tax. This turns out to be a
much harder question than we first envisioned. Indeed, it is not even clear based
on our analysis whether the optimal mileage tax for electric vehicles is positive or
negative.

Our model illuminates several key factors that are worth considering in future anal-
yses. Perhaps most important, gasoline is not efficiently priced, and this is a sig-
nificant baseline distortion to take into account. In particular, our results highlight
that when gasoline is priced well below social marginal cost as it is in the United
States, then it is probably not efficient to tax electric vehicle mileage because this
leads to substitution toward gasoline vehicles.

If policymakers have two instruments, there is an argument for combining a purchase
subsidy with a usage tax. For example, the U.S. federal $7,500 income tax credit for
electric vehicles could be combined with a mileage tax for electric vehicles, thereby
encouraging substitution toward electric vehicles, while discouraging driving thereby
reducing externalities.




                                          29
References
Allcott, Hunt and Nathan Wozny, "Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the
 Energy Paradox," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2014, 96 (5), 779­795.
Anderson, Michael and Maximilian Auffhammer, "Pounds that Kill: The
 External Costs of Vehicle Weight," Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 82 (2),
 535­571.
Archsmith, James, Alissa Kendall, and David Rapson, "From Cradle to
 Junkyard: Assessing the Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Benefits of Electric Vehicles,"
 Research in Transportation Economics, 2015, 52, 72­90.
  , Kenneth Gillingham, Christopher R Knittel, and David S Rapson,
  "Attribute Substitution in Household Vehicle Portfolios," National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper # 23856, 2017.
Bento, Antonio M, Lawrence H Goulder, Mark R Jacobsen, and
 Roger H Von Haefen, "Distributional and Efficiency Impacts of Increased
 U.S. Gasoline Taxes," American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (3), 667­99.
Borenstein, S, "A Microeconomic Framework for Evaluating Energy Efficiency
 Rebound and Some Implications," Energy Journal, 2015, 36 (1), 1­21.
Borenstein, Severin and James B Bushnell, "Do Two Electricity Pricing
 Wrongs Make a Right? Cost Recovery, Externalities, and Efficiency," National
 Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper # 24756, June 2018.
   and Lucas W Davis, "The Distributional Effects of U.S. Clean Energy Tax
  Credits," NBER Tax Policy and the Economy, 2015, 30, 191­234.
Busse, Meghan R, Christopher R Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer, "Are
 Consumers Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases," American
 Economic Review, 2013, 103 (1), 220­56.
California Office of the Governor, "Governor Brown Takes Action to Increase
 Zero-Emission Vehicles, Fund New Climate Investments," 2018.
Chandra, Ambarish, Sumeet Gulati, and Milind Kandlikar, "Green Drivers
 or Free Riders? An Analysis of Tax Rebates for Hybrid Vehicles," Journal of
 Environmental Economics and Management, 2010, 60 (2), 78­93.
Coady, David, Ian WH Parry, and Baoping Shang, "Energy Price Reform:
 Lessons for Policymakers," Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2018,
 12 (2), 197­219.
Congressional Budget Office, "Approaches to Making Federal Highway Spend-
 ing More Productive," Congress of the United States, 2016.
Davis, Lucas W, "How Much Are Electric Vehicles Driven?," Applied Economics
 Letters, forthcoming.




                                       30
   and Christopher R Knittel, "Are Fuel Economy Standards Regressive?,"
  Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 2019, 6
  (S1), S37­S63.
Diamond, Peter A., "Consumption Externalities and Imperfect Corrective Pric-
 ing," Bell Journal of Economics, 1973, 4 (2), 526­538.
Dubin, Jeffrey A and Daniel L McFadden, "An Econometric Analysis of
 Residential Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption," Econometrica, 1984,
 52 (2), 345­362.
Gallagher, Kelly Sims and Erich Muehlegger, "Giving Green to Get Green?
 Incentives and Consumer Adoption of Hybrid Vehicle Technology," Journal of
 Environmental Economics and Management, 2011, 61 (1), 1­15.
Grigolon, Laura, Mathias Reynaert, and Frank Verboven, "Consumer Val-
 uation of Fuel Costs and Tax Policy: Evidence from the European Car Market,"
 American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2018, 10 (3), 193­225.
Harrington, Winston, Ian Parry, and Margaret Walls, "Automobile Exter-
 nalities and Policies," Journal of Economic Literature, 2007, 45 (2), 373­399.
Hausman, Jerry A, "Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization
 of Energy-Using Durables," Bell Journal of Economics, 1979, 10 (1), 33­54.
Holland, Stephen P, Erin T Mansur, Nicholas Z Muller, and Andrew J
 Yates, "Are there Environmental Benefits from Driving Electric Vehicles? The
 Importance of Local Factors," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (12), 3700­
 3729.
Holland, Stephen P., Jonathan E. Hughes, and Christopher R. Knittel,
 "Greenhouse Gas Reductions Under Low Carbon Fuel Standards?," American
 Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2009, 1 (1), 106­146.
International Energy Agency, "Global EV Outlook 2017: Two Million and
  Counting," OECD/IEA, 2017.
Jacobsen, Mark R, Christopher R Knittel, James M Sallee, and Arthur A
  van Benthem, "The Use of Regression Statistics to Analyze Imperfect Pricing
  Policies," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Kahn, Matthew E, "Do Greens Drive Hummers or Hybrids? Environmental
 Ideology as a Determinant of Consumer Choice," Journal of Environmental Eco-
 nomics and Management, 2007, 54 (2), 129­145.
Knittel, Christopher R, "Reducing Petroleum Consumption from Transporta-
 tion," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26 (1), 93­118.
   and Ryan Sandler, "The Welfare Impact of Second-Best Uniform-Pigouvian
  Taxation: Evidence from Transportation," American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy, 2018, 10 (4), 211­42.



                                      31
Kopczuk, Wojciech, "A Note on Optimal Taxation in the Presence of External-
 ities," Economics Letters, 2003, 80, 81­86.
Langer, Ashley, Vikram Maheshri, and Clifford Winston, "From Gallons
  to Miles: A Disaggregate Analysis of Automobile Travel and Externality Taxes,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 2017, 152, 34­46.
Leard, Benjamin and Virginia McConnell, "New Markets for Credit Trading
  Under US Automobile Greenhouse Gas and Fuel Economy Standards," Review
  of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2017, 11 (2), 207­226.
Li, Jing, "Compatibility and Investment in the US Electric Vehicle Market," MIT
  Working Paper, 2018.
Li, Shanjun, Lang Tong, Jianwei Xing, and Yiyi Zhou, "The Market for
  Electric Vehicles: Indirect Network Effects and Policy Design," Journal of the
  Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 2017, 4 (1), 89­133.
Lipsey, R. G. and Kelvin Lancaster, "The General Theory of the Second Best,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 1956, 24 (1), 11­32.
Martin, Leslie A. and Sam Thorton, "Can Road Charges Alleviate Conges-
 tion?," October 2017. Available at SSRN.
McMullen, B Starr, Lei Zhang, and Kyle Nakahara, "Distributional Impacts
 of Changing from a Gasoline Tax to a Vehicle-Mile Tax for Light Vehicles: A Case
 Study of Oregon," Transport Policy, 2010, 17 (6), 359­366.
Muehlegger, Erich and David S Rapson, "Subsidizing Mass Adoption of Elec-
 tric Vehicles: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from California," National Bureau of
 Economic Research Working Paper # 25359, 2018.
Parry, Ian WH, "Is Pay-As-You-Drive Insurance a Better Way to Reduce Gaso-
 line than Gasoline Taxes?," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
 2005, 95 (2), 288­293.
Parry, Ian W.H. and Kenneth A. Small, "Does Britain or the United States
 Have the Right Gasoline Tax?," American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (4), 1276­
 1289.
Poterba, James M, "Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive?," NBER Tax Policy and
 the Economy, 1991, 5, 145­164.
Sallee, James M, Sarah E West, and Wei Fan, "Do Consumers Recognize
  the Value of Fuel Economy? Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price
  Fluctuations," Journal of Public Economics, 2016, 135, 61­73.
Sivak, Michael and Brandon Schoettle, "Relative Costs of Driving Electric
  and Gasoline Vehicles in the Individual US States," Working Paper, 2018.
West, Sarah E, "Distributional Effects of Alternative Vehicle Pollution Control
 Policies," Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88 (3-4), 735­757.



                                       32
Xing, Jianwei, Benjamin Leard, and Shanjun Li, "What Does an Electric
 Vehicle Replace?," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #
 25771, April 2019.




                                   33
                    Figure 1: Electric Vehicles By State, 2017




                                                                                  EVs per 1000 vehicles
                                                                                           <1
                                                                                           1-3
                                                                                           3-5
                                                                                           5-10
                                                                                           10+
Note: This map plots the number of electric vehicles per 1000 vehicles. This map was constructed
by the authors using data from the 2017 National Household Travel Survey. All estimates were
calculated using NHTS sampling weights. Electric vehicles include plug-in hybrids and all-electric
vehicles.




                                               34
                     Figure 2: Gasoline Tax By State, 2018




                                                                                   Cents Per Gallon
                                                                                         < 40
                                                                                         40-50
                                                                                         50-60
                                                                                         60-70
                                                                                         70+
Note: This map was constructed by the authors using data from the American Petroleum Institute
and include all local, state, and federal taxes as of October 2018.




                                             35
                     Figure 3: Distribution of Gasoline Taxes Across States, 2018
        6
Frequency
        4
        2
        0




              $.30      $.35    $.40    $.45     $.50        $.55   $.60    $.65     $.70     $.75       $.80


            Note: This histogram was constructed by the authors using data from the American Petroleum
            Institute and include all local, state, and federal taxes as of October 2018.




                                                        36
  Figure 4: Positive Correlation Between Electric Vehicles and Gasoline Taxes



                                                                                                       HI
                        15




                                                                         RI



                                                                                                                  CA
EVs Per 1000 Vehicles
                        10




                                                                                            CT
                                                                    GA                                      WA
                                             AZ                               MD
                                                                                       FL
                        5




                                             AL                  NV
                                           OK DEND KY    UT
                                                          ME         OR
                                                                    WV                       MI
                                           TX
                                            SC               VT                        NJ                              PA
                                                     TN        WI     IL                          NY
                                        MONMVACONH MA          ID  NC
                                                       OH
                                                        MN
                                     AK  MSLA AR DC
                                                  WY
                                                  KS    NE IA MT
                                                          SD                                IN
                        0




                             30                 40                50                 60                      70             80
                                                          Gasoline Tax in Cents Per Gallon

                        Note: This figure was constructed by the authors using vehicle information from the 2017 National
                        Household Travel Survey and gasoline tax data from the American Petroleum Institute. The number
                        of electric vehicles per 1000 vehicles was calculated using NHTS sampling weights, and includes
                        both plug-in hybrids and all-electric vehicles. The gasoline tax data are from October 2018 and
                        include all local, state, and federal taxes.




                                                                       37
                     Figure 5: Electric Vehicles By Income Category
4%
3%
2%
1%




Below $25      $25-$50        $50-$75       $75-$100            $100-$125          $125-$150   $150-$200   $200+
                                          Annual Household Income (in Thousands)


      Note: This figure reports electric vehicles as a percentage of all vehicles, by household income
      category. This information was calculated by the authors using the 2017 National Household
      Travel Survey. Estimates were calculated using NHTS sampling weights, and include both plug-in
      hybrids and all-electric vehicles.




                 Figure 6: Foregone Gasoline Tax By Income Category
$15
$12
$9
$6
$3
$0




Below $25      $25-$50        $50-$75       $75-$100            $100-$125          $125-$150   $150-$200   $200+
                                          Annual Household Income (in Thousands)


      Note: This figure was constructed by the authors assuming electric vehicle drivers would have
      otherwise driven a 28.9 miles-per-gallon gasoline-powered vehicle 15,000 miles per year. Gasoline
      tax data are from the American Petroleum Institute for October 2018 and include all local, state,
      and federal taxes. See Figure 5 notes for additional details.




                                                        38
Table 1: Top U.S. States for Electric Vehicles


                                        Total Number
                                     of Electric Vehicles


California                                   310,000
Florida                                       63,000
Georgia                                       44,000
Texas                                         38,000
Washington                                    34,000
Arizona                                       26,000
Maryland                                     24,000
Pennsylvania                                 18,000
New York                                     17,000
Michigan                                      16,000

Total Top Ten States                         589,000
Total All Other States                       192,000

U.S. Total                                  782,000

Note: This table reports estimates of the number of elec-
tric vehicles by state. The top ten states are listed. Num-
bers are rounded to the nearest thousand. This information
was constructed by the authors using data from the 2017 Na-
tional Household Travel Survey. Numbers were calculated us-
ing NHTS sampling weights. Electric vehicles include plug-in
hybrids and all-electric vehicles.




   Table 2: Foregone Gasoline Tax Revenue



 Federal                                         $ 75 million

 State and Local                               $ 174 million

 Total                                      $ 249 million

 Note: This table reports the estimated impact of electric ve-
 hicles on U.S. gasoline tax revenue in 2017. Estimates as-
 sume electric vehicle drivers would have otherwise driven a
 28.9 miles-per-gallon gasoline-powered vehicle 15,000 miles per
 year. Electric vehicles include plug-in hybrids and all-electric
 vehicles.




                               39
            Table 3: Foregone Gasoline Tax Revenue, By State


                                                     Foregone State and Local
                                                      Gasoline Tax Revenue
                                                      (in Millions of Dollars)


          California                                               89.3
          Florida                                                  13.6
          Washington                                                8.6
          Georgia                                                   7.2
          Pennsylvania                                             5.6
          Maryland                                                  4.4
          New York                                                  4.0
          Texas                                                     3.9
          Michigan                                                  3.7
          Connecticut                                               3.6

          Note: This table reports estimated impacts on state and local tax gasoline
          tax revenue in 2017. The top ten states are listed. Estimates assume elec-
          tric vehicle drivers would have otherwise driven a 28.9 miles-per-gallon in-
          ternal combustion vehicle 15,000 miles per year. Electric vehicles include
          plug-in hybrids and all-electric vehicles.




          Table 4: Foregone Gasoline Tax Revenue, Robustness



Baseline Estimate                                                                $ 249 million

Naive Estimate Ignoring Where Electric Vehicles Driven                           $ 199 million

Assuming 7,000 miles Driven Annually                                             $ 116 million

Assuming Otherwise 35MPG Vehicle                                                 $ 206 million

Assuming Otherwise 25MPG Vehicle                                                 $ 288 million

Assuming Plug-In Hybrids Driven 50% Gasoline                                     $ 192 million


Note: This table reports the estimated impact of electric vehicles on U.S. gasoline tax revenue
in 2017, under alternative assumptions. In the baseline estimates, electric vehicle drivers are
assumed to have otherwise driven a 28.9 miles-per-gallon gasoline-powered vehicle 15,000
miles per year.




                                               40
