                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DO HEALTH INSURANCE MANDATES SPILLOVER TO EDUCATION? EVIDENCE
              FROM MICHIGAN'S AUTISM INSURANCE MANDATE

                                        Riley K. Acton
                                      Scott A. Imberman
                                     Michael F. Lovenheim

                                      Working Paper 26079
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26079


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




We would like to thank the Michigan Department of Education and the Center for Educational
Performance Information for their assistance in getting this project started, providing data, and
technical support. We would also like to thank Marika Cabral, David Figlio, Nora Gordon, and
seminar participants at the Institute for Poverty Research at the University of Wisconsin,
Association for Education Finance and Policy and Association for Public Policy Analysis and
Management meetings. Research assistance by Alyssa Carlson is also greatly appreciated. This
research result used data collected and maintained by the Michigan Department of Education
(MDE) and/or Michigan's Center for Educational Performance and Information (CEPI). Results,
information and opinions solely represent the analysis, information and opinions of the author(s)
and are not endorsed by, or reflect the views or positions of, grantors, MDE and CEPI, or any
employee thereof. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Riley K. Acton, Scott A. Imberman, and Michael F. Lovenheim. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Health Insurance Mandates Spillover to Education? Evidence from Michigan's Autism
Insurance Mandate
Riley K. Acton, Scott A. Imberman, and Michael F. Lovenheim
NBER Working Paper No. 26079
July 2019
JEL No. H41,I13,I21

                                          ABSTRACT

Social programs and mandates are usually studied in isolation, but interaction effects could create
spillovers to other public goods. We examine how health insurance coverage affects the
education of students with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) in the context of state-mandated
private therapy coverage. Since Medicaid benefits under the mandate were far weaker than under
private insurance, we proxy for Medicaid ineligibility and estimate effects via triple-differences.
While we find little change in ASD identification, the mandate crowds-out special education
supports for students with ASD by shifting students to less restrictive environments and reducing
the use of ASD specialized teacher consultants. A lack of short-run impact on achievement
supports our interpretation of the service reductions as crowd-out and indicates that the shift does
not academically harm students with ASD.

Riley K. Acton                                   Michael F. Lovenheim
Michigan State University                        Department of Policy Analysis and Management
486 W. Circle Drive                              ILR School, and Department of Economics
110 Marshall-Adams Hall                          Cornell University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038                      264 Ives Hall
actonril@msu.edu                                 Ithaca, NY 14853
                                                 and NBER
Scott A. Imberman                                mfl55@cornell.edu
Michigan State University
486 W. Circle Drive
110 Marshall-Adams Hall
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
and NBER
imberman@msu.edu
1     Introduction

How policy decisions in one area spill over to other areas in which there are no direct policy
connections is a core question in economics. These spillovers often are unintended by policy-
makers, but they can have large impacts on how individuals respond to policy changes and the
resulting social welfare effects of those policies. The opportunity for these unintended spillovers
is particularly large in the United States, where a large array of different government orga-
nizations at the federal, state and local levels enact separate policies that interact with one
another in complex ways. These interactions mostly have been studied with respect to the
social safety net in the US.1 Little research has addressed spillovers into education, particularly
with respect to the health care system.2 This lack of research is surprising, since education and
health together accounted for 25.2% of GDP in 2017. Health and education are strongly linked
through their central role in the development of human capital, and there also are direct policy
linkages through the special education system that services students with disabilities.
    In this paper, we provide one of the first analyses of how health care policies spill over
to the education sector by examining the effect of Michigan's autism insurance mandate on
the educational services received by, and achievement outcomes of, students diagnosed with
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). While our analysis contains broad lessons for how health
care policies affect educational services and outcomes, the specific focus on students with ASD
also is of high importance.
    ASD is one of the fastest-growing developmental disabilities in the United States. The ASD
diagnosis rate among eight-year-olds increased from 6.7 per 1,000 students in 2000 to 16.8 per
1,000 in 2014.3 Among students 3-21 years old, the rate of special education primary disability
identifications with ASD rose from 0.2% in 2000 to 1.2% in 2015 (a 500% increase). The overall
student disability rate declined slightly over this time period, from 13.3% to 13.2%.4 A recent
study using self-reports from 2016 found that among children aged 3 to 17, 2.8% were diagnosed
   1 See for example Elwell (2018), Ham and Shore-Sheppard (2005), Yelowitz (1995), Moffitt and Wolfe (1992), and Blank (1989).

These studies all find evidence that changing one program affects participation in other programs.
   2 Recent work by Benson (2018) estimates the effect of special education participation on Supplemental Security Income receipt

and shows strong evidence of interactions among these programs. There also is some research that shows how direct health
interventions in public schools affects student health and educational achievement, but these studies do not identify spillover effects
across programs or policy areas (e.g., Lovenheim, Reback and Wedenoja 2014; Reback and Cox 2018; Buckles and Hungerman
2018).
   3 Source: https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/data.html.
   4 These tabulations are taken from the 2017 Digest of Education Statistics, Table 204.30. https://nces.ed.gov/programs/

digest/


                                                                  1
with ASD at some point (Xu et al. 2018). Students with an ASD diagnosis are growing in
absolute terms (617,000 children in 2015) and are an increasing proportion of all students with
disabilities (9.2% in 2015, up from 1.2% in 2000). Further, students with ASD are some of
the most expensive students to teach. Children with ASD typically have substantial learning
disabilities that require intensive therapy services throughout childhood as well as coordination
between the health care system and the education system. These students cost schools $8,610
more than the average non-ASD student (Lavelle et al. 2014), while the cost to families varies
dramatically by health insurance coverage but has been estimated to be as high as $47,000 per
year in the US.5
    Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA) is the main therapy used to treat students with ASD.
It is not a "cure" but has been shown to substantially improve symptoms through behavioral
modification therapy (Peters-Scheffer, Didden, Korzilius, and Sturmey 2011; Dawson et al.
2010; Viru´
          es-Ortega 2010; Howlin, Magiati, and Charman 2009; Eldevik et al. 2009; Foxx 2008).
It is most effective when implemented early in life (before age 4) and when done intensively,
often for at least 20 hours per week. Because of the high cost of these therapies, schools and
families often lack the resources to provide sufficient services to ASD students. Until recently
ABA and other autism therapies were often excluded from health insurance because they were
considered "experimental" and/or "educational." Even when a therapy is not excluded, the
coverage is uneven across health insurance plans both in terms of what is covered and the ages
for which therapies are covered.
    The lack of coverage for autism services in many private health insurance plans highlights
that what treatments students receive relies on the interaction between school-based services
and the health insurance plan to which a family has access. The interaction of health insurance
and school special education services is not unique to ASD, as these issues are present for all
student disabilities.6 Currently, there is very little understanding of how the health insurance
and special education systems interact in the production of education services for students
with disabilities. The need for expensive extra-curricular treatments that are unevenly covered
by health insurance plans makes students diagnosed with ASD an informative group through
   5 Source: https://www.special-learning.com/article/funding$_$overview.
   6 Given the strong positive correlation between health and education and the central role both play in the development of human
capital, health policy is likely to have an impact on education for non-disabled students as well. For example, Cohodes et al. (2012)
show that Medicaid expansions led to higher educational attainment among affected cohorts.


                                                                 2
which to study this interaction.
    We provide the first analysis in the literature of how mandating private insurance cover-
age of ASD treatments such as ABA affects special education diagnoses (including ASD), the
educational supports students with ASD receive, and the educational outcomes of students diag-
nosed with ASD. Beginning in October 2012, Michigan required that all private state-regulated
insurance plans cover ASD treatment services through age 18. Self-insured plans, while not
mandated to cover ASD therapy, were provided generous financial incentives to do so. Medi-
caid also provided coverage but only for children under age 6 due to a lack of funding.7 The
difference between the Medicaid and private insurance coverage forms the basis of our empirical
strategy.
    We use administrative data on all public K-12 students in the State of Michigan from the
2009-2010 to the 2014-2015 school years. The data are extremely rich and include not only
traditional test scores, demographics, and schools attended but also specific disability diagnoses
and the services students receive in school through their Individual Education Plans (IEPs).
The data do not include information on the health insurance plan under which each student
is covered, so we rely on the close overlap of Medicaid and free/reduced price lunch (FRPL)
eligibility. Between 2008 and 2016, tabulations from the American Community Survey show
that only 31% of FRPL-eligible students had private insurance coverage while 89% of those not
eligible for FRPL had private insurance.8 We use this overlap to estimate intent-to-treat models
that examine how outcomes among non-economically disadvantaged9 (who are mostly covered
by private insurance) change when the mandate is enacted in 2012 relative to economically
disadvantaged students (who are less likely to be covered by private insurance). To further
increase the accuracy of our proxies for insurance coverage, we restrict our sample to students
who are economically disadvantaged in all years that we observe them in grades 2 through 8
and those never observed during those grades as economically disadvantaged, conditional on
being observed for at least two years. We use this sample because students who are persistently
eligible for FRPL are the most disadvantaged (Michelmore and Dynarski 2017).
   7 As of January, 2016, Michigan began covering all youth in Medicaid up to age 18. Our analysis thus ends prior to the Medicaid
expansion to focus on the private insurance mandate.
   8 Note that insurance counts may exceed 100% as some people remain eligible for Medicaid while enrolled in private plans.
   9 "Economic disadvantage" status refers to students in poverty and the vast majority of students qualify based off eligibility for

free or reduced-price lunch.




                                                                 3
    In a difference-in-differences setting, we first show that the mandate has little effect on the
likelihood of receiving an ASD special education identification in grades 2 through 8.10 This is
interesting in its own right, as private insurance can cover diagnostic services. However, most
medical diagnoses for ASD occur before the age of six (Fountain, King and Bearman 2011),
which is likely why we find no effect on ASD identification.11 The lack of any meaningful ef-
fect on overall ASD incidence supports a triple difference strategy when we examine education
services and achievement. We estimate how outcomes among ASD students who are not eco-
nomically disadvantaged change relative to ASD students who are and how this change relates
to the change in outcomes among non-ASD students who differ in disadvantage status.
    We find that the insurance mandate reduces the set of special education resources ASD
students receive and induces students to be placed in less restrictive environments. Among
ASD students who are never disadvantaged, the mandate causes a 6.8 percentage point (10.1%)
reduction in placement in resource room (pull-out) or cognitive impairment programs (self-
contained classes for students with cognitive impairments) and a 4.1 percentage point (31.8%)
increase in placement in no special education program. Furthermore, these ASD students are 2.3
percentage points (17.7%) less likely to be assigned an ASD-specialized teacher consultant (who
provides oversight and support to the students' teachers and help develops instructional plans),
though they are slightly (albeit insignificantly) more likely to receive any special education
support services. Taken together, these measures indicate that the private insurance mandate
led to lower special education resource provision for affected students in schools.
    Our data do not allow us to observe the use of ASD therapy services outside of school. Such
data would be useful in assessing the costs and benefits of this policy and whether our results
indeed reflect crowd out of special education services rather than students not requiring as many
services in school. To provide some evidence on whether the mandate generates crowd out versus
reducing the need for in-school services, we examine student test scores that yield insight into
the extent to which the mandate supports or detracts from student learning. There could be a
negative effect if service crowd-out is more than 100% or if the privately provided services are
  10 Generally, free/reduced price lunch eligibility is more accurately measured in primary grades than secondary grades, which is

one benefit of focusing on younger students.
  11 While medical diagnosis and identification of ASD for education purposes are similar, they are not the same. Some students

may be diagnosed but not have an IEP or have a different primary identification. Alternatively, while it is extremely likely a child
with an ASD identification also has a medical diagnosis, the latter is not a necessary condition for the former.




                                                                 4
of lower quality. Conversely, student learning may increase if overall services increase and/or if
the quality of services provided increases. Additionally, providing ABA outside of school may
facilitate more inclusion of ASD students in general education classrooms, which some research
suggests is productive for learning among students with disabilities (Ruijs and Peetsma 2009)
and more time to focus on direct instruction. The inability to observe privately provided
services precludes a direct analysis of these mechanisms, but we are able to identify the net
policy effect that shows how the policy impacts achievement. The achievement results thus
provide suggestive evidence of the mechanisms at work.
   We find little evidence of a net change in reading or math test scores. In our preferred
model that uses other disabled students as a comparison group, the 95% confidence interval
for math in standard deviation units is [-0.054,0.051] and in reading it is [-0.043,0.072]. We
thus can rule out anything but modest-to-small changes in math and reading scores due to the
mandate. This finding suggests either that crowd-out was complete (and thus total services
did not change) or that any reduction in services is balanced by the effects of being in a
more inclusive general education environment. Nonetheless, these results suggest there was no
adverse effect on students' academic performance from the crowd-out.
   We also examine heterogeneous effects by gender, race, and grade level. Our results do
not vary much across groups, but we do find that girls are more likely to be removed from
resource/cognitive programs and more likely to be placed in no special education programs
than are boys. Effects are similar for White and Asian versus Black and Hispanic students,
but we lack power to estimate precise effects for the latter group. We also find that the effects
only begin to appear in grade 2. This grade heterogeneity is sensible, as nearly all students in
Kindergarten and many in grade 1 are 6 years old or younger and therefore receive increased
private ASD services under the mandate regardless of their health insurance status. In terms
of test scores, we find little evidence of heterogeneous treatment effects.
   This paper contributes to several different strands of research. The first is the small literature
the examines the effects of health care policies on student achievement. Most of the prior
literature focuses on Medicaid (Cohodes et al. 2016; Levin and Schanzenbach 2009) or examines
direct health interventions in schools (Lovenheim, Reback and Wedenoja 2014; Reback and



                                                 5
Cox 2018; Buckles and Hungerman 2018). Broadly, to our knowledge this is the first paper
to examine the interaction between the health insurance and special education systems. More
specifically, our study is the first to identify causal effects of Autism insurance mandates on the
educational services disabled students receive and their subsequent educational achievement.
   The second literature to which we contribute is the crowd-out of public goods by private
provision (Bergstrom, Blume, and Varian 1986). Crowd-out of public services from private
provision has been documented in several contexts like Medicaid (Cutler and Gruber 1996;
Gruber and Simon 2008), charitable donations (Payne 1998; Gruber 2007; Andreoni and Payne
2011), religion (Hungerman 2005), and school funding (Gordon 2004). To our knowledge, this
is the first analysis to show that private health insurance mandates crowd out special education
services in public schools. This is an important contribution because special education is by
design at the intersection of publicly provided education and often privately provided health
care. That changes to private insurance can affect the services that disabled students receive
in public schools is a novel finding that has implications for health insurance policies and the
funding and provision of special education services.
   We also contribute to a growing body of work on policies surrounding ASD students. ASD
is a very expensive disability to treat, with current estimates in the US indicating that it
costs about $17,000 per year to treat a student with ASD through health care and special
education services (Lavelle et al. 2014). There also is suggestive evidence that ASD leads to
lower labor force attachment and earnings among parents (Cidav, Marcus, and Mandell 2012),
although identifying causal estimates is difficult in this context. The lifetime cost of supporting
a child with ASD, including potential labor force effects among parents, is between $1.4 and
$2.4 million in the US (Buescher et al. 2014). A large literature has arisen that examines the
causes of the rise in ASD (see e.g., Hansen, Schendel, and Parner 2015; Matson and Kozlowski
2011), but to date very little work has been done on what school or health policies can support
the academic development of ASD students and how best to deliver services to them in a
cost-effective manner.
   Finally, we present direct estimates of the effect of the Michigan insurance mandate on
special education services and academic outcomes. These mandates are growing in prevalence:



                                                6
46 states (plus D.C.) currently have some form of regulation that requires ASD services to
be covered by health insurance plans. However, the scope of what is covered and the ages of
children included in the regulations vary considerably across states.12 The Michigan mandate
is among the most expansive in terms of what must be covered and in terms of the ages of
children included. Thus, our analysis is informative with respect to the potential for these
types of policies to impact educational services and outcomes among students with ASD.



2     Background

2.1     Austism Spectrum Disorder and Therapy Options

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disability that generates problems with
social, emotional, and communication skills (Centers for Disease Control, 2018). The cate-
gorization combines disorders that were previously viewed as distinct - Autism, Asperger's
Syndrome, Pervasive Developmental Disorder (Not Otherwise Specified) - and are now consid-
ered by psychiatrists to be variations of the same spectrum of conditions. Children with ASD
show many different symptoms and often exhibit some but not others. Common symptoms in-
clude difficulty with social interactions, delayed speech and inability to communicate verbally,
repetitive behaviors, and stimming. These start to appear as early as 18 months of age, and
diagnoses can be obtained as early as 24 months (Centers for Disease Control, 2018). Even so,
diagnosis this early is uncommon. The median age of first diagnosis in the US as of 2012 was
4.2 years, and only 46% of children with ASD had a full evaluation prior to 3 years of age (Baio
et al. 2018).
    ASD is considered a lifelong disorder. While there is no cure, there are treatments that
can help alleviate symptoms and improve the ability of individuals with ASD to perform well
behaviorally, both in school and in society more broadly. Children with ASD usually receive a
variety of therapeutic interventions. These often include occupational therapy, speech therapy,
sensory integration therapy, and Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) therapy.13 Students may
receive these services from private practitioners, through the special education system, which
  12 Regulations      for     each     state      can     be      found       at      http://www.ncsl.org/research/health/
autism-and-insurance-coverage-state-laws.aspx.
  13 While there is some research on how nutritional changes can help, these studies are largely observational or small sample

experiments and show limited evidence of impacts on symptoms (Mari-Bauset et al. 2014)



                                                              7
we discuss further in Section 2.3, or through a combination of private and public providers.
   Applied Behavior Analysis (or Early Intensive Behavioral Intervention), which involves us-
ing positive reinforcement and repetitive application of behavioral situations where cause and
effect are outlined, has become one of the most widely used strategies for addressing autism.14
As noted above, there is substantial experimental and observational research that shows ABA
to be effective at improving educational and behavioral outcomes for children. Further, pro-
viding intervention early on when the child is very young has been shown to be more effective
than starting later (Zwaigenbaum et al. 2015; Dawson et al. 2010; Granpeesheh et al. 2009;
Corsello 2005). ABA therapy is typically provided by licensed Board Certified Behavior An-
alysts (BCBAs), many of whom work outside of the public school system.15 However, many
students also receive some form of ABA therapy in school. For example, in 2011 - prior to the
insurance reform - 59% of public school educators in Michigan reported using ABA therapies
with students with ASD (Ferreri & Bolt, 2011).
   Data on the costs of these interventions are sparse, but the therapies are generally considered
to be quite expensive. Total costs of treatment combined with opportunity costs (e.g. for lost
work by a parent or caretaker) have ranged from $17,000 per year in the US to $44,000 in the UK
and $68,000 in Sweden (J¨
                        arbrink 2007; Knapp, Romeo, and Beecham 2009; Lavelle et al. 2014).
Additionally, estimates of medical expenditures for individuals with ASD indicate they exceed
those without ASD by $4,110 to $6,200 per year, 4 to 6 times larger than average (Shimabukuro,
Grosse, and Rice 2008). Given these large costs, insurance coverage is potentially a very
important factor in whether children receive treatment. Cost-benefit analyses have shown
ABA interventions to be highly cost effective over the long run. Jacobson, Mulick, and Green
(1998) find lifetime benefits for the individual of up to $1 million. Ganz (2007) estimates the
lifetime social costs of untreated autism at $3.2 million as of 2003, though it is unclear how
much this can be mitigated by therapeutic treatment.
 14 https://www.autismspeaks.org/applied-behavior-analysis-aba-0.
  15 Less than 30% of job postings for BCBAs come from the education sector, while nearly 60% come from the healthcare and

social assistance sectors. See: https://www.bacb.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/151009-burning-glass-report.pdf




                                                            8
2.2     The Michigan Autism Insurance Mandate

Until recently, treatments for Autism Spectrum Disorder beyond therapies for co-morbidities
like speech and occupational therapy were not commonly covered by health insurance. As a
result, states started mandating coverage for ABA and related therapies. Today, 46 states and
the District of Columbia have some coverage requirements for autism services. Even in these
states, however, coverage can be limited. Affected children often have to go through a time
consuming evaluation process where access may only be available in a few locations with long
wait lists. Furthermore, coverage mandates do not extend to all health insurance plans - since
self-insured firms are covered under Federal law, states have little ability to mandate coverage
in these cases.
   In 2012, the state of Michigan passed a law that expanded access to insurance coverage
for children with ASD, with implementation starting in October, 2012. The law had three
main pillars. First, for people covered under state regulated insurance plans, mainly employer
sponsored plans for small or medium sized employers and individually purchased plans, the
law mandated coverage for "evidence-based behavioral health treatment" - typically ABA,
pharmaceuticals, psychiatric care, psychological care, and other therapies - from birth through
18 years of age for children with diagnosed ASD.16 Coverage requirements are generous: the
maximum annual benefit starts at $50,000 for children under six and decreases with age to a
floor of $30,000 at age 18. Co-pays, deductibles, and co-insurance rates cannot exceed those
required by the individual's insurance plan for physical illness.17
   A difficulty often faced by states in ensuring widespread coverage of Autism insurance man-
dates is that only a subset of insurance plans are subject to state regulation. Self-insured plans,
mostly used by large employers, are covered under Federal law and so are not typically subject
to state mandates. As of 2011, 61% of Michiganders with employer-provided coverage were in
self-insured plans (Fronstin 2012). Michigan addressed this gap via Public Act 101 of 2012,
which set up a reimbursement fund for self-insured plans that provided benefits in line with
those required for regulated insurance plans. Plans were permitted to request up to 100% of
  16 Diagnosis by a physician is required and insurance companies are permitted to require the evaluations be done through desig-

nated evaluation centers (Peters, Lausch, and Udow-Phillips 2014).
  17 Michigan Public Acts 99 and 100 of 2012.




                                                               9
the claims from their beneficiaries for reimbursement.18 While there are no data on how many
self-insured firms provided coverage under this law, the very generous reimbursement likely led
to high take-up. It is worth noting that the Autism Alliance of Michigan maintains a list of
self-funded firms in Michigan that offer the insurance benefit, including many of largest em-
ployers in the state such as General Motors, Ford, Meijer (a supermarket chain), and Beaumont
Health System, along with the state government and most major universities.19
    Children not covered under employer-provided or individually-purchased insurance plans in
Michigan are almost all covered under Medicaid, including those covered through the Children's
Health Insurance Program (CHIP). In 2014, 58% of children aged 0 to 18 in Michigan were
covered by private insurance, while 39% were covered under Medicaid and only 3% were unin-
sured.20 The Michigan reform provided insurance coverage for ASD to Medicaid beneficiaries as
of April 2013, but the benefits were considerably less generous than the private insurance man-
date, a key aspect of the reform for our identification strategy. In particular, while pharmacy,
psychiatric, psychological, and co-morbid therapies like speech therapy were already covered
prior to the reform, the only ASD-specific therapy added to coverage from the law is ABA.
Other evidence based therapies are not covered. This itself is only a minor difference as most
therapy for ASD is based on ABA. More importantly, underfunding of the Medicaid benefit led
to coverage expiring once the child reaches an age of six.21 Generally, ABA therapy continues
beyond this age and many years of therapy are needed for benefits to emerge and be maintained.
Further reducing the value of this benefit is that often children are diagnosed relatively close
to the age cutoff. According to the most recent report available, the average age at first ASD
diagnosis for Medicaid recipients across the US was 5.4 years in 2002 - 2004 (Mandell et al.
2010). This leaves virtually no time for therapy to have an effect before access is cut off. Even
if age of diagnosis has improved, nationwide data regardless of insurance coverage showed that
the median age of diagnosis in 2012 was 4.2 years, again leaving little time to garner substantial
benefits from therapy prior to reaching six years of age (Christensen et al. 2016).
   18 In FY2016, the fund ran out of money and hence claim processing has been suspended since then. While it is possible some

firms have since removed their benefits due to the lack of reimbursement, since our data cover only through the 2015-16 school year
and firms typically make insurance coverage decisions towards the end of the calendar year, this is unlikely to affect our results.
   19 A full list of self-insured employers with ASD benefit can be found at https://autismallianceofmichigan.

org/insurance-facts/.          Data on the largest employers in Michigan are from https://www.zippia.com/advice/
largest-companies-in-michigan/.
   20 Kaiser Family Foundation estimates based on the Census Bureau's March Current Population Survey, 2014-2017.
   21 As of January 2016, due to requirements of the Affordable Care Act, the age limit was increased to 21. For this reason we focus

our analysis on school years prior to 2015-2016.


                                                                 10
2.3   Special Education

Students deemed eligible for special education services are covered under the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). To receive such services, students first must be evaluated.
An evaluation can be initiated by parents or the school and involves a review of the child's
educational progress as well as factors potentially related to the suspected disability like health,
vision and hearing, social and emotional development, academic performance, communication,
and motor skills. Hence, eligibility is not simply based on standardized test scores or pure
academic performance.
   Autism is classified under IDEA as a specific disability category. The evaluation process
for students who may be on the Autism spectrum involves examining the students existing
academic record, behavioral outcomes, interviews with teachers and parents, and an assessment
by specialists trained in ASD diagnosis and treatment. These specialists can be provided by
the school or outside of the school. Critically, under IDEA these assessments are to be provided
at no cost to families, though parents can and often do use external assessments to inform the
process. Once a child has been evaluated, parents meet with some combination of teachers,
school administrators, school counselors, and specialists to determine whether the child qualifies
for special education services. If so, they develop an individualized education plan (IEP) that
specifies what educational environment and educational services the student will receive and
the benchmarks that will be used to determine whether the student needs to continue receiving
these services in the future. Typically, IEPs are updated every year with a full reassessment
every three years.
   The special education services agreed to in the IEP need to be provided by the school at no
cost to the family. However, private providers can be used and schools can bill students' health
insurance for services with parental consent. Hence, there is a direct link between the special
education services in an IEP and a student's health insurance plan. Furthermore, the services
being received outside of school can influence the in-school services on the IEP because the IEP
is developed with direct input from the parents. It is reasonable to assume that parents and
schools consider the sum total of therapies and services available to students when crafting an
IEP, and parents of students with ASD often report needing to ask schools to provide more


                                                11
services than initially offered (Ferreri & Bolt, 2011). However, we are aware of no research that
examines the extent to which outside therapies influence IEP services. IDEA also includes a
Least Restrictive Environment (LRE) provision that requires students be placed in the most
general education setting possible. This provision is designed to avoid special education students
being segregated from the rest of the school population, which could have negative consequences
for educational and social/emotional development.
    As this discussion highlights, the special education process is complex and involves many
participants and constituencies. Together with the LRE provision of IDEA there is significant
scope for non-school resources and factors to play a role in the specific education services student
receive and the educational environment to which they are exposed. Research on factors that
influence how IEP plans are developed is thin; our paper is the first to empirically examine how
external factors such as health insurance affect special education services, which is an important
advancement in our understanding of how the special education system operates.



3     Data

3.1   Michigan Administrative K-12 Schooling Data

Our analysis relies on a student-level dataset provided by the Michigan Department of Ed-
ucation (MDE) and Center for Education Performance and Information (CEPI). The dataset
contains administrative educational records on all students enrolled in pre-K through grade 8 in
Michigan's public schools from the 2009-10 to 2014-15 school years. These records provide rich
information on students' demographic characteristics, disabilities, educational settings, special
education programs and services, and achievement levels. Student demographic characteris-
tics are reported by schools to MDE and include a student's race, gender, and eligibility for
Limited English Proficiency (LEP) services. Our key demographic variable of interest is a stu-
dent's "economically disadvantaged" status, which we use as a proxy for measuring a student's
insurance status. A student is defined as economically disadvantaged if she qualifies for free
or reduced-price meals under the National School Lunch Program, is in a household that re-
ceives food (SNAP) or cash (TANF) assistance, is homeless, is a migrant, or is in foster care.
Students' economic disadvantage statuses are updated annually to reflect changes in families'

                                                12
economic circumstances.22 Typically a student who qualifies for any of the latter also qualifies
for free/reduced price lunch, and so we interchangeably refer to this status as "economically
disadvantaged" or FRPL.
    For students with IEPs, which is synonymous with qualifying for special education, we obtain
additional information on a student's primary disability, as defined on her IEP, and special
education resources provided to the student.23 The special education resources variables are
classified into three distinct categories: (1) a student's special education program, (2) a student's
educational setting, and (3) the special education support services received by a student.
    The program category contains the IEP-designated programs in which a student is enrolled.
Programs are state-defined special education settings that must adhere to specific regulations.
To be considered an ASD program, a classroom must not have more than 5 students and
must be served by a state-endorsed teacher of students with ASD who has completed ASD-
specific education and training. Therefore, not all schools or school districts offer all special
education programs, and a student's program need not exactly correspond with her disability.
For example, students with ASD are commonly enrolled in a "cognitive impairment" program,
which has classrooms with up to 10 students and is designed to provide instruction to students
with an array of learning disabilities. There are 14 specific types of special education programs
in Michigan, and students can be enrolled in up to 3 of them. We focus on four categories that
are the most relevant for ASD students: ASD-specific special education programs, cognitive
impairment programs, resource programs - which usually involve pull-out time in a "resource
room" with a special education specialist, and no program (e.g. in a general education classroom
100% of the time).
    The educational setting category contains information on the primary educational setting
where a student receives his education. Our data include eight different measures of the ed-
ucation setting: enrollment in a special education school, whether students are in a general
education classroom more than 80% of the time, 40-79% of the time, or less than 40% of the
  22 One concern with this measure is that some schools qualify for the Community Eligibility Provision for free-lunch that allows

all students in a school to qualify regardless of individual circumstances. However, Michigan still requires schools to collect family
income information to determine individual FRPL eligibility for record keeping purposes. Only 0.3% of observations in our data
are in school-years with 100% FRPL eligibility, indicating that CEP does not affect our classifications.
  23 Students may also receive services through the use of 504 plans which typically provide access for students who are not classified

under conditions recognized via the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). Since autism is a category in IDEA and
IEPs provide more legal protections and guarantees of educational (as opposed to simply disability related) services, most children
with ASD are covered under IEPs. While we do not observe 504 plans directly, these students would have an ASD identification
but no data on services, which accounts for only 0.5% of students with ASD in our analysis sample.


                                                                  13
time, whether students spend any time in a general education classroom, and the proportion
of the student's full-time equivalent (FTE) enrollment that is in a special education setting.
Since the special education FTE rate is measured in the fall and spring, we use the average rate
across the two semesters. For brevity, we focus on whether a student is enrolled in a separate
special education school, whether she is enrolled in a general education classroom more than
80% of the time, and the percentage of FTE enrollment that is in a special education setting
averaged across the year. We hypothesize ex-ante that these education settings are the most
likely to be associated with changes in ASD-related school services, however we show estimates
for our other measures in the online appendix.
  The services category records any special education support services a student receives within
an academic year. These services include therapies, such as speech, occupational, and physical
therapy; work with school social workers and/or psychologists; special transportation to and
from school; and assignment to teacher consultants who provide assistance to general education
teachers. Teacher consultants in Michigan must have a master's degree in education or in a
field related to special education as well as teaching experience in a special education class-
room. Moreover, teacher consultants may be approved to work with special education students
generally or may be approved to work with students with particular disabilities by meeting
additional education and experience standards. There are 30 specific special education support
service categories listed in the data, and up to 10 are recorded for a student. Our primary
estimates examine ASD teaching consultants, language support, occupational therapy, social
workers, and whether a student receives any support services. We focus on these support ser-
vices because they are the most relevant for ASD student. In the online appendix, we also
examine non-ASD teaching consultants, social workers, physical therapy, and transportation
services to demonstrate that services that are less important for ASD students are unaffected
by the insurance mandate.
  Finally, we obtain information on students' test-taking behavior and achievement on stan-
dardized math and reading exams. MDE reports the type of exams (standard or special edu-
cation) students took in a given year, as well as any special education accommodations used.
Test scores are recorded for students who take standard or particular types of special education



                                               14
exams. However, the special education exams assess different material and are scored on a
different scale than the standard exams. Thus, we only consider test scores for students who
take standard exams.24 We further standardized the scaled scores for these exams across all
students in the state within a grade level and school year.
   Our main sample consists of students in grades 2-8 in school years 2009-2010 through 2014-
2015. While as noted above we have data for more grades and years, students in kindergarten
and grade 1 are excluded because it is likely that publicly insured students in these grades also
received increased access to private services through the Medicaid benefit, though we also look
at grade specific effects for the excluded grades. Further, the 2015-2016 school year is dropped
due to the age six cutoff of Medicaid ASD benefits being removed in 2016. Table 1 presents
means of all analysis variables for several subsamples of these students: all students, ASD
students, non-ASD special education students, and non-special education students.25 About
1% of the sample has an ASD identification; these students are more likely to be male and
white than the sample overall and are less likely to be disadvantaged. ASD students also are
less likely to be disadvantaged and more likely to be white and male than non-ASD special
education students. Further, there are substantive differences in the programs, educational
environments and support services received by ASD and non-ASD disabled students.


3.2     Measuring Insurance Status

One of the central data challenges in this analysis is the inability to measure student health
insurance status. The insurance mandate was only binding for students covered under a private
health insurance plan. In some cases children may be uninsured but this is very rare. According
to the American Community Survey, 96% of individuals in Michigan under age 18 were covered
by insurance in 2012, the year Michigan passed the Autism mandate.26 Thus, those students
who do not have private insurance are almost certainly covered by Medicaid/CHIP.
   To proxy for private insurance coverage, we use a student's status as being economically
  24 As we discuss below, we do not find that the mandate changed the type of exam taken by students with ASD, allowing us to

analyze the regular exams while avoiding sample selection concerns.
  25 The sample sizes of ASD students in the top and bottom panel do not match because a small number of students receive an

ASD identification through a 504 plan but receive no special education services.
  26 This is likely a lower bound of the child health insurance coverage rate because those who are eligible for Medicaid but who

are not signed up would be signed up and receive treatment upon arrival at a hospital. They therefore are functionally covered by
Medicaid even if they are not formally enrolled in the program.




                                                               15
disadvantaged, which is primarily based on free/reduced-price lunch (FRPL) eligibilty. The
motivation for using this proxy is that the eligibility criteria for FRPL status overlaps closely
with eligibility for public health insurance. In order to qualify for public health insurance,
children must be in families that earn less than 200% of the Federal Poverty Line.27 Eligibility
for free or reduced price lunches in schools is set at 185% of the poverty line.
   Table 2 shows health insurance status by free/reduced price lunch eligibility (top panel) and
by family income as a percent of the federal poverty line (bottom panel) from the 2008-2016
American Community Survey among K-8th grade students in Michigan. The top panel shows
health insurance coverage is near-universal and varies little by whether students are eligible
for free/reduced price lunch. What does vary across these groups is what type of insurance
students have. Almost 89% of ineligible students have private insurance, while 73% of eligible
students receive Medicaid. While there is some overlap, FRPL eligibility is strongly correlated
with whether students receive Medicaid.
   FRPL status is a somewhat noisy proxy for family income. Research using data from edu-
cation records linked to tax data indicates that there is a wide range of family incomes among
students in the same free/reduced price lunch category (Domina et al. 2018). The bottom
panel of Table 2 shows that the poorest students, those whose families earn under 135% of the
poverty line, are the most likely to be on Medicaid (81%). The percent on Medicaid declines
with income, even in the eligible range. In order to strengthen the proxy we use for Medicaid
eligibility, we use the fact that those who persistently receive free/reduced price lunch are the
most disadvantaged students (Michelmore and Dynarski 2017). These students are likely to
come from the bottom of the income distribution, and Table 2 indicates that they are unlikely
to have private insurance. Conversely, higher income students who are above 250% of the
poverty line are very likely to have private insurance. Hence, our main analysis sample is com-
prised of those who receive free/reduced price lunch in every observed year of school enrollment
from grade 2 to 8 and those who do not receive free/reduced price lunch in any observed year
of school enrollment between grades 2 and 8. Students who receive free/reduced price lunch in
some years are excluded, as are students who are only observed for one year. For completeness,
  27 Federal Medicaid eligibility is stricter, at 133% of the Federal Poverty Line. The Michigan Child Health Insurance Program

(MCHIP) extends public insurance eligibility up to 200% of the poverty line for Michigan residents.




                                                              16
we show robustness checks that include the "sometimes free/reduced price lunch" students in
the online appendix. The estimates that include these students are qualitatively similar but
attenuated as expected because of the use of a weaker treatment proxy.



4     The Effect of the Autism Insurance Mandate on ASD and Special

      Education Incidence

4.1   Empirical Approach

Using data on students in grades 2-8 in Michigan from school years 2009-2014 as described in
Section 3, we estimate difference-in-differences models that identify how the insurance mandate
affected the likelihood that students were diagnosed with ASD or had any special education
diagnosis. Our measure of special education is whether students have an individual education
plan, and we designate a student as being diagnosed with ASD if the IEP lists ASD as the
primary disability. Note that we only observe specific services, programs, and educational
settings for students with IEPs. Further, in our main model we exclude any student who is
identified as economically disadvantaged in some but not all years and conditions on students
being observed in grades 2-8 for at least two years. Our difference-in-differences model for ASD
identification is of the following form:


             ASDigjt = 0 + 1 N onDisadvi + 2 P ostM andatet × N onDisadvi                       (1)

                                           + Xit + gt + j + igjt ,


where ASDigjt is an indicator equal to 1 if student i in grade g and school district j is identified
as having ASD (or an alternative disability that generates an IEP in companion estimates) in
year t, N onDisadvi is an indicator that equals 1 if we never observe the student as economically
disadvantaged in grades 2 through 8 (i.e., treated students), and P ostM andatet is an indicator
that is equal to 1 in the 2012-2013 school year and beyond. The model includes district fixed
effects (j ) as well as grade-by-year fixed effects (gt ). Finally, we include controls for whether
a student is white, male, or limited English proficient (Xit ). Standard errors are clustered
at the school district level since students in the same district experience similar education

                                                17
environments and face the same special education evaluation and service provision practices.
   The coefficient of interest in equation (1) is 2 , which is the difference-in-differences esti-
mate of how the ASD (or other disability) rate of non-disadvantaged children changes in 2012
relative to disadvantaged students. The core identifying assumption is that trends in special
education diagnoses among disadvantaged students are a valid counterfactual for trends among
non-disadvantaged children, conditional on the controls. This assumption can functionally be
broken down into two pieces: 1) outcome trends between disadvantaged and non-disadvantaged
children must be similar prior to 2012, and 2) there must be no shocks that occur in 2012 that
disproportionately affect students by disadvantage status.
   Using data prior to 2012, we generate direct evidence on whether there are pre-treatment rel-
ative trends. These figures are presented below in Section 4.2 and provide strong support for the
assumption that ASD rates are trending similarly across disadvantaged and non-disadvantaged
students prior to 2012. The second assumption of no correlated shocks is more difficult to
examine in the data, as such shocks are by definition unobserved. Nonetheless, we are aware of
no other state policy that was enacted during 2012 that would have disproportionately affected
students across the SES distribution. The economy was recovering from the Great Recession,
but this should be reflected in trends rather than a 2012-specific shock. The Affordable Care
Act individual mandate came into effect in 2012. However, it was effective January 1 2012,
while the ASD mandate went into effect in October 2012. Thus, any effects of the ACA man-
date should be evident in the prior school year. We also do not believe it is plausible that the
ACA affected these students: the ACA was focused on uninsured adults rather than children.
Health insurance coverage among children was nearly universal prior to 2012 due to Medicaid
and CHIP, and Medicaid rules did not change in Michigan during this period.28 To the extent
the mandate caused some parents of children who are disadvantaged to switch from Medicaid
to private insurance to use the ASD service benefits, our estimates will understate the effect of
the mandate.
  28 Michigan expanded Medicaid for adults under the ACA in April 2014, but this expansion did not affect eligibility among

children.




                                                            18
4.2   Results

Table 3 presents estimates of 2 from equation (1). Panel A shows the baseline estimates. In
column (1), we show estimates using ASD diagnosis as the dependent variable; while the point
estimate is statistically different from zero at the 10% level, it is small in magnitude. The
point estimate indicates that non-disadvantaged students experience a relative decline in ASD
diagnoses of 0.00044 percentage points after 2012. This is 4.4% relative to the mean, and the
95% confidence interval rules out an ASD increase among this group of more than 0.11%. Thus,
our estimates indicate that the mandate led at most to a very small change in ASD special
education identification.
   As discussed above, a core assumption underlying our approach is that there are no trends
in disability diagnosis that differ across students who do and do not receive free/reduced
price lunch. The top panel of Figure 1 presents event study estimates of equation (1), where
P ostM andatet × N onDisadvi is replaced with a set of interactions between N onDisadvi and
year indicators. The figure demonstrates that there is no systematic change in the likelihood of
being diagnosed with ASD across the two groups prior to 2012. Furthermore, the year-to-year
changes are extremely small, even relative to the low baseline mean of 1%. The figure also
shows that there is little post-2012 change in the ASD diagnosis likelihood across the groups,
which is consistent with estimates in Table 3.
   Column (2) of Table 3 presents estimates for the incidence of all other non-ASD disabilities.
The estimate is positive, not statistically significant, and is small in magnitude. Taken at
face value, it suggests that non-ASD diagnoses decreased by 0.00013 percentage points (0.10%
relative to the mean) among economically disadvantaged students relative to non-disadvantaged
students post-2012. The bottom panel of Figure 1 presents event study estimates for non-ASD
disability incidence. Similar to the ASD event study, there is little evidence of pre-2012 or post-
2012 relative changes, though there is some noise in the pre-2012 estimates. Taken together,
the panels of Figure 1 support the use of the free/reduced price lunch students as a control
group in this analysis.
   Although there is no aggregate change in non-ASD disability incidence, the remaining
columns of Table 3, Panel A present evidence of a shift in the composition of disabilities in


                                                 19
this broad group. The mandate is associated with an increase in the prevalence of emotional
and other health disabilities and a decline in the prevalence of speech disability. These relative
changes in the composition of the special education groups complicates our preferred triple
difference analysis in which we compare changes in outcomes by poverty status among ASD
versus non-ASD special education students when the mandate comes into effect. It is possible
that outcomes in the non-ASD population are affected by this change in the composition of
disabilities.
   In Panel B of Table 3, we show estimates that include a linear time trend interacted with
non-poverty status. Including this control, the ASD effect is halved and is no longer statistically
significantly different from zero at even the 10% level. Furthermore, the non-ASD disability
effects are attenuated such that only emotional disability is significantly different from zero (at
the 10% level). A comparison of Panel A and Panel B of Table 3 shows that the relative shifts
in diagnoses are due to linear secular trends by poverty status. Event studies that exclude this
control also demonstrate this point: the changes in disability incidence are mostly driven by
secular trends that appear prior to 2012.29 The linear non-disadvantaged trend accounts for
these secular trends. Critically, we show below that the rest of our results and conclusions are
robust to including linear non-poverty time trend controls. Hence, our results are not being
driven by the small compositional changes that are evident in Panel A of Table 3.
   Panel C of Table 3 demonstrates the robustness of our estimates to school fixed effects.
There often is significant heterogeneity across elementary schools within a district. If our results
are biased by unobserved heterogeneity, controlling for school fixed effects should significantly
change the estimates. The results in Panel C are almost identical to those in Panel A, with the
exception of the learning disability coefficient. These estimates further support the validity of
our empirical approach.
 29 These   event study estimates are available from the authors upon request.




                                                                20
5     The Effect of the Autism Insurance Mandate on Educational Ser-

      vices and Test Scores

5.1    Empirical Approach

Motivated by the finding that the insurance mandate does not affect ASD incidence, we em-
ploy triple difference models that compare changes in outcomes among students with ASD by
free/reduced price lunch status to changes in outcomes among non-ASD students by free/reduced
price lunch status. Specifically, we estimate models of the following form:


        Yigjt = 0 + 1 N onDisadvi + 2 ASDit + 3 P ostM andatet × N onDisadvi

                  +4 P ostM andatet × ASDit + 5 N onDisadvi × ASDit

                  +6 P ostM andatet × N onDisadvi × ASDit + Xit + gt + j + igjt ,             (2)


where Yigjt is an outcome for student i in grade g , school district j , and year t. All other
variables are as previously defined. In all the models, the vector (Xit ) includes controls for
whether a student is white, male, or limited English proficient. In models with test scores as
the dependent variable, the vector also includes the lagged test score for the same subject. As
with equation (1), standard errors are clustered at the school district level throughout.
    The main variable of interest in equation (2) is 6 , which yields the triple difference esti-
mate of the effect of the Michigan insurance mandate on student outcomes. The identification
assumptions underlying this model are similar to those discussed above for equation (1). How-
ever, this model relaxes the common trends assumption somewhat: any differences in trends in
outcomes across students who do and do not receive free/reduced price lunch must be similar
for ASD and non-ASD students. Put differently, the non-ASD relative trends by free/reduced
price lunch status need to be an accurate counterfactual for these trends among ASD students.
Similar to the difference-in-differences model, there are two main sources of bias. The first is
differential relative trends across treatment and control groups. In this case, ASD students
who are / are not disadvantaged would have to exhibit different relative trends to non-ASD
students prior to 2012. We present graphical evidence in the online appendix that such relative
trends are not present. The second is contemporaneous and persistent shocks that differentially

                                                21
impact ASD students who are not eligible for free/reduced price lunch. We know of no reason
to suspect that these shocks exist, especially since the ASD incidence rate does not change
substantially when the mandate comes into effect.
   The plausibility of the identification assumptions rests heavily on the composition of the con-
trol group. When estimating impacts on programs, educational settings, and support services,
the sample consists of all students with a disability (i.e., with an individual education plan).
The control group thus is students with a non-ASD disability. Since only students with an
IEP receive special education services, non-ASD disabled students are a natural control group.
When we estimate effects on test scores, we are able to consider both non-ASD disabled and
non-disabled students as potential comparison groups. One important issue is that Michigan
changed the format and structure of achievement exams, particularly those taken by students
with disabilities, in 2014-15. Given this change, we restrict our achievement analysis to 2013-14
and earlier.


5.2   Results

One of the strengths of our data that is unique to our administrative education data and
is not commonly available in other states is the detailed information on special education
services. As discussed in Section 3.1, we consider three types of services: education programs,
the educational setting, and special education support services. These categories are correlated
with one another but imperfectly so. For example, the program in which one is enrolled can
affect special education support services and the extent to which students are in a general
education setting. However, students can receive support services even if they are not enrolled
in special education programs and if they are in a general education setting. Examining these
three categories of educational inputs thus paints a rich picture of how the ASD insurance
mandate affects the type of education students with ASD receive.
   Table 4 presents our baseline estimates for the main set of special education service outcomes
that are most associated with ASD. The special education program outcomes we examine are
whether the student is in an ASD program (column 1), whether the student is in a resource
or cognitive program (column 2) and whether the student is in no special program (column



                                               22
3).30 The program does not have to match the disability listed on the IEP, so students with
ASD diagnoses can be in non-ASD focused programs. Each column of the table shows results
from a separate regression, and the first row presents the triple difference coefficient of interest.
Column (1) shows that the ASD mandate increases the likelihood that students are placed in
an ASD program by 2.8 percentage points, which is 14.2% of the ASD-specific mean (shown at
the bottom of the table). However, the estimate is not statistically significantly different from
zero. Enrollment in resource and cognitive programs decline substantially, by 6.8 percentage
points (10.1%), and this estimate is statistically significant at the 5% level. The likelihood
a student is enrolled in no special education program increases by a statistically significant
4.1 percentage points, which is a 33.2% increase relative to the mean. This result is notable
because these students have an ASD diagnosis, which is why 87% of them are enrolled in at
least one of these special education programs. That the percentage of ASD students not in
any special education program rises substantially suggests that the insurance mandate leads to
lower intensity of special education interventions and less placement in self-contained special
education classrooms. These results thus reflect crowding out of special education services
offered by public schools from the private insurance mandate.
   As discussed in Section 3.1, one of the main assumptions under which our estimates are
identified is that relative trends among free/reduced price lunch and non-free-reduced price
lunch students are similar for ASD and non-ASD disabled students prior to 2012. Online
Appendix Figure A-1 presents evidence on the plausibility of this assumption by showing event
study estimates of the mandate on program placement.31 For no outcome do we see any evidence
of differential pre-2012 trends, which supports our identification strategy. Furthermore, there
is a clear decline in the likelihood of being in a cognitive or resource program after 2012 and
an increase in the likelihood of being enrolled in no program. These figures match the results
in Table 4 closely.
   Columns (4)-(6) of Table 4 present estimates of the effect of the mandate on students'
educational settings. We focus on three outcomes: whether a student is placed in a special
education school (column 4), whether the student is in a general education classroom more than
 30 The  estimates for other programs are provided in Appendix Table A-1 and show no effect.
 31 Specifically,we replace P ostM andatet × N onDisadvi × ASDit with N onDisadvi × ASDit interacted with a set of year dummies
in equation (2). Year 2011 is excluded, so all estimates are relative to that year.



                                                              23
80% of the time (column 5), and the percentage of time students are in a special education
classroom (column 6). The point estimates are small in magnitude and are not statistically
significant at conventional levels. While not significant and small in magnitude, the estimates
provide suggestive evidence of more inclusion. The likelihood of being in a special education
school declines by 10.7% relative to the mean, general education classroom inclusion increases
by 3.1%, and the FTE rate declines by 3.7%. These results are consistent with crowd-out of
special education services due to the ASD insurance mandate.
   Online Appendix Figure A-1 presents event study estimates for these outcomes. The event
study models are less informative for these measures because education setting variables are only
available beginning in 2010 and the FTE measures are only available beginning in 2011. Hence,
we have fewer pre-treatment years for these outcomes with which to diagnose any selection on
relative trends. Nonetheless, given the data available, the event study estimates support the
validity of our empirical approach and match the findings in Table 4 closely.
   Our final set of educational input measures ­ special education support services ­ are shown
in columns (7)-(11) of Table 4. We focus on ASD teaching consultants (column 7), language
support (column 8), occupational therapy (column 9), access to social workers (column 10),
and whether students receive any support services (column 11). Column (7) shows that the
insurance mandate reduced the likelihood that a student received an ASD teacher consultant by
a 2.3 percentage points (17.7% relative to the mean) and this estimate is statistically significant
at the 5% level. The point estimates for language and occupational therapy, as well as social
worker support, are close to zero and are not significant, though they are negative. While
these results are consistent with a crowd-out of special education services, we also find that
the likelihood of receiving any special education support services increases by 1.6 percentage
points, albeit the estimate is less than 2% of the mean and is only statistically significant at the
11% level. Thus, overall, the pattern is again consistent with crowd-out but only ASD teacher
consultants are meaningfully reduced Online Appendix Figure A-1 shows event studies for these
outcomes and again supports the identification assumption of common relative trends in special
education support services prior to 2012 between ASD and non-ASD disabled children.
   The results presented thus far suggest that ASD students who are likely to have private



                                                24
insurance receive fewer special education supports in more inclusive environments after the
insurance mandate is passed. The effect of this change on student achievement is unclear. If
the crowd-out we find is incomplete, overall support levels increase and student achievement is
likely to increase. This is particularly the case if the quality of services provided by the private
market are of higher quality. However, if crowd-out is full (or more than full) or if support
quality declines, student achievement should decline.
    In Table 5, we focus on two achievement measures: standardized math test scores and
standardized reading test scores for students in grades 4-8.32 Given Michigan changed their
exam structures in 2014-2015, we exclude that year from the estimates, leaving us with two pre-
mandate and two post-mandate years. An added complication when we analyze these outcomes
is that it is unclear which control group is most appropriate. Rather than take a strong stand
on any one control group, we show estimates using all non-ASD students as well as non-special
education students and non-ASD special education students. The third group is the control
group we have used thus far.
    The first three columns of Table 5 show results for math scores and the second three show
results for reading test scores, both of which are in standardized units. Across all columns, we
find little evidence that academic achievement is affected by the private insurance mandate.
One concern with the test score measures is that we can only measure test scores for students
who take Michigan's traditional standardized exams. Special education exams do not assess
the same material, are scored on a different scale, and experienced substantial changes over the
time period. In Appendix Table A-2, we show there is no evidence that test-taking behavior
was altered by the insurance mandate.
    For math all of the estimates are quite small. The largest estimate is in column (2) and
uses non-disabled students as the comparison group. Our preferred estimate uses the non-ASD
special education students as the comparison group, and the 95% confidence interval for this
estimate is [-0.054,0.051]. Thus, we can rule out at the 95% level that the mandate changes
math scores by more than 5.1% of a standard deviation.
    The point estimates for reading (columns 4-6) are somewhat larger than for math but are
  32 Students begin standardized testing in grade 3 but cannot be analyzed until grade 4 given our inclusion of lagged achievement.

In these specifications, our sample consists of all students who we observe taking a regular exam for at least two years and are
either never or always disadvantaged in the years in which we observe them.



                                                                25
also not statistically different from zero. In this case, the largest estimate is in column (4)
using all non-ASD as a comparison group. The 95% confidence interval for reading with our
preferred control group (column 6) is [-0.043,0.072]. We thus can rule out anything larger than
modest effects on test scores at the 95% level. Figure 2 shows event study estimates for math
and reading using non-ASD special education students as the comparison group.33 The figures
do not show any evidence of differential pre-2012 trends that would bias our triple difference
estimates, though we acknowledge that we are limited in this assessment by the need to control
for prior achievement, which restricts us to only having two years of pre-mandate testing data.
    Taken together, the results from Table 5 and Figure 2 indicate that academic achievement
is likely unaffected and certainly does not increase substantially due to the private insurance
mandate. This null result is an important finding given the changes in education services we
document. Because we cannot observe services provided outside of school, we cannot determine
whether our results indeed reflect crowd-out or just a reduced demand for services among
students because they are getting better due to increased access to private services. That
student achievement does not substantially increase suggests our findings are most consistent
with a crowd-out story, which is our preferred interpretation of the results. That they do not
substantially decrease either suggests that the shifting of responsibility to the private sector does
not academically harms students with ASD. Nonetheless, we caution that these achievement
analyses are short term and so it is possible that cognitive improvements do not show up until
more exposure time has elapsed.


5.3     Heterogeneous Treatment Effects and Robustness Checks

We examine several sources of heterogeneity: gender, race, and grade.34 Table 6 presents
estimates of the effect of the mandate on ASD incidence for each of these different groups. We
see no evidence of a change in diagnoses for girls or for Whites & Asians vs. Black & Hispanic
students. While there is evidence of reduced ASD incidence of 0.07 pp among boys due to the
mandate, as with the overall estimates, this is very small relative to the mean rate of 1.7%.
When we examine heterogeneity by grade in Panel B, there is a decline in ASD diagnosis in
  33 Event studies for the other control groups are shown in Online Appendix Figures A-2 and A-3 and are very similar.
  34 When  assessing heterogeneity by grade, our sample consists of all students in grades K-8 who we observe for at least two years
and are either disadvantaged in all years in which we observe them or are never disadvantaged in the years in which we observe
them.


                                                                26
first and second grade that is significant at the 5% level. However, there is little evidence of any
effects in higher grades, which suggests the mandate may shift the timing of diagnosis slightly to
these later grades. It is perhaps worth noting that testing begins in grade 3 which may provide
an impetus to identify students who would have been identified earlier in the absence of the
mandate. Taken together, there is little evidence that different groups experience a meaningful
increase in ASD diagnosis, and there is no evidence of a positive shift along any dimension we
examine.
   We now turn to examining outcomes for these different groups. As shown in Table 1, 85%
of those with an ASD diagnosis are boys and in general, the condition is far more common
amongst males - according to the CDC, boys are 3 times as likely to be diagnosed as girls
nationwide35 . It thus is informative to examine effects separately by gender. Table 7 shows
triple difference estimates of educational service outcomes for boys (Panel A) and girls (Panel
B). The direction of the estimates are similar for boys and girls, but the effects tend to be
larger both in absolute value and relative to the ASD identification rate for girls. Effects on
resource/cognitive programs, no special education programs, and ASD teacher consultant are
all larger for girls than for boys, but they are qualitatively similar across genders. Combined,
the results show substantial crowd out effects on both genders that are somewhat larger for
girls. We also note, however, that there is a statistically significant (at the 10% level) increase
in the likelihood of receiving any special education services among girls.
   Panels C and D show effects of the mandate for Black and Hispanic as well as White and
Asian students, respectively. The crowd-out effects are most evident for White and Asian stu-
dents, who make up nearly 3/4 of the ASD population in Michigan. The effects on Black and
Hispanic students are quite noisy as a result. The results for Whites and Asians mirror the over-
all estimates quite closely while the findings for Black and Hispanic students are qualitatively
similar but imprecise, which limits our ability to draw strong conclusions for this group.
   Table 8 shows effects by grade, including kindergarten and 1st grade. Kindergarten can be
interpreted as a specification check, as ASD services for the vast majority of these students
are covered by both private and Medicaid insurance plans after 2012. Furthermore, many first
grade students are under age 6 and will not be affected by the mandate. The estimates in both
 35 https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db291.htm




                                                             27
of these grades are small, and no estimate in these grades is statistically significantly different
from zero at even the 10% level. These estimates suggest that we are not picking up unobserved
shocks or trends that differentially influence outcomes among non-disadvantaged ASD students.
   The remaining estimates in the table test for heterogeneous treatment effects by grade for
higher grades. Autism therapies like applied behavioral analysis can have differential effects
by age, and the ability of schools to alter special education services also can differ for older
versus younger students. Resource and cognitive program reductions are largest for students
in grades 2 through 6 and start to fade after 4th grade, though estimates never turn positive.
Consistent with resource/cognitive program effects, the effects on non-participation in special
education programs are positive in grades 2 through 6. Further, the reduction in the use of
ASD teacher consultants is concentrated in early elementary grades. For the other outcomes,
the estimates are generally small and statistically insignificant regardless of grade level. Thus,
the crowd-out effects are mostly concentrated in elementary rather than middle school which
one would expect given ASD therapy is more effective, and hence more commonly used, when
the child is younger.
   We also examine test score effects along these dimensions of heterogeneity. Online Appendix
Table A-3 shows reading and math score estimates by gender, race, and grade using non-
special education students as the comparison group. There are no strong statistically significant
patterns across groups, though for girls and Black/Hispanic students the estimates are very
imprecise due to there being relatively few incidences of ASD in these cases. Nonetheless,
these results provide additional evidence that the crowd-out in education services we document
generally do not lead to changes in test scores for ASD students.
   We next estimate a series of robustness checks that assess the validity of several data limi-
tations and identifying assumptions. First, we examine the importance of including the linear
time trend interacted with non-disadvantaged status. As discussed in Section 4, this control
accounts for secular trends in ASD and non-ASD special education incidence, particularly in the
comparison group of non-ASD disabled. In Panel A of Table 9, we present triple difference re-
sults that include this control. The estimates are virtually identical to baseline, which suggests
that this control has little effect on our programs, educational settings, and special education



                                                28
service provision results despite the corrections it makes for changes in the disability category
distribution amongst non-ASD disabled shown in Table 3. Panel A of Online Appendix Table
A-4 shows a similar robustness check for math and reading test scores; the test score results
are also robust to excluding this control as well.
   In Panel B of Table 9, we present estimates that include school (rather than school district)
fixed effects. This robustness test assess the stability of the estimates to more fully control-
ling for unobserved heterogeneity across schools. The estimates are very similar to baseline,
suggesting that this heterogeneity is not correlated with the treatment.
   Panel C shows results that address the concern that ASD designation is endogenous to the
mandate. While we find little evidence to suggest this is the case, the point estimate for ASD
in Table 3 is significant at the 10% level. In Panel C, we use the pre-2012 ASD assignment of
students. This robustness check only includes students who were in the data prior to 2012, and
the estimates again are very similar to those in Table 4.
   Throughout this analysis we have compared students who are always disadvantaged to stu-
dents who never are to increase the strength of the proxy for Medicaid eligibility. In Online
Appendix Table A-5, we show results using the full sample of students.36 Relative to our
baseline sample, this sample adds those who sometimes receive free/reduced price lunch or
are observed only once in the data and identifies treatment as being non-disadvantaged in a
given year. The sample sizes increase, and the point estimates are attenuated relative to the
main results as expected, since free/reduced price lunch receipt is a worse proxy for Medicaid
eligibility among the sometimes-eligible students (Michelmore and Dynarski 2017; Domina et
al. 2018). Nonetheless, the qualitative patterns do not change; the conclusion that the Autism
insurance mandate led to crowd-out of education services is robust to including these students.
Online Appendix Table A-7 shows that we obtain similar results for math and reading test
scores when we include these students as well. In Panel B of these tables, we show that the
estimates using the full sample of students are robust to including linear year trend interacted
with non-poverty status. Together, the results in Table 9 and Appendix Tables A-5 through
A-7 demonstrate that our results and conclusions are robust to the way in which we construct
  36 Online Appendix Table A-6 shows disability incidence estimates using the full sample of students both with and without time

trends by non-poverty status. The estimates are very similar to those in Table 3.




                                                              29
our analysis sample and to the use of linear time trends by non-poverty status.
    The results thus far have focused on a set of special education services and outcomes that
are most closely associated with ASD. As noted previously, in Online Appendix Table A-1, we
present estimates for other services in our data that are less likely to be affected by the Autism
insurance mandate. If we find effects on many of these outcomes, it is suggestive of bias in our
main results. Specifically, we examine enrollment in another special education program, two
categories of general education participation, any general education participation, non-ASD
teacher consultant use, physical therapy services, and transportation services. None of the
point estimates in Table A-2 is statistically significant at even the 10% level, and each estimate
is close to zero. There is no evidence that these other service measures are affected by the
insurance mandate, which supports the validity of our main findings; the services that change
are those that are most closely aligned with the needs of ASD students.
    Finally, in Panel D of Online Appendix Table A-3, we show that our test score estimates
are robust to including the 2014-15 testing year when Michigan changed to a new exam format
that could have affected ASD versus non-ASD students differently. In general the estimates are
similar with the exception of math relative to non-ASD sped students which becomes negative
and marginally significant. More importantly, however, these results are consistent with our
overall conclusion that any achievement gains, if they existed, were modest.



6    Conclusion

We present the first estimates in the literature of how a mandate that requires private insurance
to cover therapeutic services for children diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder affects
the special education services students receive in public schools, as well as their educational
achievement as measured by test scores. While we study Michigan's mandate, passed in 2012,
46 states and D.C. currently have some form of coverage mandate for ASD students. The
prevalence of these mandates makes them important to study, but our results also provide
more general insight into how the effects of health policy spills over to education services and
outcomes. The close connection between health and education in the production of human
capital underscores the relevance of studying such policy spillovers more broadly.


                                               30
  Using administrative K-12 data on all 2nd through 8th grade students in the state of Michigan
from 2009-2010 to 2014-2015 school year, we estimate how the insurance mandate affected a
wide range of special education services as well as student test scores. The data do not contain
information on private insurance coverage, so we use the strong overlap between economic
disadvantage and Medicaid (the alternative to private insurance) to proxy for exposure to this
mandate. Because we find little evidence that the incidence of ASD diagnoses is altered by the
mandate, we estimate triple difference models that compare how services and outcomes change
in 2012 among non-disadvantaged ASD students relative to disadvantaged ASD student and
disadvantaged vs. non-disadvantaged differences among non-ASD students.
  Our main findings indicate that the ASD coverage mandate led to sizable declines in the spe-
cial education services students receive. ASD students who are not economically disadvantaged
experienced declines in the likelihood of being placed in a resource or cognitive impairment
special education program, in the likelihood of being placed in any special education program,
and in the likelihood of being given an ASD teaching consultant. However, test scores did not
change on average. Taken together, we argue the evidence is most consistent with a crowd-
out story, where the private provision of ASD therapies reduces special education services in
schools. This would generate the service reductions we document and would lead to no change
in academic achievement, as we find.
  Our results are important in showing that supply-side health policies focused on health
insurance have spillover effects to the education system that likely were unintended by policy-
makers. The findings from this paper suggest that the crowd-out of special education services
largely undoes the intent of policymakers to help provide more therapy services to autistic
children. Nonetheless, we see little evidence that policy change was harmful to students and
there is a potential for welfare enhancement if provision through the health insurance system
is more efficient than through the education system or if it frees up instruction time for stu-
dents. Nonetheless, that these spillovers occur in this setting is suggestive that other health
care policies, such as recommendations against teens taking anti-depressants or medical prac-
tices surrounding ADHD disabilities, also may have effects on the services students receive in
schools and their academic achievement. Further understanding these interactions between



                                               31
health policies and schools and how they affect students is a ripe area for future research.


References
[1] Andreoni, James, and A. Abigail Payne. 2011. "Is Crowding Out Due Entirely to Fundraising? Evidence
   from a Panel of Charities." Journal of Public Economics 95(5-6): 334-343.

[2] Baio, Jon et al. 2018. "Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder Among Children Aged 8 Years -- Autism
   and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 Sites, United States, 2014" Morbitity and Mortality
   Weekly Report 67(6): 1 - 23.

[3] Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. "Who Benefits from State and Local Development Policies?" Upjohn Institute for
   Employment Research: Kalamazoo, MI.

[4] Bergstrom, Theodore, Lawrence Blume, and Hal Varian. 1986. "On the Private Provision of Public Goods."
   Journal of Public Economics 29(1): 25-49.

[5] Buescher, Arianne V.S., Zuleyha Cidav, Martin Knapp, and David S. Mandell. 2014. "Costs of Autism
   Spectrum Disorders in the United Kingdom and the United States." JAMA Pediatrics 168(8): 721­728.

[6] Benson, Cassandra. 2018. "Is Special Education a Pathway to Supplemental Security Income for Children?"
   Mimeo.

[7] Blank, Rebecca M. 1989. "The Effect of Medical Need and Medicaid on AFDC Participation." Journal of
   Human Resources 24(1): 54­87.

[8] Buckles, Kasey S. and Daniel M. Hungerman. 2018. "The Incidental Fertility Effects of School Condom
   Distribution Programs." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 37(3): 464-492.

[9] Centers for Disease Control. 2018. "Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)" https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/
   autism/facts.html

[10] Christensen, Deborah L., et al. 2016. "Prevalence and Characteristics of Autism Spectrum Disorder Among
   4-year-old Children in the Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network." Journal of Devel-
   opmental & Behavioral Pediatrics 37(1): 1-8.

[11] Cidav, Zuleyha, Steven C. Marcus, and David S. Mandell. 2012. "Implications of Childhood Autism for
   Parental Employment and Earnings." Pediatrics 129(4): 617-623.

[12] Cohodes, Sarah R., Daniel S. Grossman, Samuel A. Kleiner, and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2016. "The Effect
   of Child Health Insurance Access on Schooling: Evidence from Public Insurance Expansions. Journal of
   Human Resources 51(3): 727-759.

[13] Corsello, Christina M. 2005. "Early Intervention in Autism." Infants & Young Children 18(2): 74-85.




                                                     32
[14] Cox, Tamara Lalovic and Randall Reback. 2018. "Where Health Policy Meets Education Policy: School-
   based Health Centers in New York." Mimeo.

[15] Cutler, David M. and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. "Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insurance?"
   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 391-430.

[16] Dawson, Geraldine, et al. 2010. "Randomized, Controlled Trial of an Intervention for Toddlers with Autism:
   The Early Start Denver Model." Pediatrics 125(1): e17-e23.

[17] Domina, Thurston, Nikolas Pharris-Ciurej, Andrew M. Penner, Emily K. Penner, Quentin Brummet, Sonya
   R. Porter, and Tanya Sanabria. 2018. "Is Free and Reduced-Price Lunch a Valid Measure of Educational
   Disadvantage?" Educational Researcher 47(9): 539-555.

[18] Eldevik, Sigmund, et al. 2009. "Meta-analysis of Early Intensive Behavioral Intervention for Children with
   Autism." Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology 38(3): 439-450.

[19] Elwell, James. 2018. "The Effects of Expansions of Children's Medicaid Eligibility on Program Participation
   and Labor Supply." Mimeo.

[20] Ferreri, Summer and Sara Bolt. 2011. "Educating Michigan's Students with Autism Spectrum Disorder
   (ASD): An Initial Exploration of Programming `The ASD Michigan Project'." Education Policy Center
   Special Report.

[21] Fountain, Christine, Marissa D. King and Peter S. Bearman. 2011. "Age of Diagnosis for Autism: Individual
   and Community Factors across 10 Birth Cohorts." Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 65: 503-
   510.

[22] Foxx, Richard M. 2008. "Applied Behavior Analysis Treatment of Autism: The State of the Art." Child
   and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America 17(4): 821-834.

[23] Fronstin, Paul. 2012. "Self-Insured Health Plans: State Variation and Recent Trends by Firm Size." Em-
   ployee Benefit Research Institute Notes 33(11): 2-11.

[24] Ganz, Michael L. 2007 "The Lifetime Distribution of the Incremental Societal Costs of Autism." Archives
   of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 161(4): 343-349.

[25] Granpeesheh, Doreen, et al. 2009. "The Effects of Age and Treatment Intensity on Behavioral Intervention
   Outcomes for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders." Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders 3(4):
   1014-1022.

[26] Gruber, Jonathan and Kosali Simon. 2008. "Crowd-out 10 Years Later: Have Recent Public Insurance
   Expansions Crowded Out Private Health Insuranc" Journal of Health Economics 27(2): 201-217.

[27] Gruber, Jonathan, and Daniel M. Hungerman. 2007. "Faith-based Charity and Crowd-out During the Great
   Depression." Journal of Public Economics 91(5-6): 1043-1069.



                                                      33
[28] Gordon, Nora. 2004. "Do Federal Grants Boost School Spending? Evidence from Title I." Journal of Public
   Economics 88(9-10): 1771-1792.

[29] Ham, John C. and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. 2005. "Did Expanding Medicaid Affect Welfare Participation?"
   Industrial and Labor Relations Review 58(3): 452­470.

[30] Hansen, Stefan N., Diana E. Schendel, and Erik T. Parner. 2015. "Explaining the increase in the preva-
   lence of autism spectrum disorders: the proportion attributable to changes in reporting practices." JAMA
   Pediatrics 169.1: 56-62.

[31] Howlin, Patricia, Iliana Magiati, and Tony Charman. 2009. "Systematic Review of Early Intensive Be-
   havioral Interventions for Children with Autism." American Journal on Intellectual and Developmental
   Disabilities 1141: 23-41.

[32] Hungerman, Daniel M. 2005. "Are Church and State Substitutes? Evidence from the 1996 Welfare Reform."
   Journal of Public Economics 89(11-12): 2245-2267.

[33] Jacobson, John W., James A. Mulick, and Gina Green. 1998. "Cost­benefit Estimates for Early Intensive
   Behavioral Intervention for Young Children with Autism--General Model and Single State Case." Behavioral
   Interventions: Theory & Practice in Residential & Community-Based Clinical Programs 13(4): 201-226.

[34] J¨
      arbrink, Krister. 2007. "The Economic Consequences of Autistic Spectrum Disorder Among Children in
   a Swedish Municipality." Autism 11(5): 453-463.

[35] Knapp, Martin, Ren´
                       ee Romeo, and Jennifer Beecham. 2009. "Economic Cost of Autism in the UK." Autism
   13(3): 317-336.

[36] Lavelle, Tara A., et al. 2014. "Economic Burden of Childhood Autism Spectrum Disorders." Pediatrics
   133(3): e520-e529.

[37] Levine, Phillip B. and Diane Schanzenbach. 2009. "The Impact of Children's Public Health Insurance
   Expansions on Educational Outcomes." Forum for Health Economics & Policy 12(1).

[38] Lovenheim, Michael F., Randall Reback, and Leigh Wedenoja. 2016. "How Does Access to Health Care
   Affect Teen Fertility and High School Dropout Rates? Evidence from School-based Health Centers." NBER
   WP No. 22030.

[39] Matson, Johnny L., and Alison M. Kozlowski. 2011. "The increasing prevalence of autism spectrum disor-
   ders." Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders 5.1: 418-425.

[40] Mandell, David S., et al. 2010. "Age of Diagnosis Among Medicaid-Enrolled Children with Autism,
   2001­2004." Psychiatric Services 61(8): 822-829.

[41] Mari-Bauset, Salvador et al. 2014. "Evidence of the Gluten-Free and Casein-Free Diet in Autism Spectrum
   Disorders: A Systematic Review." Journal of Child Neurology 29(12): 1718-1727.



                                                      34
[42] Michelmore, Katherine and Susan Dynarski. 2017. "The Gap Within the Gap: Using Longitudinal Data
   to Understand Income Differences in Educational Outcomes" AERA Open 3(1): 1 - 18.

[43] Moffitt, Robert and Barbara Wolfe. 1992. "The Effect of the Medicaid Program on Welfare Participation
   and Labor Supply." The Review of Economics and Statistics 74(4): 615­626.

[44] Payne, A. Abigail. 1998. "Does the Government Crowd-out Private Donations? New Evidence from a
   Sample of Non-profit Firms." Journal of Public Economics 69(3): 323-345.

[45] Peters, Claire, Kersten Lausch, and Marianne Udow-Phillips. 2014. "Autism Spectrum Disorder in Michi-
   gan." Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation Issue Brief.

[46] Peters-Scheffer, Nienke, Robert Didden, Hubert Korzilius, and Peter Sturmey. 2011. "A Meta-Analytic
   Study on the Effectiveness of Comprehensive ABA-based Early Intervention Programs for Children with
   Autism Spectrum Disorders." Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders 5(1): 60-69.

[47] Ruijs, Nienke M., and Thea TD Peetsma. 2009. "Effects of inclusion on students with and without special
   educational needs reviewed." Educational Research Review 4.2: 67-79.

[48] Shimabukuro, Tom T., Scott D. Grosse, and Catherine Rice. 2008. "Medical Expenditures for Children with
   an Autism Spectrum Disorder in a Privately Insured Population." Journal of Autism and Developmental
   Disorders 38(3): 546-552.

[49] Viru´
         es-Ortega, Javier. 2010. "Applied Behavior Analytic Intervention for Autism in Early Childhood:
   Meta-analysis, Meta-regression and Dose­response Meta-analysis of Multiple Outcomes." Clinical Psychology
   Review 304: 387-399.

[50] Xu, Guifeng, et al. 2018. "Prevalence and Treatment Patterns of Autism Spectrum Disorder in the United
   States, 2016." JAMA Pediatrics.

[51] Yelowitz, Aaron. 1995. "The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Participation: Evidence from
   Eligibility Expansions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4): 909­939.

[52] Zwaigenbaum, Lonnie, et al. 2015. "Early Intervention for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder Under
   3 Years of Age: Recommendations for Practice and Research." Pediatrics 136(S1): S60-S81.

   global figloc "




                                                    35
             Figure 1: ASD and Non-ASD Special Education Incidence Event Studies


                                                ASD Incidence


                    .001
                    .0005
             Estimate
                 0  -.0005
                    -.001




                             2009    2010         2011          2012        2013         2014
                                                         Year


                                        Any Non-ASD Incidence
                    .01
                    .005
             Estimate
                    0
                    -.005




                             2009    2010         2011          2012        2013         2014
                                                         Year




This figure plots event study estimates in which we replace P ostM andatet × N onDisadvi with N onDisadvi
interacted with a set of year dummies in equation (1). The N onDisadv × t control is excluded because of
collinearity with the event study variables. Year 2011 is excluded, so all estimates are relative to that year.
Each point represents the point estimate and the bars extending from each point show the 95% confidence
interval that is calculated from standard errors that are clustered at the school district level.



                                                       36
     Figure 2: Test Scores Event Studies, using Non-ASD Special Education Control Group


                           Math Test Score (vs. Non-ASD Disabled Students)


                    .05
                    0
             Estimate
                    -.05
                    -.1




                               2010           2011               2012                2013
                                                        Year


                        Reading Test Score (vs. Non-ASD Disabled Students)
                    .1
                    .05
             Estimate
                 0  -.05
                    -.1




                               2010           2011               2012                2013
                                                        Year


This figure plots event study estimates in which we replace P ostM andatet × N onDisadvi × ASDit with
N onDisadvi × ASDit interacted with a set of year dummies in equation (2). Year 2011 is excluded, so all
estimates are relative to that year. Each point represents the point estimate and the bars extending from each
point show the 95% confidence interval that is calculated from standard errors that are clustered at the school
district level.




                                                      37
             Table 1: Descriptive Tabulations of Analysis Variables

 Variable                                   All        ASD        Non-ASD           Non-
                                                                 Special Ed.     Special Ed.
 Demographics
 White                                    0.683        0.754        0.651           0.687
 Male                                     0.513        0.858        0.644           0.489
 LEP                                      0.055        0.030        0.053           0.055
 Poverty                                  0.509        0.434        0.691           0.482

 Disability
 ASD                                      0.010
 Any Non-ASD                              0.133
 Cognitive                                0.011
 Emotional                                0.009
 Speech                                   0.036
 Learning Disability                      0.055
 Other Health                             0.016

 Observations                           3,854,234      38,803      506,432        3,308,999

 Special Education Program
 ASD                                                   0.197        0.001
 Resource                                              0.551        0.611
 Cognitive                                             0.119        0.090
 Other                                                 0.031        0.046
 None                                                  0.129        0.268

 Education Setting
 Special Ed. School                                    0.056        0.018
 Gen. Ed. > 80%                                        0.455        0.594
 Gen. Ed. 40-79%                                       0.149        0.143
 Gen Ed. < 40%                                         0.207        0.074
 Average FTE                                           0.353        0.194

 Special Education Support Services
 ASD Teaching Consultant                               0.130        0.003
 Non-ASD Teaching Consultant                           0.091        0.074
 Language                                              0.790        0.478
 Social Worker                                         0.691        0.220
 Occupational Therapy                                  0.401        0.085
 Physical Therapy                                      0.031        0.027
 Transportation                                        0.041        0.009
 Other Service                                         0.042        0.023
 Any Service                                           0.943        0.674

 Observations                                          38,621      506,432
 Authors tabulations from data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2009-2010 to the 2014-2015 school
years. The sample sizes for the ASD groups in the top and bottom panels differ slightly because a
small number of students with an ASD diagnosis do not receive any special education services.




                                                  38
Table 2: Overlap Between Free/Reduced Price Lunch
         and Medicaid in Michigan, by Family Income

           By Free/Reduced Price Lunch Status
 Free/Reduced Price Percent    Percent   Percent Private
 Lunch Status        Insured Medicaid       Insurance

 Eligible                  95.40%       72.93%           31.03%
 Not Eligible              97.54%       12.86%           88.53%

          By Family Income as Percent of Poverty Line
 Family                 Percent   Percent    Percent Private
 Income                 Insured Medicaid        Insurance

  135% FPL                 95.63%       81.05%           22.50%
 135-185% FPL              94.75%       50.87%           54.19%
 185-250% FPL              95.95%       29.13%           74.53%
 250-350% FPL              96.84%       14.60%           86.82%
  350% FPL                 98.57%        5.16%           95.29%
 Authors tabulations from the 2008-2016 American Community Survey
among children who were in grades K-8 at Michigan public schools (N
= 84,477). "FPL" stands for Federal Poverty Line. Note that insurance
counts may exceed 100% as some people remain eligible for Medicaid while
enrolled in private plans.




                                  39
                      Table 3: The Effect of the ASD Insurance Mandate on Disability Incidence

                                                            Panel A: Main Estimates
                                                                       Dependent Variable:
                                           Non-ASD           Cognitive Emotional        Speech                  Learning        Other Health
      Independent              ASD         Disability        Disability Disability    Disability                Disability       Disability
      Variable                  (1)           (2)               (3)         (4)            (5)                     (6)              (7)

      Non-disadv*           -0.00044*       -0.00013          -0.00005      0.00125***       -0.00303***         -0.00168        0.00345***
      Post-2012             (0.00023)      (0.00011)         (0.00031)       (0.00031)        (0.00066)         (0.00123)         (0.00048)

                         Panel B: Including Linear Time Trend Interacted with Non-Disadvantaged Status
                                                               Dependent Variable:
                                       Non-ASD       Cognitive Emotional        Speech      Learning   Other Health
      Independent            ASD       Disability    Disability Disability     Disability  Disability   Disability
      Variable                (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)          (7)

      Non-disadv*            -0.00022       0.00006           -0.00042       0.00054*           -0.00013         0.00018           0.00019
      Post-2012             (0.00022)      (0.00099)         (0.00032)       (0.00030)         (0.00064)        (0.00071)         (0.00039)




40
                                                      Panel C: School Fixed Effects
                                                                   Dependent Variable:
                                           Non-ASD       Cognitive Emotional         Speech                     Learning        Other Health
      Independent              ASD         Disability    Disability Disability      Disability                  Disability       Disability
      Variable                  (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)                         (6)              (7)

      Non-disadv*           -0.00045*       -0.00004          0.00001       0.00126***       -0.00283***       0.00399***        -0.00266***
      Post-2012             (0.00024)      (0.00105)         (0.00032)       (0.00028)        (0.00065)         (0.00088)         (0.00043)

      Incidence Rate          0.010          0.133              0.011           0.009            0.036            0.055             0.016
      Authors estimates of equation (1) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2009-2010 to the 2014-2015
     school years. The sample includes only students who are always or never eligible for free/reduced price lunch. Each column is a separate
     regression; N=3,854,234. "Non-disadv" is an indicator for whether the student is eligible for free/reduced price lunch in all observed
     years of schooling. Students who are eligible for free/reduced price lunch in only some years of schooling are excluded from the regression.
     All regressions include controls for whether a student is white, male, and limited English proficient as well as grade-by-year fixed effects.
     Estimates in Panels A and B include district fixed effects, while those in Panel C include school fixed effects. Estimates in Panel B
     also control for a linear time trend interacted with non-disadv status. Standard errors are clustered at the school district level: *,**,***
     indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
                                            Table 4: The Effect of the ASD Insurance Mandate on Special Education Services

                                                                                                     Dependent Variable:
                                             Resource or        No           Special       General       Sped        ASD                               Occupational                        Any
                                ASD           Cognitive        Sped            Ed            Ed          FTE        Teacher             Language         Therapy           Social         Sped
      Independent              Program        Program         Program        School         >80%         Rate     Consultant             Services        Services          Worker        Services
      Variable                   (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)                  (8)             (9)              (10)           (11)

      Non-disadv*Post-            0.028        -0.068**        0.041***        -0.006         0.014         -0.013       -0.023**         -0.000           -0.017            -0.015        0.016
      2012*ASD                  (0.036)         (0.030)         (0.011)       (0.007)       (0.016)        (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.014)          (0.013)           (0.014)       (0.010)
      Non-disadv                 0.003        -0.140***        0.151***         0.001      0.125***      -0.058***          0.000       0.105***         0.022***         -0.096***      0.054***
                                (0.002)         (0.005)         (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.006)        (0.004)        (0.001)        (0.005)          (0.003)           (0.005)       (0.005)
      ASD                      0.224***         -0.064*       -0.114***         0.023     -0.167***       0.135***       0.119***       0.307***         0.273***          0.387***      0.251***
                                (0.047)         (0.037)         (0.011)       (0.015)       (0.021)        (0.028)        (0.016)        (0.015)          (0.016)           (0.021)       (0.012)
      Non-disadv*Post-            0.000         0.011**       -0.016***         0.001     -0.026***      0.012***          -0.000       -0.020***          0.005           0.010***      -0.011***




41
      2012                      (0.002)         (0.005)         (0.005)       (0.001)       (0.006)        (0.003)        (0.001)        (0.005)          (0.003)           (0.004)       (0.004)
      Non-disadv*ASD             -0.057        0.149***       -0.113***      -0.014**        -0.026         -0.006       0.039**        -0.071***          0.017           0.107***      -0.054***
                                (0.042)         (0.034)         (0.013)       (0.007)       (0.021)        (0.025)        (0.017)        (0.015)          (0.017)           (0.019)       (0.011)
      Post-2012*ASD              -0.027          0.047           -0.011        -0.002        -0.016         0.009          -0.014         0.012             0.006            0.024        -0.019*
                                (0.040)         (0.033)         (0.009)       (0.010)       (0.015)        (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.014)          (0.013)           (0.016)       (0.010)

      Observations             545,053         545,053         545,053       455,751       455,751        332,372        545,053         545,053          545,053          545,053        545,053
      ASD Mean                  0.197           0.670           0.129         0.056         0.455          0.353          0.130           0.790            0.401            0.691          0.943
      Authors estimates of equation (2) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2010-2011 to the 2014-2015 school years. The sample includes only students who are
     always or never eligible for free/reduced price lunch. Each column is a separate regression. "Non-disadv" is an indicator for whether the student is eligible for free/reduced price lunch in all
     observed years of schooling and "ASD" is an indicator for whether the student has an ASD diagnosis in that year. All regressions include controls for whether a student is white, male, and
     limited English proficient as well as district and grade-by-year fixed effects. The final row of the table provides dependent variable means for the ASD sample. Standard errors are clustered
     at the school district level: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
              Table 5: The Effect of the ASD Insurance Mandate on Test Scores

                                                Math                                       Reading
                                All                         Non-ASD          All                          Non-ASD
 Control Group:               Non-ASD        Non-Sped         Sped         Non-ASD        Non-Sped          Sped
                                (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)

 Non-disadv*Post-               0.0099         0.0137         -0.0013         0.0291         0.0268         0.0143
 2012*ASD                      (0.0264)       (0.0264)       (0.0269)        (0.0289)       (0.0291)       (0.0294)
 Non-disadv                   0.163***       0.151***        0.147***       0.204***        0.189***       0.167***
                                (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.006)         (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.007)
 ASD                          -0.089***      -0.124***       0.111***       -0.096***      -0.162***      0.193***
                                (0.016)        (0.016)        (0.018)         (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.019)
 Non-disadv*Post              0.0119**        0.0100*       0.0307***         -0.0027        0.00039        0.0114
                               (0.0050)       (0.0052)       (0.0065)        (0.0035)       (0.0036)       (0.0072)
 Non-disadv*ASD               -0.086***      -0.077***         -0.023       -0.191***      -0.174***      -0.151***
                                (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.020)         (0.022)        (0.022)        (0.023)
 Post*ASD                       0.0197         0.0183       0.0585***         0.0126         0.0208         0.0274
                               (0.0214)       (0.0215)       (0.0210)        (0.0236)       (0.0238)       (0.0239)
 Lagged Achievement           0.744***        0.737***       0.606***        0.649***       0.624***       0.570***
                                (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.013)         (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.009)

 Observations                 1,754,971      1,579,046       185,814        1,749,290      1,578,937       180,172
 Authors estimates of equation (2) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2009-2010 to
the 2013-2014 school years. 2014-2015 is excluded as Michigan changed from the Michigan Assessment of Educational
Progress to the M-Step exam and restructured alternative examination options. The sample includes only students who
are always or never eligible for free/reduced price lunch. Each column is a separate regression. "Non-disadv" is an
indicator for whether the student is eligible for free/reduced price lunch in all observed years of schooling and "ASD" is
an indicator for whether the student has an ASD diagnosis in that year. All regressions include controls for whether a
student is white, male, and limited English proficient as well as district and grade-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered at the school district level: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                            42
                                     Table 6: Heterogeneous Effects of the ASD Insurance Mandate on ASD Incidence

                                                                             Panel A: By Gender and Race
      Independent                 Girls           Boys                          White & Asian Black & Hispanic
      Variable                     (1)             (2)                                (3)             (4)

      Non-disadv*                -0.00020      -0.00073*                              -0.00027               0.00034
      Post-2012                 (0.00016)      (0.00044)                             (0.00024)              (0.00066)

      Observations              1,878,120      1,976,114                             3,272,013               582,221
      Incidence Rate              0.003          0.017                                 0.011                  0.007

                                                                                    Panel B: By Grade
      Independent                  KG           Grade 1          Grade 2             Grade 3          Grade 4                    Grade 5        Grade 6        Grade 7        Grade 8
      Variable                     (1)            (2)              (3)                 (4)              (5)                        (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)




43
      Non-disadv*Post-           -0.00061      -0.00123**      -0.00216***            -0.00078               -0.00039           0.00101*        0.00050        -0.00051       -0.00040
      2012                      (0.00053)       (0.00050)       (0.00057)            (0.00058)              (0.00058)           (0.00061)      (0.00063)      (0.00058)      (0.00052)

      Observations               594,630        545,212           526,440             520,105                524,539             538,197        559,531        588,427        503,930
      Incidence Rate              0.007          0.008             0.009               0.010                  0.010               0.011          0.010          0.010          0.010
      Authors estimates of equation (1) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2009-2010 to the 2014-2015 school years. The sample includes only
     students who are always or never eligible for free/reduced price lunch. Each column is a separate regression. "Non-disadv" is an indicator for whether the student is eligible
     for free/reduced price lunch. All regressions include the full set of controls listed in equation (2), including controls for whether a student is white, male, and limited English
     proficient as well as district and grade-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the school district level: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent
     level, respectively.
                Table 7: The Effect of the ASD Insurance Mandate, by Gender and Race

                                                                 Panel A: Boys
                                                                       Dependent Variable:
                              Resource or     No       Special   General    Sped      ASD                    Occupational               Any
                     ASD       Cognitive     Sped        Ed        Ed       FTE      Teacher     Language      Therapy      Social     Sped
 Independent        Program    Program      Program    School     >80%      Rate   Consultant     Services     Services     Worker    Services
 Variable             (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)       (11)

 Non-disadv*Post-    0.030     -0.062**     0.038***    -0.002    0.011     -0.012   -0.021*       -0.006       -0.017       -0.018    0.011
 2012*ASD           (0.036)     (0.029)      (0.012)   (0.007)   (0.017)   (0.010)   (0.011)      (0.015)      (0.013)      (0.014)   (0.010)

 Observations       359,165     359,165     359,165    300,256   300,256   218,809   359,165     359,165       359,165      359,165   359,165
 ASD Mean            0.193       0.662       0.130      0.062     0.529     0.349     0.130       0.788         0.400        0.694     0.943

                                                                 Panel B: Girls
                                                                       Dependent Variable:
                              Resource or     No       Special   General     Sped     ASD                    Occupational               Any
                     ASD       Cognitive     Sped        Ed        Ed        FTE     Teacher     Language      Therapy      Social     Sped
 Independent        Program    Program      Program    School     >80%       Rate  Consultant     Services     Services     Worker    Services
 Variable             (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)      (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)       (11)

 Non-disadv*Post-    0.013     -0.103**     0.065***    -0.020    0.021     -0.018    -0.031       0.037        -0.010       -0.006   0.038*
 2012*ASD           (0.049)     (0.047)      (0.024)   (0.020)   (0.033)   (0.028)   (0.021)      (0.026)      (0.030)      (0.033)   (0.020)

 Observations       185,888     185,888     185,888    155,495   155,495   113,563   185,888     185,888       185,888      185,888   185,888
 ASD Mean            0.222       0.644       0.123      0.076     0.489     0.380     0.131       0.805         0.410        0.676     0.944

                                                          Panel C: Black & Hispanic
                                                                       Dependent Variable:
                              Resource or     No       Special General     Sped       ASD                    Occupational               Any
                     ASD       Cognitive     Sped        Ed        Ed      FTE       Teacher     Language      Therapy      Social     Sped
 Independent        Program    Program      Program    School    >80%      Rate     Consultant    Services     Services     Worker    Services
 Variable             (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)        (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)       (11)

 Non-disadv*Post-    0.083       -0.059      -0.005     -0.001    0.017     0.009     -0.013       0.016        -0.011       -0.011    -0.014
 2012*ASD           (0.090)     (0.078)     (0.035)    (0.018)   (0.051)   (0.029)   (0.025)      (0.033)      (0.046)      (0.040)   (0.030)

 Observations        82,393     82,393       82,393    58,337     58,337   29,426    82,393       82,393        82,393      82,393    82,393
 ASD Mean            0.320      0.579        0.093      0.073     0.428    0.396     0.088        0.849          0.387       0.662    0.946

                                                           Panel D: White & Asian
                                                                      Dependent Variable:
                              Resource or     No       Special General     Sped      ASD                     Occupational               Any
                     ASD       Cognitive     Sped        Ed       Ed       FTE      Teacher      Language      Therapy      Social     Sped
 Independent        Program    Program      Program    School    >80%      Rate   Consultant      Services     Services     Worker    Services
 Variable             (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)           (8)          (9)         (10)       (11)

 Non-disadv*Post-    -0.015    -0.036**     0.048***    -0.010   0.026*     -0.015   -0.016*       -0.017      -0.021*       -0.013    0.009
 2012*ASD           (0.012)     (0.014)      (0.010)   (0.006)   (0.014)   (0.012)   (0.010)      (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.014)   (0.008)

 Observations       462,660     462,660     462,660    397,414   397,414   302,946   462,660     462,660       462,660      462,660   462,660
 ASD Mean            0.183       0.668       0.133      0.063     0.533     0.350     0.135       0.784         0.403        0.695     0.942

Authors estimates of equation (2) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2009-2010 to the
2014-2015 school years. The sample includes only students who are always or never eligible for free/reduced price lunch. Each
column is a separate regression; N=707,376. "Non-disadv" is an indicator for whether the student is eligible for free/reduced price
lunch and "ASD" is an indicator for whether the student has an ASD diagnosis in that year. All regressions include the full set of
controls listed in equation (2), including controls for whether a student is white, male, and limited English proficient as well as
district and grade-by-year fixed effects. The final row of each panel provides dependent variable means for the ASD sample.
Standard errors are clustered at the school district level: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level,
respectively.




                                                                   44
                                             Table 8: The Effect of the ASD Insurance Mandate, by Grade

                               Resource or        No          Special     General       Sped         ASD                           Occupational                     Any
                  ASD           Cognitive        Sped           Ed          Ed          FTE         Teacher         Language         Therapy          Social       Sped
                 Program        Program         Program       School       >80%         Rate       Consultant        Services        Services         Worker      Services
      Grade        (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)              (8)             (9)             (10)         (11)

      KG            0.003           0.012         0.005         0.004        0.012      -0.004         -0.006         -0.016            -0.028         -0.045       -0.013
                  (0.044)         (0.044)        (0.028)      (0.013)      (0.034)     (0.038)        (0.022)        (0.018)           (0.045)        (0.034)      (0.013)
      1            0.018           -0.022         -0.008       -0.011       -0.009       0.002         -0.030          0.024            -0.029          0.013        0.008
                  (0.044)         (0.041)        (0.027)      (0.014)      (0.034)     (0.030)        (0.025)        (0.021)           (0.032)        (0.032)      (0.016)
      2            0.018           -0.068          0.040      -0.027*       -0.015       0.013       -0.048**          0.017            -0.045         -0.014        0.024
                  (0.044)         (0.044)        (0.025)      (0.016)      (0.036)     (0.036)        (0.022)        (0.025)           (0.030)        (0.030)      (0.018)
      3            0.055         -0.107**         0.047*        0.011       -0.006       0.004        -0.041*         0.006           -0.068**         -0.008        0.019
                  (0.051)         (0.048)        (0.025)      (0.015)      (0.033)     (0.025)        (0.021)        (0.023)           (0.027)        (0.027)      (0.017)




45
      4            0.059         -0.095**        0.047**      -0.031*       -0.006      -0.009         -0.002          0.010             0.046         -0.014        0.030
                  (0.047)         (0.043)        (0.022)      (0.016)      (0.032)     (0.024)        (0.018)        (0.025)           (0.029)        (0.029)      (0.020)
      5            0.012           -0.047          0.030       -0.018        0.035       0.007         -0.008         -0.000             0.020         -0.023       -0.003
                  (0.040)         (0.039)        (0.020)      (0.013)      (0.032)     (0.026)        (0.018)        (0.025)           (0.026)        (0.026)      (0.017)
      6            -0.004          -0.033        0.045**       -0.006        0.042      -0.033         -0.011         -0.028            -0.005         -0.009       -0.001
                  (0.034)         (0.033)        (0.018)      (0.013)      (0.031)     (0.025)        (0.018)        (0.024)           (0.025)        (0.025)      (0.016)
      7            0.021           -0.022          0.002       -0.002        0.001      -0.027         -0.016         -0.043            -0.039          0.006        0.003
                  (0.043)         (0.041)        (0.019)      (0.013)      (0.032)     (0.025)        (0.020)        (0.028)           (0.024)        (0.027)      (0.018)
      8            0.023           -0.010         -0.004        0.008        0.022      -0.033         -0.023         -0.041             0.010         0.002        -0.024
                  (0.028)         (0.032)        (0.021)      (0.013)      (0.032)     (0.023)        (0.022)        (0.028)           (0.023)        (0.026)      (0.020)
      Authors estimates of equation (2) as described in the text using data on students in grades Kindergarten-8 from the 2009-2010 to the 2014-2015 school years. The
     sample includes only students who are always or never eligible for free/reduced price lunch. Each cell is a separate regression and shows the estimate of the coefficient
     on the triple interaction term of Non-disadv*Post-2012*ASD. All regressions include the full set of controls listed in equation (2), including controls for whether a
     student is white, male, and limited English proficient as well as district and grade-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the school district level:
     *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
                                              Table 9: The Effect of the ASD Insurance Mandate ­ Robustness Checks

                                                  Panel A: Including Linear Time Interacted with Non-Disadvantaged Status
                                                                                      Dependent Variable:
                                            Resource or      No      Special General      Sped       ASD                  Occupational                                             Any
                                ASD          Cognitive      Sped        Ed       Ed       FTE       Teacher    Language     Therapy                                 Social        Sped
      Independent              Program       Program      Program School       >80%       Rate    Consultant    Services    Services                                Worker       Services
      Variable                   (1)            (2)          (3)        (4)      (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)                                    (10)          (11)

      Non-disadv*Post-           0.028        -0.068**        0.041***       -0.006      0.014       -0.013       -0.023**         -0.000           -0.017           -0.015        0.016
      2012*ASD                  (0.037)        (0.030)         (0.011)      (0.007)     (0.016)     (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.014)          (0.013)          (0.014)       (0.010)

      Observations             545,053         545,053        545,053      455,751      455,751     332,372        545,053        545,053          545,053          545,053       545,053
      ASD Mean                  0.197           0.670          0.129        0.056        0.455       0.353          0.130          0.790            0.401            0.691         0.943

                                                                                   Panel B: School FEs
                                                                                             Dependent Variable:
                                            Resource or         No          Special General      Sped       ASD                                 Occupational                       Any
                                ASD          Cognitive         Sped           Ed        Ed       FTE      Teacher                Language         Therapy           Social        Sped
      Independent              Program       Program          Program       School    <80%       Rate   Consultant                Services        Services          Worker       Services
      Variable                   (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)                    (8)             (9)              (10)          (11)

      Non-disadv*Post-           0.031        -0.064**        0.034***       0.004       0.000       -0.009       -0.023**         0.005            -0.004          -0.021*       0.020**




46
      2012*ASD                  (0.035)        (0.030)         (0.011)      (0.004)     (0.015)     (0.009)        (0.011)        (0.013)          (0.012)          (0.013)       (0.010)

      Observations             545,053         545,053        545,053      455,751      455,751     332,372        545,053        545,053          545,053          545,053       545,053
      ASD Mean                  0.197           0.670          0.129        0.056        0.455       0.353          0.130          0.790            0.401            0.691         0.943

                                                                Panel C: Pre-Treatment Assignment of ASD Variable
                                                                                        Dependent Variable:
                                            Resource or         No       Special General     Sped      ASD                                      Occupational                       Any
                                ASD          Cognitive         Sped        Ed       Ed       FTE      Teacher     Language                        Therapy           Social        Sped
      Independent              Program       Program          Program School       >80%      Rate    Consultant    Services                       Services          Worker       Services
      Variable                   (1)            (2)             (3)        (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)          (8)                            (9)              (10)          (10)

      Non-disadv*Post-           0.016        -0.075***       0.058***       -0.002      0.004       -0.006         -0.010         -0.0002          -0.022         -0.036***      0.019*
      2012*ASD                  (0.034)        (0.028)         (0.011)      (0.006)     (0.016)     (0.009)        (0.011)        (0.0178)         (0.014)          (0.014)       (0.011)

      Observations             422,974         422,974        422,974      352,054      352,054     332,338        252,537        422,974          422,974          422,974       422,974
      ASD Mean                  0.190           0.661          0.133        0.049        0.534       0.338          0.132          0.779            0.373            0.700         0.939
      Authors estimates of equation (2) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2010-2011 to the 2014-2015 school years. The sample in Panel A includes only
     students who are always or never eligible for free/reduced price lunch, while the sample in Panels B and C include all students. Each column is a separate regression. "Non-disadv"
     is an indicator for whether the student is eligible for free/reduced price lunch and "ASD" is an indicator for whether the student has an ASD diagnosis in that year. All regressions
     include the full set of controls listed in equation (2), including whether a student is white, male, and limited English proficient as well as grade-by-year fixed effects. Estimates in
     Panels A and C include district fixed effects, while those in Panel B include school fixed effects. Estimates in Panel A also control for a linear time trend interacted with non-disadv
     status. The final row of each panel provides dependent variable means for the ASD sample. Standard errors are clustered at the school district level: *,**,*** indicate significance
     at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
7   Online Appendix

          Online Appendix: Not for Publication
             Figure A-1: Event Study Estimates of Main Outcomes

                                         ASD Program
                  .1 .05
              Estimate
                  0
                  -.05




                           2009   2010   2011          2012   2013   2014
                                                Year


                                    Resource/Cog. Program
                  .05
                  0
              Estimate
                -.05
                  -.1
                  -.15




                           2009   2010   2011          2012   2013   2014
                                                Year




                                            47
                               No Program




     .08
     .06.04
  Estimate
.02  0
     -.02




              2009   2010      2011          2012     2013   2014
                                      Year


                             Special Ed School
     .02
     .01
Estimate
     0
     -.01
     -.02




              2010     2011           2012          2013     2014
                                      Year


                            Gen Ed 80% or more
     .06
     .04
Estimate
    .02
     0
     -.02




              2010     2011           2012          2013     2014
                                      Year




                                  48
                         Average Special Ed FTE




       .02
       0
Estimate
       -.02
       -.04




                2011          2012              2013          2014
                                       Year


                         ASD Teacher Consultant
       .04
       .02
Estimate
    0  -.02
       -.04




              2009     2010     2011          2012     2013     2014
                                       Year


                              Speech Therapy
       .04
       .02
Estimate
   0   -.02
       -.04




              2009     2010     2011          2012     2013     2014
                                       Year




                                     49
                                               Occupational Therapy




                            .06
                            .04
                              .02
                        Estimate
                        0   -.02
                            -.04




                                     2009   2010   2011          2012   2013   2014
                                                          Year


                                                   Social Worker
                            .02
                            0
                        Estimate
                           -.02
                            -.04
                            -.06




                                     2009   2010   2011          2012   2013   2014
                                                          Year


                                                          Any
                            .04.02
                        Estimate
                            0
                            -.02




                                     2009   2010   2011          2012   2013   2014
                                                          Year



This figure plots event study estimates in which we replace P ostM andatet × N onDisadvi × ASDit with
N onDisadvi × ASDit interacted with a set of year dummies in equation (2). Year 2011 is excluded, so all
estimates are relative to that year. Each point represents the point estimate and the bars extending from each
point show the 95% confidence interval that is calculated from standard errors that are clustered at the school
district level.


                                                      50
            Figure A-2: Test Scores Event Studies, using All Non-ASD Control Group


                         Math Test Score (vs. All Non-ASD Students)


                .1
                .05
             Estimate
                 0
                -.05
                -.1




                          2010                2011               2012                2013
                                                        Year


                        Reading Test Score (vs. All Non-ASD Students)
                .1
                .05
             Estimate
                 0
                -.05
                -.1




                          2010                2011               2012                2013
                                                        Year


This figure plots event study estimates in which we replace P ostM andatet × N onDisadvi × ASDit with
N onDisadvi × ASDit interacted with a set of year dummies in equation (2). Year 2011 is excluded, so all
estimates are relative to that year. Each point represents the point estimate and the bars extending from each
point show the 95% confidence interval that is calculated from standard errors that are clustered at the school
district level.




                                                      51
       Figure A-3: Test Score Event Studies, using Non-Special Education Control Group


                         Math Test Score (vs. Non-Disabled Students)


                .1
                .05
             Estimate
                 0
                -.05
                -.1




                           2010               2011               2012                2013
                                                        Year


                        Reading Test Score (vs. Non-Disabled Students)
                .1
                .05
             Estimate
                 0
                -.05
                -.1




                           2010               2011               2012                2013
                                                        Year


This figure plots event study estimates in which we replace P ostM andatet × N onDisadvi × ASDit with
N onDisadvi × ASDit interacted with a set of year dummies in equation (2). Year 2011 is excluded, so all
estimates are relative to that year. Each point represents the point estimate and the bars extending from each
point show the 95% confidence interval that is calculated from standard errors that are clustered at the school
district level.




                                                      52
Table A-1: The Effect of the ASD Insurance Mandate on Other Special Education Ser-
           vices

                                                             Dependent Variable:
                             Other                                Any     Non-ASD                                Trans-
                              Sped       Gen Ed       Gen Ed General       Teacher               Physical      portation
 Independent               Program       40-79%        <40%       Ed     Consultant              Therapy        Services
 Variable                      (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)         (5)                   (6)            (7)
 Non-disadv*Post-            -0.001       -0.005       -0.008    0.001       0.003                -0.008         -0.003
 2012*ASD                   (0.006)      (0.011)      (0.014)   (0.008)     (0.007)              (0.005)        (0.006)

 Observations              545,053       455,751      455,751      455,571        545,053         545,053       545,053
 ASD Mean                   0.031         0.149        0.207        0.811          0.091           0.031         0.041
 Authors estimates of equation (2) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2010-2011
to the 2014-2015 school years. The sample includes only students who are always or never eligible for free/reduced
price lunch. Each column is a separate regression. "Non-disadv" is an indicator for whether the student is eligible for
free/reduced price lunch and "ASD" is an indicator for whether the student has an ASD diagnosis in that year. All
regressions include the full set of controls listed in equation (2), including controls for whether a student is white, male,
and limited English proficient as well as district and grade-by-year fixed effects. The final row of the table provides
dependent variable means for the ASD sample. Standard errors are clustered at the school district level: *,**,***
indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                             53
  Table A-2: The Effect of the ASD Insurance Mandate on Taking Regular Exams

                                             Math                                          Reading
                             All                          Non-ASD           All                           Non-ASD
 Control Group:            Non-ASD        Non-Sped          Sped          Non-ASD         Non-Sped          Sped
                             (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)

 Non-disadv*Post-           -0.0120          0.0108         -0.0345         -0.0171         0.0068          -0.0371
 2012*ASD                  (0.0263)         (0.0254)       (0.0260)        (0.0266)        (0.0254)        (0.0272)
 Non-disadv               0.0289***        0.0007**       0.0633***       0.0318***         0.0002        0.0708***
                           (0.0013)         (0.0003)       (0.0058)        (0.0015)        (0.0005)        (0.0061)
 ASD                      -0.375***        -0.426***      -0.229***       -0.376***       -0.433***       -0.210***
                            (0.030)          (0.030)        (0.030)         (0.030)         (0.030)         (0.031)
 Non-disadv*Post          0.0164***         -0.0005*      0.0408***       0.0170***      -0.0011***       0.0414***
                           (0.0010)         (0.0003)       (0.0062)        (0.0011)        (0.0004)        (0.0065)
 Non-disadv*ASD            0.0561**        0.0873***        0.0138         0.0475*       0.0817***           0.0005
                           (0.0276)         (0.0273)       (0.0281)        (0.0276)        (0.0272)        (0.0287)
 Post*ASD                 -0.0683**       -0.1040***         0.0360       -0.0571**      -0.0951***        0.0545*
                           (0.0271)         (0.0262)       (0.0269)        (0.0277)        (0.0265)        (0.0282)

 Observations              2,712,322       2,352,871        385,960       2,712,322       2,352,871        385,960
 Authors estimates of equation (2) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2009-
2010 to the 2013-2014 school years. 2014-2015 is excluded as Michigan changed from the Michigan Assessment of
Educational Progress to the M-Step exam and restructured alternative examination options. The sample includes
only students who are always or never eligible for free/reduced price lunch. Each column is a separate regression.
"Non-disadv" is an indicator for whether the student is eligible for free/reduced price lunch in all observed years
of schooling and "ASD" is an indicator for whether the student has an ASD diagnosis in that year. All regressions
include controls for whether a student is white, male, and limited English proficient as well as district and grade-
by-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the school district level: *,**,*** indicate significance at the
10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                          54
Table A-3: Heterogeneous Effects of the ASD Insurance Mandate on Test
           Scores, using Non-Special Education Control Group

                            Panel A: Math, by Gender and Race
 Independent                Girls     Boys              White/Asian                  Black/Hisp.
 Variable                    (1)       (2)                  (3)                          (4)

 Non-disadv*               0.0885       0.0031                        0.0142             -0.0308
 Post-2012                (0.0721)     (0.0288)                      (0.0286)           (0.0896)

 Observations              803,320      775,726                     1,365,614           213,432

                          Panel B: Reading, by Gender and Race
 Independent               Girls     Boys               White/Asian                  Black/Hisp.
 Variable                   (1)       (2)                   (3)                          (4)

 Non-disadv*               0.0707       0.0161                        0.0429             -0.0976
 Post-2012                (0.0879)     (0.0297)                      (0.0307)           (0.1080)

 Observations              803,315      775,622                     1,365,950           212,987

                                Panel C: Math, by Grade
 Independent              Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6                    Grade 7            Grade 8
 Variable                   (1)       (2)       (3)                    (4)                (5)

 Non-disadv*Post-         0.1390*       -0.0732         -0.0204       0.0125             0.0320
 2012                     (0.0739)     (0.0652)        (0.0576)      (0.0606)           (0.0613)

 Observations              298,060      300,174        309,489       326,170            343,020

                                Panel D: Reading, by Grade
 Independent              Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6          Grade 7                      Grade 8
 Variable                   (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)                          (5)

 Non-disadv*Post-          0.0306       0.0764          -0.0732       0.0422             0.0761
 2012                     (0.0672)     (0.0631)        (0.0657)      (0.0637)           (0.0685)

 Observations              298,012      299,973        309,512       326,192            343,089
 Authors estimates of equation (2) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8
from the 2009-2010 to the 2013-2014 school years. 2014-2015 is excluded as Michigan changed from
the Michigan Assessment of Educational Progress to the M-Step exam and restructured alternative
examination options. The sample includes only students who are always or never eligible for
free/reduced price lunch. Each column is a separate regression. "Non-disadv" is an indicator for
whether the student is eligible for free/reduced price lunch and "ASD" is an indicator for whether
the student has an ASD diagnosis in that year. All regressions include the full set of controls listed
in equation (2), including controls for whether a student is white, male, limited English proficient,
as well as district and grade-by-year fixed effects. Estimates also include controls for lagged test
score. Standard errors are clustered at the school district level: *,**,*** indicate significance at
the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                  55
Table A-4: The Effect of the ASD Insurance Mandate on Test Scores - Robustness
           Checks

     Panel A: Including Linear Time Trend Interacted with Non-Disadvantaged Status
                                 Math                              Reading
                       All                 Non-ASD        All                 Non-ASD
 Control Group:     Non-ASD Non-Sped         Sped      Non-ASD Non-Sped         Sped
                       (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)

 Non-disadv*Post-           0.0099          0.0137         -0.0013        0.0291          0.0268         0.0143
 2012*ASD                  (0.0264)        (0.0264)       (0.0269)       (0.0289)        (0.0291)       (0.0294)

 Observations              1,754,971      1,579,046       185,814       1,749,290       1,578,937       180,172

                                            Panel B: School FEs
                                           Math                                          Reading
                            All                      Non-ASD      All                                  Non-ASD
 Control Group:           Non-ASD         Non-Sped     Sped     Non-ASD                 Non-Sped         Sped
                            (1)             (2)         (3)       (4)                     (5)             (6)

 Non-disadv*Post-           0.0010          0.0048         -0.0102        0.0213          0.0182         0.0037
 2012*ASD                  (0.0259)        (0.0259)       (0.0268)       (0.0288)        (0.0290)       (0.0301)

 Observations              1,754,971      1,579,046       185,814       1,749,290       1,578,937       180,172

                         Panel C: Pre-Treatment Assignment of ASD Variable
                                        Math                            Reading
                            All                  Non-ASD       All                                     Non-ASD
 Control Group:           Non-ASD Non-Sped         Sped     Non-ASD Non-Sped                             Sped
                            (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)                            (6)

 Non-disadv*Post-           0.0054          0.0088         -0.0122        0.0398          0.0385         0.0135
 2012*ASD                  (0.0276)        (0.0276)       (0.0277)       (0.0292)        (0.0294)       (0.0310)

 Observations              1,542,200      1,387,847       162,767       1,537,785       1,388,220       157,909

                                         Panel D: Including 2014-15
                                           Math                                          Reading
                            All                      Non-ASD        All                                Non-ASD
 Control Group:           Non-ASD        Non-Sped       Sped     Non-ASD                Non-Sped         Sped
                            (1)             (2)          (3)        (4)                   (5)             (6)

 Non-disadv*Post-           -0.0116         0.0018        -0.0425*        0.0358          0.0420         0.0167
 2012*ASD                  (0.0245)        (0.0246)       (0.0248)       (0.0258)        (0.0260)       (0.0266)

 Observations              2,184,874      1,961,605       236,273       2,179,192       1,961,404       230,726
 Authors estimates of equation (2) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2009-
2010 to the 2013-2014 school years, except where specified. The sample includes only students who are always or
never eligible for free/reduced price lunch. Each column is a separate regression. "Non-disadv" is an indicator
for whether the student is eligible for free/reduced price lunch and "ASD" is an indicator for whether the student
has an ASD diagnosis in that year. All regressions include the full set of controls listed in equation (2), including
whether a student is white, male, and limited English proficient as well as grade-by-year fixed effects. Estimates in
Panels A, C, and D include district fixed effects, while those in Panel B include school fixed effects. The estimates
in Panel A also include a linear time trend interacted with non-disadv status. Estimates also include controls
for lagged test score. Standard errors are clustered at the school district level: *,**,*** indicate significance at
the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                         56
                    Table A-5: The Effect of the ASD Insurance Mandate ­ No Sample Exclusion Based on Disadvantaged Status

                                                   Panel A: Including All Students Who are Ever Observed Disadvantaged
                                                                                      Dependent Variable:
                                             Resource or     No       Special General     Sped       ASD                                          Occupational                      Any
                                ASD           Cognitive     Sped        Ed        Ed      FTE       Teacher    Language                             Therapy           Social       Sped
      Independent              Program        Program     Program School        >80%      Rate    Consultant    Services                            Services          Worker      Services
      Variable                   (1)             (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)        (7)         (8)                                 (9)              (10)         (11)

      Non-disadv*Post-           0.019          -0.045*        0.026***       -0.006       0.007      -0.014*        -0.018*        0.00004            -0.008          -0.005       0.009
      2012*ASD                  (0.032)         (0.026)         (0.010)      (0.005)      (0.015)     (0.008)        (0.009)        (0.012)           (0.013)         (0.013)      (0.009)

      Observations              705,616         705,616        705,616       577,221     577,221      421,418        705,616        705,616           705,616         705,616     705,616
      ASD Mean                   0.200           0.672          0.125         0.056       0.444        0.359          0.129          0.784             0.395           0.688       0.940

          Panel B: Including All Students Who are Ever Observed Disadvantaged and Linear Time Trend Interacted with Non-Disadvantaged Status
                                                                           Dependent Variable:




57
                                    Resource or     No      Special General     Sped       ASD                   Occupational              Any
                           ASD       Cognitive     Sped       Ed       Ed       FTE       Teacher    Language      Therapy      Social    Sped
      Independent        Program      Program     Program School      >80%      Rate     Consultant   Services      Services   Worker Services
      Variable              (1)          (2)        (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)           (9)        (10)      (11)

      Non-disadv*Post-           0.019          -0.045*        0.026***       -0.006       0.007      -0.014*        -0.018*        0.00004            -0.008          -0.005       0.009
      2012*ASD                  (0.032)         (0.026)         (0.010)      (0.005)      (0.015)     (0.008)        (0.009)        (0.012)           (0.013)         (0.013)      (0.009)

      Observations              705,616         705,616        705,616       577,221     577,221      421,418        705,616        705,616           705,616         705,616     705,616
      ASD Mean                   0.200           0.672          0.125         0.056       0.444        0.359          0.129          0.784             0.395           0.688       0.940
       Authors estimates of equation (2) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2010-2011 to the 2014-2015 school years. The sample in Panel A includes
     only students who are always or never eligible for free/reduced price lunch, while the sample in Panels B and C include all students. Each column is a separate regression.
     "Non-disadv" is an indicator for whether the student is eligible for free/reduced price lunch and "ASD" is an indicator for whether the student has an ASD diagnosis in that year.
     All regressions include the full set of controls listed in equation (2), including whether a student is white, male, and limited English proficient as well as district and grade-by-year
     fixed effects. The estimates in Panels A and C exclude the linear time trend interacted with non-disadv status. The final row in each panel provides dependent variable means for
     the ASD sample. Standard errors are clustered at the school district level: *,**,*** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
     Table A-6: The Effect of the ASD Insurance Mandate on Disability Incidence - No Sample Exclusion
                Based on Disadvantaged Status

                  Panel A: Excluding Linear Time Trend Interacted with Non-Disadvantaged Status
                                                        Dependent Variable:
                                Non-ASD       Cognitive Emotional        Speech     Learning    Other Health
      Independent      ASD      Disability    Disability Disability     Disability  Disability   Disability
      Variable          (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)           (7)
      Non-disadv*    -0.00034    0.00149       0.00008    0.00115*** -0.00237*** 0.00461***     -0.00204***
      Post-2012     (0.00022) (0.00131)       (0.00028)    (0.00029)    (0.00056)   (0.00101)    (0.00036)


                         Panel B: Including Linear Time Trend Interacted with Non-Disadvantaged Status
                                                               Dependent Variable:




58
                                       Non-ASD       Cognitive Emotional        Speech      Learning   Other Health
      Independent             ASD      Disability    Disability Disability     Disability  Disability   Disability
      Variable                 (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)
      Non-disadv*           -0.00011    -0.00072      -0.00043     0.00035      0.00001      -0.00092    0.00047
      Post-2012            (0.00026) (0.00114)       (0.00031)    (0.00033)    (0.00063)    (0.00075)    (0.0004)

      Incidence Rate          0.010           0.133             0.011           0.009             0.035            0.056             0.016
      Authors estimates of equation (1) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2009-2010 to the 2014-2015
     school years. Each column is a separate regression; N=4,970,113. "Non-disadv" is an indicator for whether the student is eligible for
     free/reduced price lunch. All regressions include the full set of controls listed in equation (1), including whether a student is white, male,
     and limited English proficient as well as district and grade-by-year fixed effects. Estimates in Panel B exclude the control for linear time
     trend interacted with non-disadvantage status. Standard errors are clustered at the school district level: *,**,*** indicate significance
     at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
Table A-7: The Effect of the ASD Insurance Mandate on Test Scores - No Sample
           Exclusion Based on Disadvantaged Status

          Panel A: Including All Students Who are Ever Observed Disadvantaged
                                  Math                             Reading
                       All                 Non-ASD       All                  Non-ASD
 Control Group:     Non-ASD Non-Sped         Sped      Non-ASD Non-Sped         Sped
                       (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)

 Non-disadv*Post-            -0.011         -0.009         -0.023         0.014          0.010           -0.001
 2012*ASD                   (0.023)        (0.023)        (0.024)        (0.026)        (0.026)         (0.026)

 Observations             2,158,249       1,940,574       230,304       2,151,497      1,940,733       223,320

          Panel B: Including All Students Who are Ever Observed Disadvantaged
             and Linear Time Trend Interacted with Non-Disadvantage Status
                                  Math                             Reading
                       All                 Non-ASD        All                 Non-ASD
 Control Group:     Non-ASD Non-Sped         Sped      Non-ASD Non-Sped         Sped
                       (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)

 Non-disadv*Post-            -0.012         -0.009         -0.023         0.014          0.010           -0.001
 2012*ASD                   (0.023)        (0.023)        (0.024)        (0.026)        (0.026)         (0.026)

 Observations             2,158,249       1,940,574       230,304       2,151,497      1,940,733       223,320
 Authors estimates of equation (2) as described in the text using data on students in grades 2-8 from the 2009-
2010 to the 2013-2014 school years, except where specified. The samples in Panels A and D include only students
who are always or never eligible for free/reduced price lunch, while the sample in Panels B and C include all
students. Each column is a separate regression. "Non-disadv" is an indicator for whether the student is eligible
for free/reduced price lunch and "ASD" is an indicator for whether the student has an ASD diagnosis in that
year. All regressions include the full set of controls listed in equation (2), including whether a student is white,
male, and limited English proficient as well as district and grade-by-year fixed effects. The estimates in Panels
A and C exclude the linear time trend interacted with non-disadvantaged status. Estimates also include controls
for lagged test score. Standard errors are clustered at the school district level: *,**,*** indicate significance at
the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                        59
