                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              REGIONAL EFFECTS OF EXCHANGE RATE FLUCTUATIONS

                                     Christopher L. House
                                     Christian Proebsting
                                        Linda L. Tesar

                                     Working Paper 26071
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26071


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019




We thank Antoine Martin, Kenneth West, George Alessandria and participants of the 50th
anniversary of the JMCB conference for helpful suggestions and advice. We gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the Michigan Institute for Teaching and Research in
Economics (MITRE). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Christopher L. House, Christian Proebsting, and Linda L. Tesar. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Regional Effects of Exchange Rate Fluctuations
Christopher L. House, Christian Proebsting, and Linda L. Tesar
NBER Working Paper No. 26071
July 2019
JEL No. F22,F41,F45

                                           ABSTRACT

We exploit differences across U.S. states in terms of their exposure to trade to study the effects of
changes in the exchange rate on economic activity at the business cycle frequency. We find that a
depreciation in the state-specific trade-weighted real exchange rate is associated with an increase
in exports, a decline in unemployment and an increase in hours worked. The effect is particularly
strong in periods of economic slack. We develop a multi-region model with inter-state trade and
labor flows and calibrate it to match the state-level orientation of exports and the extent of labor
migration and trade between states. The model replicates the relationship between exchange rates
and unemployment. Counterfactuals show that the high degree of interstate trade plays a
dominant role in transmitting shocks across states in the first year, whereas interstate migration
shapes cross-sectional patterns in following years. The model suggests that a 25% Chinese import
tariff on U.S. goods would be felt throughout the United States, even in states with small direct
linkages to China, raising unemployment rates by 0.2 to 0.7 percentage points in the short run.


Christopher L. House                                      Linda L. Tesar
University of Michigan                                    Department of Economics
Department of Economics                                   University of Michigan
238 Lorch Hall                                            Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                                  and NBER
and NBER                                                  ltesar@umich.edu
chouse@umich.edu

Christian Proebsting
Department of Economics
Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne
CProebsting@gmail.com
1     Introduction
This paper is motivated by three facts. First, there are large differences in the volume of trade
across states. State-level export shares range from as much as 20 percent to less than 1 percent
of state GDP. Second, export destinations also vary considerably across states. For example,
exports to Canada are systematically greater in Northern Midwest states while exports to
Mexico are more highly concentrated in the Southwest. Third, changes in real exchange
rates are frequent, large and persistent. Exchange rates of destination countries often exhibit
changes as large as 20 percent over relatively short periods of time. These basic observations
suggest that exchange rate fluctuations should have systematically different effects on each
states' economic activity. To the extent that states are linked through trade and factor
markets, exchange rate shocks will be transmitted across state borders.
    We assemble a state-level dataset to examine the relationship between state-specific trade-
weighted real exchange rates, state-level trade in goods, unemployment and output for the
years 1999-2018. We find that variations in state-level exchange rates are systematically
related to changes in the labor market. On average, a one percent exchange rate depreciation
is associated with a decrease in unemployment of roughly 0.4 percentage points and an increase
in economic activity of one to two percent. This increase in economic activity goes along with
an expansion of exports and a steady inflow of workers from other states. The strength of
these effects at the state level depends on the extent of trade exposure to a particular foreign
market. Following Ramey and Zubairy (2018), we also estimate state-dependent effects and
show that economies react stronger to exchange rate movements when local labor market
conditions are slack.
    We then construct a multi-region model of the United States that is consistent with these
empirical facts. The framework builds on the multi-country DSGE model in House, Proebsting
and Tesar (2018) (HPT) that captures trade and migration flows between regions. We adapt
the HPT model to the 50 U.S. states plus the District of Columbia. The model allows for
trade in assets and goods and for migration between U.S. states. We follow the literature on
small open economies (see e.g Gal´
                                 i, 2008; Kehoe and Ruhl, 2009), and add a large region that
is unaffected by state-level economic developments. We refer to this region as the "rest of
the world" or RoW. The model is calibrated to match broad features of the interstate trade
statistics (Commodity Flow Statistics), labor migration data and international trade flows
at the state and country level. When feeding in the observed paths of exchange rates for


                                               2
each state into our model, we show that our model can reproduce the effects of exchange rate
fluctuations on economic activity observed in the data.
   Using the model we then explain the transmission mechanism at play: In the model, a real
exchange rate depreciation alters the relative price facing domestic firms, making the home
good cheaper for foreign consumers and boosting foreign demand. Domestic firms respond
to the higher demand by hiring more labor and expanding output. Domestic consumption
and investment rise along with the increase in employment, further stimulating the economy.
Search frictions in the labor market prevent an immediate adjustment to an efficient allocation
of labor across locations. There are two channels of transmission to those states not directly
affected by the change in the exchange rate. First, the increase in labor demand in the
affected state will trigger migration from other states. Second, because states trade with each
other, there is an indirect transmission of the exchange rate shock to demand for goods from
other states. Our counterfactuals suggest that the presence of both channels contributes to
explaining cross-sectional patterns in the data, with interstate trade playing a dominant role
in the first year after the shock and migration shaping the response in the following years.
   In a next step, we ask how the last thirty years of trade globalization and the recent trade
war have left states more or less exposed to exchange rates. Since 1989, U.S. states have
steadily increased their exports (as a share of GDP), both towards traditional export markets
like Canada and the euro and to rising economies like China and Mexico. Our counterfactual
suggests that despite the increase in exports, states' unemployment rates are not necessarily
more sensitive to foreign exchange rate fluctuations. Part of this reason is that the rise in
exports went along with higher imports and this expansion in trade offers states the ability
to use trade to limit fluctuations in local production and employment.
   The recent trade war between China and the United States has seen a substantial increase
in tariffs on both sides. We use our model to evaluate the effects of an increase in Chinese
tariffs of 25% across all goods imported from the United States. In response to such a tariff,
and abstracting from higher U.S. tariffs on Chinese goods, unemployment rates are predicted
to increase by 0.2 to 0.7 percentage points across U.S. states within four quarters. Whereas
exports to China are mostly concentrated in a handfull of states in the upper Northwest, the
tariff increase will be felt throughout the United States because integrated goods and factor
markets transmit the shocks even to states that export little to China.
   Our work relates to several strands of literature on the impact of trade shocks on economic
activity. Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2016) study the impact of the "China shock" on employ-

                                              3
ment and wages in those parts of the United States specializing in sectors that compete with
Chinese imports. Caliendo, Dvorkin and Parro (2019) develop a dynamic trade model with
spatially distinct labor markets to capture the general equilibrium effects of the China trade
shock on the U.S. economy. Our paper differs from their approach by focusing on the effects
of trade shocks at the business cycle frequency.
    Our paper also relates to a long-standing literature in international finance that estimates
the effect of exchange rates on economic activity (see e.g. Campa and Goldberg, 1995; Ekholm,
Moxnes and Ulltveit-Moe, 2012). We add to this literature by emphasizing how U.S. states,
though different in their direct exposure to exchange rates, are interconnected through capital
and labor markets, as well as input-output linkages that shape how states react to shocks and
how these shocks are transmitted through the U.S. economy. Finally, our paper speaks to a
recent literature in macroeconomics that has emphasized regional variation to macroeconomic
shocks in monetary unions. While HPT focuses on European countries, Beraja, Hurst and
Ospina (2016); Nakamura and Steinsson (2014); Dupor et al. (2018) have studied the conse-
quences of regional fluctuations for both regional and aggregate business cycles in the United
States.



2     Empirical Analysis

2.1       Trade Exposure Across U.S. States
We begin by examining the differences in regional exposure to trade across U.S. States and
over time. Export data by state and country of destination are drawn from the Origin of
Movement (OM) series compiled by the Foreign Trade Division of the U.S. Census Bureau.
While the series provides the most accurate available information on state export patterns, it
has two shortcomings: First, it only covers trade in manufactured and agricultural goods and
therefore excludes trade in services. At the federal level, exports of services comprise roughly
one third of all trade over our sample period. Second, the OM series credits exports to the
state where the goods began their final journey to the port of exit from the United States.
This can either be the location of the factory where the export item was produced or the
location of a warehouse or distributor. Comparing the OM data with the U.S. Census data
set on "Exports From Manufacturing Establishments" (which does not contain destinations),
Cassey (2009) concludes that, despite these flaws, the OM data is generally of high enough


                                               4
quality to use as origin of production data, and the quality has improved over time.
   Table 1 lists each state, the state's size as measured by the share of its GDP relative to
total U.S. GDP, the state's export share relative to state GDP, the primary destination for
the states exports of goods and the corresponding export share. The median export share has
slighlty increased over the last 20 years, from about 5 to 7%, indicating that the U.S. economy
has become somewhat more open to trade. More importantly, the table shows that there is
considerable variation in export shares across states. The lowest export share is close to zero
while the highest is nearly 18 percent of state GDP. There are also considerable state-level
fluctuations in export shares over time (not shown).
   The primary destination of a state's exports varies considerably across states and over
time. Figure 1 shows heat maps of state exports to Canada, Mexico, the euro area, and Japan
(the largest four export destinations for the United States) as a share of state GDP averaged
over 1999 to 2018. The heat maps show that, in addition to the differences in overall trade
exposure reported in Table 1, there is also substantial regional variation by export destination.
While exports to Canada are concentrated in Northern States and the Midwest, exports to
Mexico are concentrated in the Southwest.


2.2    Exchange Rate Exposure Across U.S. States
Each state exports to other U.S. states as well as several different foreign nations. In our
empirical analysis we construct state-level effective exchange rates. These effective exchange
rates are trade-weighted combinations of individual exchange rates and thus vary across states
depending on the volume and orientation of trade.
   We calculate the log change in real effective exchange rates as the log change in nominal
effective exchange rates deflated by the CPI:


                                  ln s                      
                                      n,t =  ln Sn,t +  ln Pn,t ,                            (2.1)

           
where  ln Sn,t is the log change in the nominal effective exchange rate, quoted in U.S. dollar
                               
per foreign currency, and  ln Pn,t is the log change in the CPI in state n's effective export
market relative to the log change in the U.S. CPI. The nominal effective exchange rate is
a weighted average of foreign currency exchange rates, where the weights reflect the extent
of trade with other countries as well as other states. Denoting country j 's log exchange rate
                                            US
relative to the U.S. dollar in period t by Sj,t , we calculate the change in the effective exchange

                                                5
rate as
                                                 J           4
                                                        1
                                
                            ln Sn,t       =-                      weightj
                                                                        n,t-s
                                                                                        US
                                                                                    ln Sj,t ,
                                                j =1
                                                        4   s=1

where the weights correspond to the ratio of state n's exports to country j to state n's GDP.
To allow for gradual drift in the trade shares, we average the weights over the four quarters
prior to each period t. Export data is taken from the OM series and data on states' GDP is
provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.1 Data on U.S. dollar exchange rates are taken
                                                                                  
from the IMF International Financial Statistics. We calculate the values for  ln Pn,t in a
similar fashion. Specifically,

                                      J           4
                                            1
                           
                       ln Pn,t   =                     weightj
                                                             n,t-s          (ln Pj,t - ln PU S,t ) ,           (2.2)
                                     j =1
                                            4    s=1


where Pj,t is country j 's CPI and yj,t is country j 's real GDP. Data on the CPI come from the
IMF International Financial Statistics.
       Figure 2 displays time series plots for bilateral real exchange rates (price of U.S. goods per
price of foreign goods) for the ten most common export destinations for U.S. products. The
plots show that there are often sudden large changes in the nominal exchange rates. Sudden
changes on the order of 10 to 20 percent are not uncommon.
       As described above, these individual nominal exchange rates are combined to produce each
                                    
states effective exchange rate  ln Sn,t . Figure 3 displays year-to-year growth rates of states'
real effective exchange rates. These year-to-year growth rates are calculated as the sum of the
                                                                  3
current and previous 3 quarters' growth rate,                     s=0    ln sn,t-s . We then sort these growth rates

and plot their mean across states together with the interquartile range, the interdecile range
and the full range across states. The figure reveals common trends in real effective exchange
rates across U.S. states, such as the initial depreciation and subsequent appreciation of the
U.S. dollar in the wake of the Great Recession. Across time, the average standard deviation
of the growth rate is 0.38 percent. The reason this is so much smaller than the fluctuations in
nominal exchange rates shown in Figure 2 is that the measure of the real effective exchange
rate puts a large weight on the domestic market, where the exchange rate vis-a-vis other states
is constant. As shown in Table 1, sales within the United States account for more than 90
percent of total state sales, tempering fluctuations in the real effective exchange rate.
   1
     Quarterly state GDP data only starts in 2005:1. We evenly split annual state GDP across the four quarters
for years prior to 2005.



                                                             6
       Despite the common trends in effective exchange rates over time, the figure also shows
some variation across states. The average cross-sectional standard deviation is 0.21 percent;
that is, on average, states differ by 0.21 percentage points in the growth rates of their effective
exchange rates. We can compare this number to the cross-sectional standard deviation of the
annual change in the U.S. unemployment rate, which is about 1 percentage point.


2.3       Exchange Rates and Economic Performance
2.3.1      Baseline Results

We next ask whether fluctuations in effective exchange rates can account for the cross-sectional
variation in economic performance observed across states. To study this relationship, we run
the following regressions for each time horizon h  0:

                               h             h      
    xn,t+h - xn,t-1 = h   h
                      t + n +  s  ln sn,t +  y  ln yn,t +                             h
                                                                                      k xn,t-k   + n,t+h ,   (2.3)
                                                                              k=1,2


where xn,t is a measure of economic performance (e.g. the unemployment rate or log GDP)
in state n at time t. The main coefficient of interest is  h
                                                           s that describes the response of the

unemployment rate at horizon h to a log change in the real effective export exchange rate,
 ln sn,t , calculated according to (2.1). Our regression includes both state fixed effects and
                                                                                  
time fixed effects. We also control for demand changes in export markets through yn,t , the
log change in real GDP for state n's trade-weighted export market relative to the log change
in U.S. real GDP and is similarly constructed to (2.2).2,3
       We run regression (2.3) for the real effective state exchange rate itself (ln sn,t ), as well

as various measures of economic performance: the state unemployment rate (urn,t ), state
real per capita GDP (yn,t ), nominal exports, (exn,t ), hours worked in the state (ln,t , both
   2
    We assume that total demand for a states exports is the sum of domestic (U.S.) demand and demand
                                                                     US                                    
from foreign nations. Writing total demand for state n as  n,U S ln yt  + (1 -  n,U S ) j foreign  n,j ln yj,t we
                                        US
then add and subtract (1 -  n,U S ) ln yt to get total demand as

                                  US                                                  US
                              ln yt  + (1 -  n,U S )                n,j ln yj,t - ln yt
                                                       j foreign

                                                    
Taking the first difference gives the variable  ln yn,t .above.
   3
     We use seasonally adjusted data for real GDP from the IMF International Financial Statistics. For some
countries, we seasonally adjust the data ourselves using the X-13 ARIMA SEATS software used by the U.S.
Census. Data on the CPI and real GDP is not available for all export markets and we implicitly set inflation
and changes in real GDP for missing observations equal to their U.S. values. This only concerns on average
13 percent of a state's exports for real GDP and 3 percent of a state's exports for the CPI.


                                                          7
total and in the manufacturing sector), and net immigration. Data on seasonally adjusted
unemployment rates and hours worked are taken from the Bureau of Labor Statistics and
data on state GDP are taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Data on exports are
the OM series. We draw data on each state's foreign imports from the State of Destination
series of foreign trade, published by the U.S. census. Both exports and imports are expressed
in percent of t - 1 state GDP. Finally, data on annual net immigration by state are provided
by the Internal Revenue Service and is partly based on tax returns (see Molloy, Smith and
Wozniak, 2011, for a discussion of the dataset). We apply the Chow and Lin (1971) method
to temporarily disaggregate this dataset using quarterly unemployment rate data as high-
                          4
frequency indicators.
       Our key empirical findings are shown in Figure 4. The figure illustrates the impulse
responses to a shock to a state's real effective exchange rate. The upper left panel (panel
(a)) displays the real exchange rate's reaction to its own innovation. Following a one percent
depreciation, the real exchange rate shows essentially no tendency to return to its original
value. That is, the real effective exchange rate is approximately a random walk over the
horizons we consider.
       Panel (b) shows that a real exchange rate depreciation is associated with an increase in ex-
ports by about 1%-2%. The rise in exports is the standard supply response to an improvement
in the terms of trade. Panels (c) - (e) show the estimated response of the state unemployment
rate, state GDP and hours worked to a one-percent change depreciation of the real exchange
rate. State unemployment falls by roughly 0.4 percentage points. The point estimates suggest
that state GDP rises by about 1/2%-1% while hours worked rise by perhaps 1%-2%. The figure
also reports estimates for hours worked in manufacturing. The manufacturing series appears
to be substantially more responsive with hours rising by perhaps as much as 4%.
       As shown in Figure 3, a 1% change in the state-level effective exchange rate is not uncom-
mon over the time period we study. Taken together with the results from panels (c) - (e), this
suggests that exposure to international trade and exchange rate fluctuations could contribute
significantly to unemployment differentials and GDP growth rate differentials across states.
       Panel (f) shows the response of cumulative net migration to exchange rate fluctuations.
While the estimates are noisy, the point estimates suggest that a 1% real exchange rate de-
preciation at the state level causes an increase in state population through net migration by
   4
  Certain variables are not available for the entire 1999:1 - 2018:4 time period. In particular, quarterly state
GDP is published since 2005:1, hours worked since 2007:1 and imports since 2008:1.



                                                       8
perhaps 0.3% after two years. This finding is consistent with results in HPT who show that
cross-state migration in the United States responds to unemployment differentials. The slug-
gish, but steady inflow of migrants could also help rationalize the reversal of the unemployment
response after about a year displayed in panel (c).
   Finally, panel (b) shows that besides exports, imports also increase. This increase in
imports might at first pass be somewhat puzzling because the exchange rate depreciation
should, a priori, make imports more expensive. However, states do not always import from
the same states they are exporting to, implying that the exchange rate they face for imports
does not move one-for-one with the exchange rate for their exports. In addition, several papers
have shown that pass-through into import prices is particularly low for the United States, even
in the medium run (see e.g. Gopinath, Itskhoki and Rigobon, 2010). The rise in imports could
therefore be the results of an income effect or of vertical supplier relationships.
   The results in Figure 4 correspond to changes in a single state's effective exchange rate.
This specification imposes a structure that weights bilateral exchange rates by each state's
bilateral export shares. Another way of looking at the effects of changes in exchange rates is
to examine each state's response to a single bilateral exchange rate. To estimate this effect,
we regress state economic indicators on exchange rates country-by-country. Consider the
following specification in which we regress state n's change in unemployment on country j 's
exchange rate, sj
                t:


                                                                           ,=j
           urn,t+h - urn,t-1 = h,j h,j  h,j      j    h,j      j    h,j
                               t + n +  s,n  ln st +  y,n  ln yt +  s  ln sn,t
                                                                                              (2.4)
                                        ,=j
                            +    h,j
                                 y  ln yn,t   +    h,j
                                                   1 urn,t-1   +    h,j
                                                                    2 urn,t-2   +   j
                                                                                    n,t+h .


In this case, we estimate a state-specific reaction  h,j
                                                     s,n to changes in the real exchange rate

vis-a-vis country j while controlling for changes in the weighted exchange rate for all other
                                       ,=j
export destinations (the terms  h,j
                                s  ln sn,t ).

   For example, consider the estimated responses to changes in the Canadian dollar. The
state-specific coefficients of interest are  h,j
                                             s,n which give the estimated reaction of unemploy-

ment for each state n in response to changes in currency j (where j is the Canadian dollar).
One would anticipate that  h,j
                           s,n would be greater for states that are more closely tied to Canada

through trade. We run regression (2.4) for the five top destination markets separately: the
Canadian dollar, the Chinese yuan, the Japanese yen, the euro and the Mexican peso.
                                                                   1
  Figure 5 plots the estimated coefficients averaged over a year ( 4  3   ^ h,j
                                                                      h=0  s,n ) against the



                                                  9
states' trade exposure to destination j . Because we estimate (2.4) for the five main export
destinations, each state appears five times in the graph. The estimated coefficient is on the
vertical axis with OLS standard errors displayed as bars. In the figure, states with more
trade exposure experience a greater decline in unemployment when the U.S. dollar depre-
ciates against a destination market's currency. The slope coefficient (-0.31) quantifies this
relationship, implying that an increase in trade exposure by 1 percentage point raises a state's
unemployment response to a U.S. dollar appreciation by 0.3 percentage points. This number
is in line with the estimate displayed in panel (c) of Figure 4. We will compare this coefficient
to the corresponding coefficient in the structural model.


2.3.2      Response Over the Business Cycle

It is possible that the responses of macroeconomic variables to changes in the real exchange rate
depend on the degree of slack in the economy. To test for this effect, we re-estimate equation
(2.3) allowing for different responses to depend on the state of the economy. Specifically, we
consider the regression specification:

                                                     
                xn,t+h - xn,t+h = In,t  h                  h
                                        slack,s  ln sn,t + slack,Z Zn,t
                                                                                                (2.5)
                                                               
                                + (1 - In,t )  h                     h
                                               no slack,s  ln sn,t + no slack,Z Zn,t + n,t+h


Here In,t indicates periods of slack and Zn,t is a vector of controls. As in the earlier specification
(2.3), the controlls Zn,t include state and time fixed effects, demand changes in export markets
and two lags of the left-hand side variable. We follow Ramey and Zubairy (2018) and Owyang,
Ramey and Zubairy (2013) and say that a state's economy has slack if its unemployment rate
exceeds 6.5 percent.
      The impulse responses in Figure 6 show that exports, unemployment, GDP and hours
worked are more responsive during periods of relatively high slack compared to periods when
the labor market is tight.5 Exports rise by about 3% and stay up high during high unemploy-
ment states, whereas they never exceed 2% and quickly revert back to zero during periods
of low slack. Similarly, unemployment falls by 0.9 percentage points during periods of slack,
whereas it barely falls when labor markets are tight. As emphasized by Ramey and Zubairy
(2018), different responses across the business cycle could be caused by differences in the shock
process itself. This is not the case here: independent of the state of the business cycle, the
  5
      We thank Linda Goldberg for suggesting this extension.


                                                     10
real exchange rate displays a random walk behavior in reaction to its own innovation (not
shown).



3     A Model of U.S. State Exchange Rate Fluctuations
We now use the multi-region model in HPT to analyze the U.S. states. The goal of the model
is to generate responses of unemployment and output to exchange rate shocks and to assess the
model's performance relative to the facts we document in Section 2. The model includes many
features that are now standard in modern DSGE frameworks as well as unemployment and
cross-state labor migration. Because many of the model details are explained in our earlier
work, we present an overview of the model in this section and refer the reader to House,
Proebsting and Tesar (2019, 2018) for a more detailed discussion.
    We introduce labor mobility in a tractable way which exploits a "large" household as-
sumption as in Merz (1995). We introduce unemployment into our model through a modified
Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides (DMP) search-and-matching framework (see Diamond, 1982;
Mortensen, 1982; Pissarides, 1985).


3.1    Households
The model consists of the 50 U.S. states, the District of Columbia and a rest-of-the-world
(RoW) aggregate (52 regions in total). Let i be an index of the regions. The number of
households originating from state i is fixed at Ni . Each state i has a representative household
made up of a unit mass of individuals that can live and work in any state j = 1, ..., N , with
N = 51 (they cannot live or work outside of the United States). The household members
have to live and work in the same state. Let ni
                                              j,t be the fraction of state i's household that

live in state j at time t. Superscripts denote the state of origin while subscripts denote state
of residence.
    The total number of people living and working in state i is denoted by Ni,t and is given by


                                       Ni,t =        nj    j
                                                      i,t N .                              (3.1)
                                                j


For simplicity, we abstract from an intensive labor supply choice and instead assume that each
person supplies a fixed amount of labor li wherever they choose to work. Household members


                                                11
from state i living in state j consume state j 's final good. State-specific final goods cannot
be traded.
      In addition to receiving utility from consumption, household members receive a time-
invariant utility gain or loss tied to their current residence (see the literature review in Redding
and Rossi-Hansberg, 2017). We allow a state's amenity to differ between households from
different states of origin. The utility gain from living in j for a person from state i is Ai
                                                                                            j . We

normalize the home-state amenity to Ai
                                     i = 0.

      The representative household for each state maximizes the following discounted utility
(expressed as of date 0):

                           
                                                                                ln(ni
                                                                                    j,t )
                      E0         t        ni       i
                                           j,t U (cj,t ) +          ni    i
                                                                     j,t Aj -               .   (3.2)
                           t=0        j                      j =i
                                                                                   

                            1
                         1- 
where U (ci        i
          j,t ) = cj,t          , and  is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. When house-
hold members migrate, they receive the state-specific amenity but average utility declines with
the share of migrants ni
                       j,t . The willingness to migrate is governed by the parameter  > 0

which limits the extent to which migration responds to economic conditions.
      Households receive labor income, capital income, and lump-sum transfers / taxes. Labor
income is earned in the state of residence while capital and firms of state i are owned by
the household members originating from state i. Household i's labor income at time t is
       h i                                                                 h
  j   Wj,t nj,t lj . Each worker in state j is paid the same nominal wage Wj,t irrespective of where
they are from. We allow for country-specific variation in labor force participation rates so
the per capita labor supply li differs for each state. We calibrate these parameters to match
observed labor force participation rates.
      Households have access to internationally traded non-contingent, one-period bonds that
pay off a gross interest rate of 1 + i in foreign currency. Let St be the nominal exchange rate
of the U.S. dollar in terms of this foreign currency. Households then choose their members'
locations ni                                i
           j,t , consumption in each state cj,t , investment Xi,t , the rate of capital utilization
                                                              i
ui,t , next period's capital stock, Ki,t , and bond holdings Bt for all t  0 to maximize (3.2)




                                                        12
subject to the budget constraint

                                                             1           nij,t                                     St Bti
       Ni         Pj,t ni    i
                        j,t cj,t    +           Pj,t ni
                                                      j,t                               + Ni,t Pi,t Xi,t + Ni
              j                          j =i
                                                            1-          ni
                                                                         j,t-1                                    (1 + i )
                                                                                                 i  i
       = Ni       ni    h                       k
                   j,t Wj,t lj + Ni,t-1 Ki,t-1 Ri,t ui,t - Pi,t a(ui,t ) + Ni,t (i,t - Ti,t ) + N St Bt-1 ,
              j


the capital accumulation constraint6

                                                                                   Ni,t Xi,t
                   Ni,t Ki,t = Ni,t-1 Ki,t-1 (1 -  ) + 1 -                                          Ni,t Xi,t ,
                                                                                 Ni,t-1 Xi,t-1

and the constraint           j   ni
                                  j,t = 1.
                                                                                                k
      Here Xi,t , Ki,t and ui,t denote investment, capital and capital utilization in state i; Ri,t is
the nominal rental price of capital;  (·) and  (·) are adjustment cost functions for investment
and migration respectively7 ; i,t are nominal profits and Ti,t are nominal lump-sum taxes.


3.2         Firms
There are two groups of firms. Final goods firms produce a non-tradable good which is used for
regional consumption, investment and state government purchases. Final good firms purchase
intermediate goods from other states and foreign nations to be used as inputs. Intermediate
goods firms produce tradeable inputs used to produce the final good.
      Prices of the tradeable intermediate goods are sticky and governed by New Keynesian
Phillips Curves:
                                        ~ i,t =  (mci,t - p
                                                          ~i,t ) + Et [~
                                                                        i,t+1 ] ,

where x
      ~ denotes the log change in the variable x relative to its non-stochastic steady state
                                                                             pi,t
value,  i,t is inflation of the intermediate good,  i,t =                   pi,t-1
                                                                                   ,   mc denotes the real marginal cost
                                                                                                 (1-)(1- )
of production, expressed in terms of the intermediate good, and  =                                   
                                                                                                                  where  is the
Calvo probability of price rigidity. The nominal marginal cost in state i is

                                                            1-                         1-        
                                              1     f                      1                1
                                 M Ci,t =         Wi,t           Ri,t
                                             Zi,t                         1-                
  6
    We assume adjustment costs in investment as in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), with (1) =
 (1) = 0 and  (1) > 0.
  7
    The adjustment cost functions satisfy  (1) =  (1) = (1) =  (1) = 0, while  (1) > 0 and  (1) > 0.



                                                             13
        f
where Wi,t is the nominal wage paid by firms in state i, Ri,t is the nominal rental price capital
                                                                                                                   M Ci,t
and Zi,t is a state-specific productivity shock. Real marginal cost is simply mci,t =                               pi,t

where pi,t is the nominal price of the intermediate good produced in state i.
   The final goods are assembled from a (state-specific) CES aggregate of intermediate goods
from all states and the RoW. Final goods firms are competitive and take the prices of the
                                                                        
intermediate goods as given. Foreign imports to state i are denoted by yi,t . We assume that
nominal prices of foreign imports in U.S. dollars are constant so the nominal price in U.S.
dollars in state i is simply 1. The final goods producers maximize their profits

                                                       N
                                                                   j      
                                    Pi,t Yi,t -              pj,t yi,t - yi,t
                                                      j =1


subject to the CES production function

                                                                                                       y
                             N           1              y -1                                    y -1    y -1
                                                                            1
                   Yi,t =           j
                                    i
                                         y      j
                                               yi,t    y
                                                                + ( i)
                                                                            y        
                                                                                    yi,t       y
                                                                                                                   (3.3)
                             j =1


       j
Here, yi,t is the amount of state-j intermediate good used in production by state i at time t
and  y is the trade elasticity. The weights  j            
                                             i,t satisfy  i +                              j   j                    j
                                                                                               i = 1. We calibrate  i to

match average bilateral trade shares across states and calibrate  i to match the trade share

of each states with the rest of the world.
   The solution to this maximization problem state i's demand for domestic intermediate
goods from state j as
                                                                       - y
                                         j                     pj,t
                                        yi,t   =   Yi,t  j
                                                         i                      .                                  (3.4)
                                                               Pi,t
   Just as each state has a demand for the tradable intermediate good, foreign countries
demand goods produced in the United States. Demand curves for the RoW are given by the
isoelastic functions
                                                                      - y
                                           i       i         pi,t
                                          y  ,t =             
                                                                            ,                                      (3.5)
                                                             Si,t
       
where Si,t is the nominal (effective) exchange rate of U.S. dollars in terms of foreign currency.
The state subscript i reflects the fact that, because states have different trade shares and
different trading partners, each state has a different effective exchange rate for their exports.
The exchange rate shocks we consider influence local demand by shifting the foreign demand
curves (3.5). Notice that while we assume that exchange rate movements affect demand for

                                                         14
states' exports, we keep the U.S. dollar price of imports from RoW fixed. This asymmetry
finds some support in the empirical literature that observes that the pass-through of exchange
rate fluctuations into import prices for the United States is quite low, hovering around 0.25
at 1-2 year horizons (see Gopinath, Itskhoki and Rigobon, 2010).8


3.3       Labor Markets and Labor Reallocation
Workers move from one state to the next in response to changing labor market conditions.
The incentive to move depends on the difference in local labor market conditions and the
preferences to move included in the utility function (3.2). Workers in each state are matched
to employers according to a DMP search framework. We model labor search by assuming that
                                                                                                                h
                                                                                                              Wi,t
                                                                             h
each entering worker provides work to employment agencies (EA) for the wage wi,t =                            Pi,t

where the superscript indicates that this is the wage received by the household (i.e., by the
worker). The employment agency then supplies available workers in a search market where
workers are matched to vacancies. Vacancies are posted by human resource (HR) firms who
                                                                          f
                                                      f                 Wi,t
in turn sell matched workers to the firms for a wage wi,t =             Pi,t
                                                                             .   The wage paid by the HR
firms to the EA firms is referred to as the "match wage" and is denoted wi,t . Naturally,
 h             f
wi,t < wi,t < wi,t .
       The probability that a job hunter (an unmatched worker) finds a job is given by fi,t . If
the worker is matched, the employment agency receives

                                            h
                             Ei,t = wi,t - wi,t + (1 - d) Et {i,t+1 Ei,t+1 } ,

                                                                                    ui
                                                                                     1,i,t+1
where d  (0, 1) is an exogenous job destruction rate and i,t+1 =                     ui
                                                                                               is household i's
                                                                                       1,i,t

stochastic discount factor. If the worker is not matched, the EA gets an unemployment
                          h                              h
benefit bi less the wage wi,t . Notice that the EA pays wi,t regardless of whether the worker
                                                                                              h
is matched or not. The payoff to the EA from hiring a worker is fi,t Ei,t + (1 - fi,t )(bi - wi,t ).
                                                                                      1-fi,t     h
Assuming that there is free entry for the EA firms, we must have Ei,t =                fi,t
                                                                                                wi,t - bi .
       HR firms post vacancies Vi,t . Each vacancy requires a per-period cost  > 0. The job
filling probability is denoted by gi,t . Denote the value to the HR firm of filling a vacancy by
   8
    Gopinath (2015) relates these asymmetric pass-throughs to the dominance of the U.S. dollar as an invoicing
currency.




                                                     15
Ji,t . Then, the value of posting a vacancy to an HR firm is


                           Vi,t = gi,t Ji,t + (1 - gi,t )  Et {i,t+1 Vi,t+1 } - .

                        f
Since the HR firm gets wi,t for every matched worker but pays wi,t to the EA firm, the value
of a filled vacancy is

                             f
                     Ji,t = wi,t - wi,t + (1 - d)  Ji,t+1 + d Et {i,t+1 Vi,t+1 }


   We assume that HR firms face a quadratic cost to adjust the number of vacancies. This
                                     Vi,t+s
cost is given by a function         Vi,t+s-1
                                                with (1) =  (1) = 0 and  (1)  0. The first-order
condition for vacancies requires

                                                                                 2
                    Vi,t          Vi,t                              Vi,t+1
                         = i,t +        -  Et               i,t+1                    i,t+1   ,
                                 Vi,t-1 i,t                          Vi,t

                   Vi,t
where i,t =       Vi,t-1
                           .
   The match wage, wi,t , is determined through Nash bargaining and satisfies

                                                                           h
                               Ji,t (wi,t ) = (1 - ) Ei,t (wi,t ) - (bi - wi,t ) .


   The total number of job hunters Ni,t Hi,t is the sum of everyone who was unemployed in
the previous period plus all the workers who lost their jobs plus any (net) new entrants into
the labor force. Thus,


                 Ni,t Hi,t = Ni,t-1 [li - Li,t-1 ] + dNi,t-1 Li,t-1 + li [Ni,t - Ni,t-1 ] .


Matches per capita are given by the matching function

                                                              1-
                                               Mi,t = mH
                                                      ¯ i,t Vi,t

                                                    Mi,t                Mi,t
where m
      ¯ > 0. The job finding rate, fi,t =           Hi,t
                                                           and gi,t =   Vi,t
                                                                             .   Finally, total employment in
state i evolves according to


                                Ni,t Li,t = (1 - d)Ni,t-1 Li,t-1 + Ni,t Mi,t .


                                                      16
and the unemployment rate is


                                                 uri,t = li - Li,t .                                                 (3.6)


3.4     Aggregation
For each state i, aggregate production of the tradable intermediate goods is

                                                                              N
                                                                   1-                     i        i
                 Ni,t Qi,t = Zi,t (Ni,t-1 ui,t Ki,t-1 ) (Ni,t Li,t )    =           Nj,t yj,t   + y  ,t .
                                                                             j =1


which must equal the total demand for the states intermediate good by other trading partners.
Real state-level GDP is also Ni,t Qi,t .
    Final goods production (per capita) is Yi,t and is given by (3.3). The market clearing
condition for the aggregate final good is


                 Ni,t Yi,t = Ni,t Ci,t + Ni,t Xi,t + Ni,t Gi,t + a(ui,t )Ni,t-1 Ki,t-1 +  Ni,t Vi,t ,

                        N
where Ni,t Ci,t =       j =1   nj    j    j
                                i,t ci,t N is aggregate consumption in state i. The labor market clearing

condition is given by (3.6). Finally, the bond market clearing condition requires that the bond
                                                                                                            N
position of the RoW mirrors the aggregate bond position of the United States,                               i=1   Ni Bt
                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                        .


3.5     Forcing Variables
The driving force in this model are exogenous fluctuations in exchange rates. In line with the
empirical evidence on exchange rate dynamics we capture these exchange rate fluctuations by
assuming that the trade weighted exchange rates are simple random walks. Thus, for each
state i, we have
                                                        
                                                Si,t = Si,t -1 + i,t


where    j,t   is a mean zero shock. This shock specification implies that, to satisfy uncovered
interest rate parity, there must be no interest rate differential between foreign nominal interest
rates and the domestic interest rate.9
   9
     We implicitly assume that monetary policy in the United States does not respond to state-specific exchange
rate shocks. To explicitly model monetary policy, we could add a bond denominated in U.S. dollars with its
interest rate, it , set by the Federal Reserve. Such a setup would give rise to an uncovered interest rate parity




                                                          17
3.6     Steady State
We solve the model by log-linearizing the equilibrium conditions around a non-stochastic
steady state with zero inflation. We adjust the productivity levels Zi so that the real price
of the intermediate good and hence the real exchange rates, are 1 for all states. We set the
amenity values Ai                        i
                j and the trade weights  j to match observered state location patterns (for

the Ai                                                i
     j parameters) and state trade patterns (for the  j parameters). Given the number of

people living out of state (ni
                             j ) and data on state populations Ni , we set the household size for

each state Nj (i.e., the number of people originating from state j ) from (3.1). See the section
on calibration below for more detail on these parameter settings.
    The state trade data implies net export shares (in goods) for each state. These shares are
determined jointly by the trade weights,  j
                                          i , and country size as measured by state domestic

absorption, Ni Yi .10 Given the net export shares and observed government purchases in state
GDP, we can derive the shares of investment and consumption in state GDP.
                                  f
    The real wage paid by firms, wi , equals the marginal product of labor and is therefore
proportional to GDP per employed worker. We directly back out employment, Li , from data
on labor force participation, li , and the unemployment rate, uri for each state. Using the free
                                                                                      h
entry conditions for both the EA and HR firms we can recover the household real wage wi .


3.7     Calibration
The model is solved at a quarterly frequency and calibrated for the U.S. sample of 50 states
plus the District of Columbia. The parameter values are displayed in Table 2 and for the most
part match those reported in HPT. While most of these parameter values are conventional,
HPT estimate a small set of parameters for which we have little guidance from the literature.
This concerns the two parameters related to interstate migration,  and  , as well as the
vacancy adjustment cost,  . The migration parameters are estimated to match the observed
relationship between unemployment and migration at the state level. HPT report that over
between U.S. dollar bonds and international bonds:
                                                                      
                                           U1,i,t+1                  St+1 U1,i,t+1
                             (1 + it )Et              = (1 + i )Et                   .
                                           Pi,t+1                     St  Pi,t+1
                  
Assuming that St    follows a random walk and keeping the foreign interest rate fixed, this uncovered interest
rate parity condition then requires the intereste rate set by the Federal Reserve to be kept constant.
  10
     Keep in mind, our state trade data captures only trade in goods. States that run persistent trade deficits
will typically have large offsetting service trade surpluses.



                                                        18
1977 - 2014, an increase of 100 unemployed workers in a state coincided with outmigration
of 27 people from the state, with the number only slightly smaller in the latter part of the
sample. Empirically, measured outmigration due to high unemployment is quite sluggish.
Following a 1% increase in the unemployment rate, the drop in a state's population reaches
its peak of 130 people only after five years.
       While many parameters pertaining to preferences, technology and government policy are
assumed to be the same across states, our model captures states' variation in size and their
exposure to trade and migration. Data on interstate trade is taken from the freight analysis
framework that sources most of its data from the commodity flow survey. As with the data on
states' exports, we capture only trade in goods, not services. The freight analysis framework
also publishes numbers on trade within states, which we use to calculate the implied home bias
in states' trade patterns. We use the data on state-to-state trade to construct the matrix of
bilateral preference weights,  j
                               i . For a typical state, half the goods are imported from another

state and 10% are imported from abroad.11
       We approximate the number of households born in state j , Nj , with data on population
residing in the United States by state of birth from the U.S. 2000 Census. The same data
source also breaks down a state birth's population by its current state residence. We use these
figures to calculate the share of people from state j living in state i, nj
                                                                          i . For the typical state,

the share of people living in a different state is 38 percent. Overall, the data indicates a high
degree of economic integration in the United States, with states being tighlty linked to each
other through both trade and migration.



4        Regional Effects of Exchange Rate Fluctuations
In this section, we first evaluate the fit of the model by repeating the two empirical exercises
for simulated data from the model. In the first exercise, we feed in the observed state-specific
effective exchange rates over the 1999 - 2018 period and record the simulated unemployment
rates. We then run local projections of these simulated unemployment rates on the effective
exchange rates, as in regression (2.3) and compare the estimated coefficients to those obtained
  11
    Alessandria and Choi (2019) emphasize the role of short- and long-run trade elasticities for explaining trade
dynamics. We adopt a time-invariant trade elasticity of 1.5, but our model does produce different responses to
exchange rate shocks in the short and long run due to the adjustment of labor, capital and intra-state trade.
Additional analysis of the difference between shor- and long-run responses to trade shocks is left to future
work.



                                                       19
from the actual data. In the second exercise, we compute state-specific responses to currency
depreciations in the top destination markets, and, as for the data, plot them against states'
trade exposure to these markets.
   Then, we conduct a series of counterfactuals to evaluate the role of economic integration
on the impact of state-specific exchange rate shocks. We repeat the first exercise described
above, but adjust our model to (i) remove interstate trade in goods, (ii) remove migration,
and (iii) remove trade in bonds. We then use the model to simulate the response to a 25%
tariff imposed by China on U.S. exports. Finally, we conclude this section by considering
how the observed growth in U.S. trade over the past 30 years affects the model's predicted
response to exchange rate changes.


4.1    Model and Data Comparison
Figure 7 compares the impulse response functions implied by the calibrated model with the
estimated impulse responses from Figure 4. The shaded regions correspond to 90% confi-
dence intervals. For the model responses, these shaded regions should be interpreted as the
confidence intervals that an econometrician would compute if he or she were using data from
the model simulations. To construct the figure, we simulate the model by feeding in the ex-
change rate innovations we calculate in the data. The model produces simulated time paths
of the unemployment rate and GDP for each state from 1999-2018. We then estimate local
projections as we did for the actual data in Figure 4.
   The impulse responses of the unemployment rate to a 1% depreciation of the trade-weighted
effective exchange rate in the model and the data have a similar shape, though the effects are
more pronounced in the model. The model-implied unemployment rate drops on impact by
roughly 0.5 percentage points (panel (a)) whereas the empirical drop is zero on impact and
declines over time. For both the data and the model, the unemployment rate returns to steady
state at roughly the same pace. State GDP (panel (b)) rises by roughly 1% in both the model
and the data though the estimated change in production in the data has some tendency to
revert towards its initial level over time while there is no such pattern in the model.
   Panel (b) of Figure 5 plots the model-implied coefficients ( h,j
                                                                s,n ) from regression (2.4). As in

panel (a), we consider the relationship between the state-level reactions to bilateral exchange
rates for the five largest trade destinations against the states corresponding export shares.
Relative to the estimates from the data, the model produces tighter relationship between


                                               20
states' trade shares and their unemployment response. The cross-sectional relationship is also
slightly stronger in the model relative to the data; the model coefficient is -0.38 compared to
its counterpart in the data of -0.31.


4.2    Regional Shocks and Economic Integration
We now use the model to study the impact of increased trade exposure over time on economic
outcomes across the United States. Many studies examine the impact of localized trade shocks
on output and employment assuming that communities are isolated from one another and that
labor is unable to reallocate in response to shocks. Our model allows us to disentangle the
relative importance of labor market adjustment, financial risk sharing and intrastate trade in
response to changes in state-specific exchange rates. For each counterfactual, we feed in the
observed state-specific effective exchange rates, record the simulated unemployment rates and
run local projections as in (2.3). The results are reported in Figure 8.
   When there is trade between states but no interstate migration (Figure 8 panel (a) ), we
see that the impact on unemployment is approximately twice as large than the benchmark
case, falling by 1.6 percentage points instead of 0.9 percentage points. Because workers can-
not relocate to states experiencing the exchange rate appreciation of the Canadian dollar,
more workers are drawn out of the local unemployment pool. By failing to account for labor
mobility, models with trade shocks will overestimate the effect on local unemployment. Be-
cause population movements are somewhat sluggish in their response to changing economic
conditions (as emphasized by HPT and captured in our model), this mechanism needs several
quarters to attain its full effect.
   In the second counterfactual, we allow for labor mobility but assume that there is no trade
between states. The impulse response in panel (b) shows that a state-specific exchange rate
depreciation produces a decline in unemployment of 3.2 percentage points. The depreciation
of the exchange rate ­ effectively an increase in foreign import demand ­ induces an increase
in state output, both to satisfy exports and increased consumption and investment. In this
no-intrastate-trade counterfactual, all the extra demand must be met through local produc-
tion, resulting in a large decline in local unemployment. The impulse response also shows
that the impact effect in the no-intrastate-trade specification is rather short-lived and the
unemployment response converges to the benchmark after 1.5 years.
   In the last experiment we close asset markets, but allow for interstate trade and migration.


                                              21
We let states run bilateral current account imbalances, as long as their aggregate (across all
other states and RoW) current account is balanced. In the benchmark model, households
respond to an exchange rate depreciation by borrowing against future income to increase
investment (and consumption). Financial markets therefore help states finance the economic
expansion. In financial autarky, households must self-finance their investment. This dampens
the response of the unemployment rate and delays its drop by two quarters.
   Taken together, these experiments suggest that both interstate trade and migration play
an important role in the allocation of resources in response to exchange rate changes. Both of
these features of the U.S. economy help smooth out state-specific shocks, with interstate trade
playing a major role in the short run, but migration being the key adjustment mechanism in
the medium run. Models that fail to account for interstate linkages and labor mobility will
overstate the impact of trade shocks in both the short- and the long-run.


4.3    Chinese Import Tariffs on U.S. Exports
Our model emphasizes the effects of exchange rate shocks on output and employment though
changing demand for exports. We next consider an experiment that captures changing trade
policy in China. In response to the recent hike in U.S. tariffs on Chinese imports under
President Donald Trump, China retaliated by raising tariffs on U.S. exports. Here we consider
a scenario in which China imposes a 25% tariff on all U.S. exports. We interpret this in our
model as a 25% depreciation of the Chinese yuan relative to the U.S. dollar that lowers Chinese
demand for U.S. goods. In our experiment, we abstract from the impact of U.S. tariffs on
U.S. import demand from China and assume that there is no monetary policy response to the
Chinese import tariff.
   Panel (a) of Figure 9 shows exports to China as share of state's GDP, as of 2018. As can
be seen in the Figure, there is a large variation in export exposure across states: while many
states export less than 1/2% of their GDP to China, this number is substantially higher for
some states, especially in the Northwest: the states with the greatest export shares to China
are Alaska, South Carolina, Oregon, and--reaching about 5% of state GDP--Washington.
   Panel (b) shows the model-implied change in unemployment by state resulting from the
Chinese retaliation. Clearly, the states with the greatest direct export exposure suffer the
largest increases in unemployment, with unemployment rates in Washington rising by 0.78
percentage points over the first four quarters. However, while the effects are concentrated in


                                              22
the upper Northwest, the effects are transmitted to other states through interstate trade and
migration. This transmission substantially reduces the cross-state dispersion in unemployment
to almost a tenth of the dispersion in export shares. The effects of Chinese import tariffs on
U.S. exports are therefore felt throughout the United States, not just in states that directly
export to China, but also in states with little direct ties to China.


4.4    Trade Growth and Exchange Rate Fluctuations
Finally, we consider the consequences of the steady expansion in trade and changing patterns
of destination markets for the United States over the last 30 years. Since our state-level
export data only goes back to 1999, we have to extrapolate bilateral export exposure back
to 1989 using destination-specific export data at the national level. We proceed similarly for
state-level imports. The appendix provides more details on the assumptions underlying these
extrapolations.
   The first two columns in Table 3 display the median ratio of state-level exports to state
GDP to the top destination markets, both in 1989 and in 2018. Exports as a percent of state
GDP have increased by 0.3 to 0.5 percentage points for all markets, except for Japan, where
they slightly fell. Mexico and China have overtaken Japan, but Canada and the euro area
clearly remain the U.S.' main trading partners.
   For the experiment, we consider two calibrations of the model. For the first calibration we
set the trade shares to match their empirical counterparts in 1989. For the second calibration
we set trade shares to their 2018 levels. We then examine how the economy reacts to an
exogenous change in the various foreign currencies. The last columns of Table 3 display the
median unemployment response to a 10% real exchange rate appreciation of either one of the
five foreign currencies.
   We observe that despite the increase in exports, states' unemployment rates do not gener-
ally react more to foreign exchange rate fluctuations: While a 10% appreciation of the Mexican
peso or the Chinese yuan raise unemployment rates by 0.11 or 0.16 percentage points more in
2018 compared to 1989, a similar appreciation of the Canadian dollar or the euro cause unem-
ployment to respond less today than 30 years ago, and this despite increasing export shares to
Canada and the euro area. The muted response of the unemployment rate is the result of two
counteracting effects in the model: First, because states trade more with foreign countries,
changes in foreign exchange rates will tend to have larger effects on economic activity. This


                                               23
effect dominates the change in the response to the Mexican peso and Chinese yuan. Second,
the expansion in trade offers states the ability to use trade with a broader set of countries to
limit fluctuations in local production and employment. Together with the increase in exports,
imports as share of states' GDP more than doubled over the last 30 years, going from an
average of 5 percent to an average of 11 percent. As a consequence, some of the extra demand
resulting from a U.S. dollar exchange rate depreciation will be met by importing from abroad
instead of raising demand for domestic labor. This second effect dominates the change in the
response to the Canadian dollar and the euro.



5     Conclusion
Our paper studies the impact of changes in real exchange rates on economic activity across
U.S. states. Changes in exchange rates are relatively large, and there is considerable hetero-
geneity across states in terms of the volume and direction of trade. We find that an effective
exchange rate depreciation of the U.S. dollar by 1% increases state-level exports by 1%-2%
and raises output by as much as 1/2%-1%. Within the first year unemployment falls by about
0.4 percentage points before reverting back, whereas population steadily increases by perhaps
0.3% over the first two years. The magnitude of such effects depends on the state's exposure
to international trade, and are generally stronger when there is sufficient slack in local labor
markets.
    In a multi-state model calibrated to state-level trade, labor mobility and relative state
size, we find that interstate trade plays a key role in transmitting local shocks across the
United States in the short run, whereas state-to-state migration shapes economies' response
in subsequent periods. In a counterfactual 25% depreciation of the Chinese yuan (an approx-
imation of the impact of retaliatory tariffs by China on U.S. exports), unemployment rates
are predicted to increase by 0.2 to 0.7 percentage points, with the impact being particularly
strong in the upper Northwest. However, integrated goods and factor markets help transmit
the shocks throughout the United States, even to states that export little to China.




                                              24
References
Alessandria, George A, and Horag Choi. 2019. "The Dynamics of the US Trade Balance
  and Real Exchange Rate: The J Curve and Trade Costs?" National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Autor, David H, David Dorn, and Gordon H Hanson. 2016. "The China Shock:
  Learning from Labor-Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade." Annual Review of
  Economics, 8: 205­240.

Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland. 1994. "Dynamics of
  the Trade Balance and the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve?" American Economic Review,
  84(1): 84­103.

Basu, Susanto, and John G. Fernald. 1995. "Are Apparent Productive Spillovers a Fig-
  ment of Specification Error?" Journal of Monetary Economics, 36(1): 165­188.

Basu, Susanto, and Miles S. Kimball. 1997. "Cyclical Productivity with Unobserved
  Input Variation." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina. 2016. "The Aggregate Implications of
  Regional Business Cycles."

Caliendo, Lorenzo, Maximiliano Dvorkin, and Fernando Parro. 2019. "Trade and
  Labor Market Dynamics: General Equilibrium Analysis of the China Trade Shock." Econo-
  metrica.

Campa, Jose, and Linda S. Goldberg. 1995. "Investment in Manufacturing, Exchange
  Rates and External Exposure." Journal of International Economics, 38(3-4): 297­320.

Cassey, Andrew J. 2009. "State Export Data: Origin of Movement vs. Origin of Produc-
  tion." Journal of Economic and Social Measurement, 34(4): 241­268.

Chow, Gregory C., and An-loh Lin. 1971. "Best Linear Unbiased Interpolation, Distri-
  bution, and Extrapolation of Time Series by Related Series." The Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 372­375.




                                           25
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005. "Nominal
  Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy." Journal of Political
  Economy, 113(1): 1­45.

Del Negro, Marco, Stefano Eusepi, Marc Giannoni, Argia Sbordone, Andrea Tam-
  balotti, Matthew Cocci, Raiden Hasegawa, and M. Henry Linder. 2013. "The
  FRBNY DSGE Model." Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 647.

Diamond, Peter A. 1982. "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium." Journal
  of Political Economy, 90(5): 881­894.

Dupor, Bill, Marios Karabarbounis, Marianna Kudlyak, and M. Saif Mehkari.
  2018. "Regional Consumption Responses and the Aggregate Fiscal Multiplier." FRB St.
  Louis Working Paper, , (2018-4).

Ekholm, Karolina, Andreas Moxnes, and Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe. 2012. "Man-
  ufacturing Restructuring and the Role of Real Exchange Rate Shocks." Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics, 86(1): 101­117.

Engen, Eric M., and Jonathan Gruber. 2001. "Unemployment Insurance and Precau-
  tionary Saving." Journal of Monetary Economics, 47(3): 545­579.

Gal´
   i, Jordi. 2008. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: an Introduction to
  the New Keynesian Framework. Princeton University Press (Princeton, New Jersey: 2008).

Gopinath, Gita. 2015. "The International Price System." National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki, and Roberto Rigobon. 2010. "Currency Choice and
  Exchange Rate Pass-Through." American Economic Review, 100(1): 304­36.

Heathcote, Jonathan, and Fabrizio Perri. 2002. "Financial Autarky and International
  Real Business Cycles." Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(3): 601­627.

House, Christopher L., Christian Proebsting, and Linda L. Tesar. 2018. "Quanti-
  fying the Benefits of Labor Mobility in a Currency Union." National Bureau of Economic
  Research.



                                           26
House, Christopher L., Christian Proebsting, and Linda L. Tesar. 2019. "Austerity
  in the Aftermath of the Great Recession." Journal of Monetary Economics.

Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2013. "The Global Decline of the Labor
  Share." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 61­103.

Kehoe, Timothy J., and Kim J. Ruhl. 2009. "Sudden Stops, Sectoral Reallocations, and
  the Real Exchange Rate." Journal of Development Economics, 89(2): 235­249.

Merz, Monika. 1995. "Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle." Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 36(2): 269­300.

Molloy, Raven, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniak. 2011. "Internal Migration
  in the United States." The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3): 173­196.

Mortensen, Dale T. 1982. "Property Rights and Efficiency in Mating, Racing, and Related
  Games." The American Economic Review, 72(5): 968­979.

Nakamura, Emi, and J´
                    on Steinsson. 2008. "Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of
  Menu Cost Models." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4): 1415­1464.

Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson. 2014. "Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evi-
  dence from US Regions." The American Economic Review, 104(3): 753­792.

Owyang, Michael T, Valerie A Ramey, and Sarah Zubairy. 2013. "Are Government
  Spending Multipliers Greater During Periods of Slack? Evidence from Twentieth-Century
  Historical Data." American Economic Review, 103(3): 129­34.

Pissarides, Christopher A. 1985. "Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment,
  Vacancies, and Real Wages." The American Economic Review, 75(4): 676­690.

Ramey, Valerie A, and Sarah Zubairy. 2018. "Government Spending Multipliers in Good
  Times and in Bad: Evidence from US Historical Data." Journal of Political Economy,
  126(2): 850­901.

Redding, Stephen J., and Esteban A. Rossi-Hansberg. 2017. "Quantitative Spatial
  Economics." Annual Review of Economics, 9(1).

Shimer, Robert. 2005. "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacan-
  cies." American Economic Review, 95(1): 25­49.

                                           27
Shimer, Robert. 2010. Labor Markets and Business Cycles. Princeton University Press
  Princeton, NJ.




                                        28
                                                          Table 1: SUMMARY STATISTICS

                                      Export        Main     Exp share                                        Export        Main     Exp share
     State                     Size    share     destination   main              State                Size     share     destination   main
     Alabama                    1.2     8.1       Euro area          2.0         Montana                0.3     2.7         Canada           1.3
     Alaska                     0.3     8.5          Japan           2.5         Nebraska               0.6     5.2         Canada           1.3
     Arizona                    1.7     5.7         Mexico           1.8         Nevada                 0.8     3.9     Switzerland          1.2
     Arkansas                   0.7     4.3         Canada           1.1         New Hampshire          0.4     4.6      Euro area           1.0
     California                13.4     5.6         Mexico           0.9         New Jersey             3.4     4.8         Canada           1.0
     Colorado                   1.7     2.5        Canada            0.6         New Mexico             0.5     2.8         Mexico           0.6
     Connecticut                1.6     5.3       Euro area          1.7         New York               8.0     4.0         Canada           0.9
     Delaware                   0.4     5.6         Canada           1.3         North Carolina         2.7     5.4         Canada           1.3
     District of Columbia       0.7     1.2         U.A.E.           0.3         North Dakota           0.2     6.5         Canada           4.0
     Florida                    5.0     5.2       Euro area          0.5         Ohio                   3.5     7.3         Canada           3.3
     Georgia                    2.9     5.7         Canada           1.1         Oklahoma               1.0     2.9         Canada           1.0
     Hawaii                     0.4     1.0          Japan           0.2         Oregon                 1.1     8.8         Canada           1.3
     Idaho                      0.4     5.7        Canada            1.1         Pennsylvania           4.0     4.5         Canada           1.4




29
     Illinois                   4.5     6.4         Canada           2.0         Rhode Island           0.3     3.3         Canada           1.0
     Indiana                    1.9     8.6        Canada            3.5         South Carolina         1.1    10.7      Euro area           2.7
     Iowa                       1.0     6.6         Canada           2.2         South Dakota           0.2     3.0         Canada           1.2
     Kansas                     0.9     6.7         Canada           1.6         Tennessee              1.8     7.2         Canada           2.2
     Kentucky                   1.1    10.0         Canada           3.1         Texas                  8.3    12.8         Mexico           4.9
     Louisiana                  1.5    17.8       Euro area          2.6         Utah                   0.8     7.8           U. K.          1.8
     Maine                      0.3     5.0         Canada           2.1         Vermont                0.2     9.2         Canada           4.2
     Maryland                   2.0     2.4       Euro area          0.5         Virginia               2.7     3.8      Euro area           0.8
     Massachusetts              2.7     5.4       Euro area          1.4         Washington             2.4    15.4          China           2.4
     Michigan                   2.8    10.0         Canada           5.2         West Virginia          0.4     7.9         Canada           2.0
     Minnesota                  1.8     5.7         Canada           1.5         Wisconsin              1.7     6.6         Canada           2.2
     Mississippi                0.6     6.7         Canada           1.3         Wyoming                0.2     2.9         Canada           0.7
     Missouri                   1.7     4.3         Canada           1.6         Average                        6.2                          1.7

      Notes: Table displays states' relative size (measured as a state's GDP in U.S. GDP), export share in state GDP, the main destination country of
     their exports and the corresponding export share of that destination in state GDP. The main destination country is identified as the country with
     the highest share of exports in total exports. All statistics are averages over 1999-2018.
                                                               Table 2: Calibration
     Parameter                                          Value    Target / Source
     Preferences
     Discount factor                                    0.995    2% real interest rate
                                                1
     Coefficient of relative risk aversion                2      Standard value

     Technology & Nominal Rigidities
     Curvate of production function                      0.30    Labor income share of 0.63 (Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2013)
     Depreciation rate                                  0.021    Annual depreciation rate of 8 percent
     Utilization cost                           a       0.286    Del Negro et al. (2013)
     Investment adjustment cost                          0.05    House, Proebsting and Tesar (2018)
     Elasticity of substitution bw. varieties   q         10     e.g. Basu and Fernald (1995), Basu and Kimball (1997)
     Sticky price probability                   p        0.70    Price duration: 10 months (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2008)

     Trade and State Size
     Trade demand elasticity                    y        1.5     e.g. Heathcote and Perri (2002), Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1994)
     Trade preference weights                   ji        x      Share of imports from j ; Freight Analysis Framework (2002, 2007, 2012, 2016)
     State's absorption                         Nn Yn     x      Nominal GDP (BEA)




30
     Migration
     Population                                 Ni       x       Population, Census ('00)
     Amenity value                              Aj
                                                 i       x       Share of people from j living in i, Census ('00)
     Migration propensity                               2.27     House, Proebsting and Tesar (2018)
     Migration adjustment cost                          1.91     House, Proebsting and Tesar (2018)

     Labor Markets
     Unemployment rate                          ur        x      BLS ('00-'17)
     Labor force                                l         x      BLS ('00-'17)
     Separation rate                            d        0.10    Shimer (2005)
     Matching elasticity to tightness                    0.72    Shimer (2005)
     Bargaining power of workers                         0.72    Same as matching elasticity
     Unemployment benefits                      b/w      0.44    Net replacement rate, Engen and Gruber (2001)
                                                Vi
     Vacancy cost                               Yi      0.004    Shimer (2010)
     Vacancy adjustment cost                             0.85    House, Proebsting and Tesar (2018)

     Fiscal Policy
                                                Gi
     Gov't purchases over final demand          Yi      0.18     BEA ('00-'17)

     Notes: Values marked with x are state- or state-pair specific.
Table 3: Export Share and Unemployment Response Over Time

                  Exports / GDP (%)               Unempl Response
                  1989    2018    Change        1989    2018 Change
    Canada        0.88    1.18     0.30         0.42    0.32     -0.10
    Euro area     0.65    1.04     0.39         0.34    0.26     -0.08
    Japan         0.37    0.29    -0.08         0.23    0.08     -0.15
    Mexico        0.14    0.59     0.46         0.10    0.26      0.16
    China         0.04    0.42     0.39         0.03    0.13      0.11

     Notes: The first two columns display the median export share (across
    U.S. states) for the U.S. top 5 destination markets, both in 1989 and
    2018. Columns 3 and 4 show the model-implied median responses of the
    unemployment rate to a 10% real exchange rate appreciation of either
    the Canadian dollar, the Mexican peso, the euro, the Japanese yen or the
    Chinese yuan, both in 1989 and 2018. The unemployment response is the
    average response over the first four quarters.




                                      31
                                (a) Canada                                                                  (b) Mexico




32
                               (c) Euro Area                                                                (d) Japan

                                                 Figure 1: Export Shares by Destination

     Notes: Figures display a state's share of exports towards (a) Canada, (b) Mexico, (c) the euro area, and (d) Japan. Shares are averaged over 1999 -
     2016.
        Figure 2: US Dollar Real Exchange Rate: Top Destinations

Notes: Figure displays the bilateral real exchange rate of the US Dollar relative to the 10 top destination
markets. Exchange rates are quoted in US Dollar per foreign currency and deflated by the ratio of the
consumer price indices.




                                                  33
34
                   Figure 3: Growth Rates of the Real Effective Exchange Rate Across U.S. States

     Notes: Figure displays year-to-year growth rates of the real effective exchange rate across states between 2001 and 2018. For any point in time t,
     the growth rate between t - 4 and t is displayed. Effective exchange rates are calculated based on average export shares over the last four quarters.
     Export data starts in 1999q1, so that effective exchange rates can only be calculated starting in 2000q1 and annual growth rates start in 2001q1.
     The thick black line is the growth rate for the median state, the heavy-shaded area is the interquartile range, the light-shaded area is the interdecile
     range and the thin blue lines display the minimum and maximum growth rates observed across U.S. states.
             (a) Real Exchange Rate                             (b) Exports and Imports                               (c) Unemployment Rate




35
                   (d) State GDP                                     (e) Hours worked                                    (f) Net migration

                Figure 4: Empirical Impulse Response to a Real Effective Exchange Rate Depreciation

     Notes: Figure displays the local projection of (a) the real effective exchange rate, (b) nominal exports and imports (expressed in percent of state's
     GDP), (c) the unemployment rate, (d) state GDP, (e) hours worked and (f) cumulative net immigration to a 1% depreciation of the real effective
     exchange rate based on regression (2.3). The definition of the (export) effective exchange rate covers the U.S. market, including the state itself. State
     GDP is real, total GDP at the state level. Bands are 90 percent confidence intervals.
36
                                  (a) Data                                                                   (b) Model

         Figure 5: Unemployment Rate Response to a Depreciation of the U.S. dollar and Export Shares

     Notes: Panel (a) displays the estimated response of the unemployment averaged over the first four quarters for an appreciation of the U.S. dollar
     relative to one of the five top export markets as a function of a state's exports to that market (normalized by a state's GDP). Each dot represents
                                             3    ^ h,j                                                 1 3     ^ h,j
     an estimated regression coefficient, 1
                                          4  h=0  s,n , and the vertical lines are standard deviations, 4
                                                                                                                           ^ h,j . Panel (b) displays the
                                                                                                          h=0  s,n ± std  s,n
     coefficients from the simulated response in the model.
                  (a) Exports                                     (b) Unemployment Rate




                 (c) State GDP                                       (d) Hours Worked

Figure 6: Response to an Exchange Rate Depreciation Over the Business Cycle

  Notes: Figure displays the local projection of (a) nominal exports (expressed in percent of state's GDP),
  (b) the unemployment rate, (c) state GDP, (d) hours worked to a 1% depreciation of the real effective
  exchange rate based on regression (2.5). The definition of the (export) effective exchange rate covers
  the U.S. market, including the state itself. State GDP is real, total GDP at the state level. Bands are
  1-standard error-deviation bounds. Slack is identified as time periods where a state's unemployment rate
  exceeds 6.5 percent.




                                                   37
38
                         (a) Unemployment Rate                                                               (b) GDP

                      Figure 7: Impulse Response to a Real Effective Exchange Rate Depreciation

     Notes: Figure displays the local projection of (a) the unemployment rate and (b) state GDP to a 1 percent appreciation of the effective exchange
     rate based on regression (2.3). The definition of the (export) effective exchange rate covers the U.S. market, including the state itself. Both the
     response in the actual data and the simulated benchmark model are displayed. Bands are 90 percent confidence intervals.
               (a) No Migration                                (b) No Interstate Trade




                                      (c) Financial Autarky

Figure 8: Model Response of Unemployment to an Exchange Rate Depreciation

  Notes: See Figure 7. Only impulse responses based on the benchmark model and the various counterfac-
  tuals are displayed.




                                                39
                              (a) Exports to China as Share of GDP




                        (b) Unemployment Response to a 25% China Tariff

Figure 9: Export Exposure to China and Effects of Tariff on Unemployment.

  Notes: Figure (a) displays exports to China as a share of state GDP (in percent, as of 2018). Figure (b)
  displays the model-implied change in the unemployment rate in response to a 25 percent tariff imposed
  by China on U.S. exports averaged over the first year.




                                                  40
