                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      PARTIAL DEFAULT

                                        Cristina Arellano
                                      Xavier Mateos-Planas
                                      José-Víctor Ríos-Rull

                                       Working Paper 26076
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26076


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




We thank Emmanuel Farhi for his discussion. We appreciate comments received on early
versions at the conferences NBER Summer Institute, SED Seoul, SAET Paris, Econometric
Society Toulouse, RES Manchester, CRETE Crete, REDg Madrid, GSE Winter Workshop, and
seminars at several universities. We also thank Laura Sunder-Plassmann and Alexandra
Solovyeva for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26076.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Cristina Arellano, Xavier Mateos-Planas, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Partial Default
Cristina Arellano, Xavier Mateos-Planas, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull
NBER Working Paper No. 26076
July 2019
JEL No. E44,F3

                                           ABSTRACT

In the data sovereign default is always partial and varies in its duration. Debt levels during default
episodes initially increase and do not experience reductions upon resolution. This paper presents
a theory of sovereign default that replicates these properties, which are absent in standard
sovereign default theory. Partial default is a flexible way to raise funds as the sovereign chooses
its intensity and duration. Partial default is also costly because it amplifies debt crises as the
defaulted debt accumulates and interest rate spreads increase. This theory is capable of
rationalizing the large heterogeneity in partial default, its comovements with spreads, debt levels,
and output, and the dynamics of debt during default episodes. In our theory, as in the data, debt
grows during default episodes, and large defaults are longer, and associated with higher interest
rate spreads, higher debt levels, and deeper recessions.

Cristina Arellano                                 José-Víctor Ríos-Rull
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis               Department of Economics
Research Department                               University of Pennsylvania
90 Hennepin Avenue                                3718 Locust Walk
Minneapolis, MN 55401                             Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                          and NBER
arellano.cristina@gmail.com                       vr0j@econ.upenn.edu

Xavier Mateos-Planas
School of Economics and Finance
Queen Mary University of London
London, E1 4NS
United Kingdom
and Centre For Macroeconomics CFM
x.mateos-planas@qmul.ac.uk
1     Introduction

Understanding sovereign debt crises and defaults is central for emerging markets as default risk is
a main driver of fluctuations in capital flows and economic activity. Sovereigns in these countries
frequently miss payments on their debt, but almost always by only a fraction of the amount
due. During these partial defaults, sovereigns continue to pay some of the debt, continue to
borrow at higher-than-normal interest rates, and accumulate the defaulted debt as arrears until
resolution. Some of these partial defaults take the form of protracted episodes associated with
rising default and debt, and deeper recessions. The standard theory of sovereign default, as in the
influential framework in Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), assumes that default is complete, rather than
partial, and that it is followed by a period of exclusion without any borrowing, further default, or
accumulation of arrears taking place. Default in that paradigm leads to a new start with reduced
debt. In this paper, we propose a theory of partial default more in accord with the evidence, where
partial default often leads to further defaults and to debt increases.

A central idea in our theory is that partial default is an alternative way to effectively borrow
and inter-temporally transfer resources. As with standard borrowing through markets, partially
defaulting raises current resources and increases future liabilities as most of the defaulted debt
accumulates. Unlike standard borrowing, however, partial default does not have the acquiescence
of the lenders and is associated with future resource costs. A main implication of our theory is
that partial default is an amplifying force for debt crises. A country that misses payments will
be in worse shape going forward because it will experience rising debt as the defaulted payments
accumulate and any new borrowing occurs at high interest rates. This theory is capable of
rationalizing the large heterogeneity in partial default, its comovements with economic outcomes,
and rising debt during default episodes. In our theory, as in the data, large defaults are associated
with higher interest rate spreads, higher debt levels, deeper recessions, and longer default episodes.

Our analysis puts at center stage partial default, which we define as the fraction in arrears of
current debt payments due by sovereigns. We document the properties of partial default using
data for 38 emerging markets since 1970. We find that sovereigns default often, with varying
intensity and duration, missing their debt payments about one third of the time. During these
events, often only a small fraction of the payment is missed; in about half of these events, less
than 30% of the promised payments are missed. Default episodes vary in duration, with many
lasting less than 2 years but some on occasion lasting much longer, over 30 years. Debt-to-output
ratios feature a hump-shaped pattern during default episodes, and these episodes are typically not


                                                  1
associated with a net reduction in debt. As a default episode starts, debt-to-output rises from
35% to 40%, in the middle of the episode debt reaches an even larger ratio of 47%, and debt falls
to 36% towards the end of the default episode. We also find that partial default is systematically
correlated with other outcomes of the debt crisis. During small defaults (those belonging in the
bottom quartile of the distribution) sovereign governments miss on average 3% of payments,
interest rate spreads are about 7%, debt-to-output ratios are about 37%, and output is at trend.
During large defaults (those in the top quartile) in contrast, governments miss about 82% of their
payments, face interest rate spreads of about 15%, debt-to-output ratios are 63%, and output is
about 6% below trend. Large defaults are also associated with longer default episodes.1

Our framework consists of a sovereign government in a small open economy that borrows long-
term bonds, can choose to partially default on its debt payments, and faces a stochastic stream
of income. Partial default is a flexible yet expensive way to raise funds. Partial default is flexible
because the government can choose when to start the default episode, the intensity of partial
default every period, and when to end the default episode. The defaulted debt is accumulated at
a rate that depends on a recovery factor parameter. This accumulated defaulted debt comes due
in the future. Yet default is costly because it induces future resource costs that depend on the
intensity of the default. The government can also raise resources by borrowing through markets
at interest rates that compensate for potential default losses. Borrowing is always possible,
even during default episodes. Expected default losses, however, are more elevated during default
episodes, which increases interest rates and can deter borrowing altogether. This framework
implies varying debt haircuts and maturity extensions that depend on the endogenous default
episode length and intensity of the default.

The sovereign effectively faces a portfolio choice to intertemporally transfer resources and smooth
consumption because it chooses how much to borrow and partially default every period. We
characterize theoretically the trade-offs involved in these two decisions. The gains from borrowing
are the increases in consumption net of the reduction in bond prices due to higher default, while
its costs consist of the future coupon payments evaluated at future prices. Due to default risk,
the gains from borrowing are capped by a Laffer Curve typical of sovereign default models. The
benefits to partially defaulting increase linearly with the amount defaulted on and is not subject
to a Laffer Curve, but is capped by the total level of debt due. The costs from partially defaulting
include also the future payments from the accumulation of the defaulted debt, also evaluated at
future prices, plus the future resource costs resulting from default.

   1
     Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Cruces and Trebesch (2013) document that sovereign defaults throughout
history have been partial in that creditors receive sizable debt recoveries after default episodes.

                                                    2
The portfolio shares of borrowing and partial defaulting result from weighing these marginal gains
and costs. When income is high and debt is low borrowing is preferred to partial default because
these are times when borrowing rates are low. As income falls and debt rises, borrowing rates
increase and a mix of borrowing and partial default becomes optimal. When debt rises and income
falls further, default is complete and borrowing collapses because borrowing rates are extremely
high. Partial default increases borrowing rates because defaulted debt piles up as debt in arrears
and future resources are diminished. The bond price schedule reflects these default decisions and
shapes the dynamics of the model.

We estimate the model by targeting moments that summarize the empirical distribution of partial
default and the behavior of interest rate spreads, debt, and output in emerging markets. The
estimated parameters include the ones characterizing the default cost function as well as the debt
recovery factor. We show that our over-identified model matches the target moments well and
delivers the empirical distribution of debt and partial default, including the presence of many small
defaults.

The parameterized model contains additional implications, consistent with the data, for the cor-
relations of partial default with other variables, as well as for the length of default episodes, and
debt haircuts and maturity extensions resulting from default episodes. In the model and the
data, small defaults tend to be shorter and are associated with lower interest rate spreads, lower
levels of debt, and smaller recessions, while large partial defaults are longer and associated with
higher interest rate spreads, higher levels of debt, and deeper recessions. Our model matches
the data in that it delivers a hump-shaped pattern for debt to output during episodes. During
default episodes, debt continues to rise in the model, and default episodes do not result in a net
reduction of the debt burden. Default episodes in our model also result in sizable debt haircuts
and maturity extensions with magnitudes similar to those in the data.

To analyze the mechanisms behind the results, we study the equilibrium policy functions and the
impulse responses to income shocks. When income falls, the bond price schedule tightens, making
it more costly to roll over the debt. To alleviate the consumption decline, the government not
only increases borrowing at higher interest rates but also partially defaults. The rise in borrowing
and partial default increases future debt and creates the dynamic amplification of the shocks.
As debt remains elevated, interest rates and partial default remain persistently high, even as the
shock dissipates. These impulse responses show that recessions in our model have long-lasting
effects on the functioning of international financial markets.



                                                 3
We also analyze the dynamics of default episodes. The severity of the debt crisis depends on
the size and persistence of the recession and on the accumulation of debt from past borrowing
and partial default. Default episodes generally start with a small partial default that occurs after
a moderate downturn when debt is high enough. These small defaults are resolved quickly if
the recession is temporary. When the recession is deeper and more persistent, however, the
small but rising partial defaults amplify the debt crisis by inducing a rapid increase in debt at
increasingly higher interest rates. Small partial defaults coupled with persistent recessions are
the culprit of prolonged debt crises. The episode ends when output recovers sufficiently to repay
the accumulated debt. Larger debt crises require stronger output recoveries for the resolution of
default as they feature larger accumulated debt from past borrowing and partial defaults.

Default episodes are associated with debt haircuts and maturity extensions that depend on the
intensity of partial default and also on the length of the episode. Longer episodes have larger
haircuts because the default discount is compounded with repeated partial defaults. The model
features maturity extensions because defaults occur on payments due, which are inherently short
term, and the new liabilities are in the form of long-term bonds. The path and intensity of partial
default also shape maturity extensions because the overall maturity of the defaulted debt depends
on whether larger defaults occur early or late during the episode.

We perform two counterfactual experiments that relate to discussions around resolution mecha-
nisms for sovereign defaults. In the first counterfactual, we eliminate the possibility of borrowing
during default episodes and argue that, in our model, this policy is similar to adding more strin-
gent pari passu clauses to the bond contracts. This application is motivated by the fact that
in the baseline model borrowing during default episodes implies differential haircuts to lenders
because bonds issued later in the episode experience fewer periods with partial default compared
to bonds issued earlier. Such differential treatment violates pari passu clauses. In the second
counterfactual, we decrease the debt recovery factor on defaulted debt. This counterfactual im-
plements higher debt relief policies within our model, as in the Highly Indebted Poor Countries
initiative proposed by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. Our analysis of these
counterfactuals suggests that pari passu clauses lead to lower default frequency, shorter default
episodes, and smaller debt haircuts from defaults. Debt relief initiatives that increase haircuts,
reduce the incidence of large defaults, reduce debt levels, but also decrease debt sustainability.

Finally, we contrast our partial default model directly to the reference full default model of Arel-
lano (2008) and Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012). We highlight two striking differences across
models. First, the reference full default model is silent about the behavior of debt and spreads


                                                 4
during periods of default, while our model accounts for the substantial observed variation and
comovements in these variables. Second, the reference full default model features a fresh start
with complete debt discharge after default and a consumption and borrowing burst as soon as
the default episode ends. In contrast, our model matches the data in that, without a fresh start,
debt does not decline in default episodes.



Related Literature. This paper introduces the study of partial default in the literature on
sovereign debt and embraces the lack of commitment inherent in sovereign contracts. In addressing
new aspects of the evidence, it departs in essential ways from work in the tradition of Eaton and
Gersovitz (1981). In the standard short-term debt model of Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) or
Arellano (2008), default can only be on the total amount of debt, is followed by a period of
exclusion, and ends in a full discharge of debt.2 In these papers, a default episode, spanning
the moment of default and the specified moment of redemption, precludes any continuation of
debt repayments on any coupons, further borrowing, or accumulation of arrears. During default
episodes, the sanction of complete exclusion from financial markets is assumed and rationalized
by assumed commitment from lenders to collude in not lending to the sovereign. By design, such
theory cannot study the partial default episodes that we measure and focus here.

Following the work on debt restructuring, as in Bulow and Rogoff (1989), an active recent strand
of research explores the implications of less blunt resolutions of defaults in quantitative sovereign
debt models. Yue (2010) and Benjamin and Wright (2013) develop models for debt renegotiations
for resolving defaults. Yue (2010) models renegotiation via Nash bargaining, while Benjamin and
Wright (2013) model renegotiation with a dynamic alternating offers framework. Recent work
in Mihalache (2017) and Dvorkin et al. (2018) extend the renegotiation framework to long-term
bonds and endogenous maturity choice. Here, as in our work, the length of the default episode,
the debt haircut, and the maturity extensions after default are endogenous. Default episodes in
these models end with haircuts and delays that depend on bargaining forces, and in the work
of Mihalache (2017) and Dvorkin et al. (2018), they also end with an extension in the maturity
of debt. Importantly in these papers, just as in the earlier papers and in contrast to our work
and actual data, default episodes are an impasse state without debt repayments, borrowing, or
accumulation of the defaulted debt and lead to a new start with reduced debt.

In some recent work, Gordon and Guerron-Quintana (2018) and Erce and Mallucci (2018) also

    2
    These features are also true of extensions of the model to long-term debt, including Chatterjee and Eyigungor
(2012) or Hatchondo, Martinez, and Sosa-Padilla (2016).

                                                       5
study heterogeneity in defaults. Gordon and Guerron-Quintana (2018) consider a model in which
when the sovereign defaults, it does so only on long-term debt coupons due in the present, and
not on the future coupons. Erce and Mallucci (2018) consider selective defaults on one-period
bonds based on whether the debt is issued domestically or abroad. We note that, in contrast with
our model and the data, in these two papers the defaulted debt dissipates and default episodes
are associated with reductions in the value of debt.

Our work is also related to the literature on private defaultable debt and personal bankruptcy.
As in the literature of sovereign debt, most work, as in Chatterjee et al. (2007) and Livshits,
MacGee, and Tertilt (2007), has focused on full defaults and private bankruptcy. In this context
the assumption that default is a discrete action upon which debts are discharged coincide with
much of bankruptcy law, where debt is formally discharged. Recently, however, analyzing partial
defaults is attracting more attention because defaults outside formal bankruptcy procedures are
substantial, as documented by Dawsey and Ausubel (2004). In Mateos-Planas and Seccia (2014),
households default partially on their debts giving rise to incomplete consumption insurance in an
environment with a complete set of securities. Herkenhoff and Ohanian (2015) share with us the
feature that borrowing continues after default, as they model foreclosures with a long process
where lenders effectively finance the borrower after payments are stopped but before the house is
lost.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 documents the evidence. Section 3
describes the model, defines the equilibrium, and discusses its main properties. Section 4 maps
the model to data, discusses the quantitative implications of the model against the evidence,
and analyzes impulse-response functions and default episodes in the model. Section 5 conducts
counterfactual analysis of various policies discussed. Section 6 compares the implication of our
model to the standard sovereign default model. Section 7 concludes. We also include appendices
with data description, computational details, construction of measures for haircuts and extensions,
and details of how we implement the reference standard model of total default.




2    The Empirical Properties of Sovereign Defaults

In this section we use panel data for emerging markets and document the properties of sovereign
defaults. We first document that governments default with varying intensity and duration and
that many defaults are small and short. We also document that default is systematically correlated


                                                6
with outcomes of the debt crisis: large defaults are associated with higher interest rate spreads,
larger debt levels, deeper recessions, and longer default episodes. Finally, we document that
default episodes do not lead to a decrease in debt.



2.1    Data

We use a panel dataset for 38 emerging markets from 1970 to 2010. The sample of countries
consists of those from the J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index (EMBI+). We use public
debt statistics from the World Development Indicators (WDI) and public bond spreads from the
Global Financial Database. From the WDI, we construct measures for debt defined as the ratio
of total government debt public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) to output, and output defined as
the detrended log of real output, detrended with a linear country-specific trend. From the Global
Financial Database, we get annual series for the EMBI+ government bond spreads, which we use
as our measure of spreads.

We also use information on debt in arrears to construct the panel series for default intensity,
which we label as partial default. For each year and country, we define arrears as the sum of PPG
interest and principal in arrears. We define debt due as the sum of PPG debt service and arrears.
We define partial default as the ratio of the arrears to the debt due for each year and country.
This variable is our measure of default intensity:


                                                       Arrears
                           Partial Default =                          .                        (1)
                                               Arrears + Debt Service

Our definition of partial default essentially measures the fraction of payments missed. With the
time series measure of partial default for many countries, we also study the duration of default
episodes. We measure the duration of default episodes, which we label as default episode length, as
the number of consecutive years that a country has positive values for partial default. Appendix A
contains the list of countries and all the variables in more detail.




                                                 7
2.2                   Empirical Findings

We document the distributions of partial default and default episode length and their comovement
with interest rate spreads, debt-to-output ratios, and output.

We start by describing time series of partial default for two emerging market countries with a
history of sovereign default: Argentina and Russia. In Figure 1 we plot the time series of partial
default from 1970 to 2010 for these countries. The figure shows that default varies in intensity
and is always partial, ranging from small levels of less than 10%, as was the case in the late 2000s
for Russia, to high levels of more than 90%, as in the case of Argentina in the early 2000s. In
terms of default episode length, Argentina experienced two episodes with lengths equal to 10 and
9 years, and Russia experienced one episode of a length equal to 20 years.

                                  Defaults in Argentina                                                  Defaults in Russia
          1




                                                                                 1
          .8




                                                                                 .8
  Partial Default




                                                                         Partial Default
             .6




                                                                                    .6
   .4




                                                                          .4
          .2




                                                                                 .2
          0




                                                                                 0




                    1970   1980         1990         2000     2010                         1970   1980        1990        2000   2010
                                          year                                                                  year




                                                 Figure 1: Time Series for Partial Default

Although our partial default measure is distinct from the popular Standard and Poor's (S&P)
binary definition of default, it correlates with it.3 The shaded areas in Figure 1 are the years S&P
classifies Argentina and Russia as being under default. The figure shows that having positive
partial default is correlated with having the S&P default flag.

We now study the properties of partial default for the 38 emerging markets. Sovereigns partially
default often, and defaults vary in intensity and duration. The frequency of positive partial default
in the panel dataset is 35%. The varying intensity of partial default across years and countries
is illustrated in Figure 2a. Here we plot the histogram of partial default (conditional on positive
partial default) for panel data, the year×country series of the 38 emerging markets. The histogram
        3
     S&P records a sovereign as being in default if it has failed to meet any payments on the due date and removes
the default flag after it settles a payment with creditors.

                                                                     8
shows that countries partially default at varying degrees covering the full range. Sovereigns often
default on a small amount of debt due; about 37% of the time, partial default is less than 20%.

Default episodes also vary in duration. In Figure 2b we plot the histogram of default episode
length for the 58 default episodes in the dataset. Most of the default episodes are short-lived;
almost 40% of the episodes last less than 2 years. The histogram has a long right tail, as few
episodes last more than 30 years. The distribution of the default episode length in our dataset is
similar to the one documented in Benjamin and Wright (2013).
      .2




                                                                  .4
      .15




                                                                  .3
  Fraction




                                                              Fraction
     .1




                                                                .2
      .05




                                                                  .1
      0




                                                                  0




             0   .2         .4              .6   .8   1                  0       10        20       30     40
                            Partial Default>0                                             Years



                      (a) Partial Default                                    (b) Default Episode Length

                            Figure 2: Partial Default and Default Episode Length

In Table 1 we summarize the distributions of partial default and default episode length. Emerging
markets often have positive partial default, the average intensity of the default is modest, yet the
variation is large. The mean partial default conditional on positive partial default is also 35% with
a standard deviation of 16%. The mean length of the default episode is equal to 9 years, but a
large fraction of the defaults are short. As the table shows, the fraction of default episodes that
last less than 2 years is 38%.

The table also reports the dynamics of debt to output during default episodes. Debt to output
feature on average a hump-shaped pattern during default episodes, and default episodes do not
lead to reductions in debt. In the period before the episode starts, the ratio of debt to output is
35%. The default episode starts with a higher debt-to-output ratio of 40%. During the default
episode, the debt continues to rise and is equal to 47% in the middle of the episode.4 Debt
decreases toward the end of the episode and equals 36% in the period after the episode ends. Our
     4
     We define the middle of the episode as the total length of the episode divided by 2 rounded to the nearest
integer.

                                                          9
findings are consistent with those in Benjamin and Wright (2013) who, using a different dataset,
find that debt is not smaller following the end of the default episode than it was prior to the
episode.

                 Table 1: Partial Default and Default Episodes in Percentages

                                Partial Default Frequency | > 0
                       Mean                                             35
                       Standard deviation                               16
                                       Default Episodes
                       Episode length (years)                            9
                       Fraction of short episodes ( 2 years)            38
                                     Debt During Episode
                       Before episode                                   35
                       Beginning of episode                             40
                       Middle of episode                                47
                       After episode                                    36


Next we document the comovement of partial default with spreads, debt to output, output, and
episode length. Table 2 shows that partial default is positively correlated with spreads and debt
to output, with correlations equal to 25% and 34%, and negatively correlated with output by
-12%. The correlation between partial default and default episode length is computed across the
58 default episodes where partial default is the mean value for the episode. Partial default is
positively correlated with episode length, with a correlation value of 55%; longer episodes are
more intense.

To illustrate the magnitude of the comovement of partial default with interest rate spreads, debt
to output, and output, we divide the panel dataset into four bins based on the levels of partial
default and report for each bin the mean of the variables of interest. We report the means
of partial default, spreads, debt-to-output ratios and output across the partial default bins in
Table 3. The no default bin consists of the observations with zero partial default. We partition
the observations with positive partial default into three groups. The small partial default bin

                           Table 2: Correlations with Partial Default

                                 Spreads                    .25
                                 Debt to output             .34
                                 Output                    -.12
                                 Episode length             .55


                                               10
contains the observations below the 25th percentile; the medium partial default bin contains the
observations between the 25th and 75th percentiles; and the large partial default bin contains the
observations above the 75th percentile.

The means of partial default across the groups display a large variation. Small defaults on average
have only 3% of their payments in default, medium defaults have 27% of their payments in default,
and large defaults have an average of 82% of their payments in default.

                        Table 3: Partial Default, Spreads, Debt, and Output

                       No default                            Partial default > 0
   Means (%)                         Small (0 - 25%)       Medium (25 - 75%)         Large (25 - 75%)

   Partial default         0                  3                      27                       82
   Spreads                 4                  7                       7                       15
   Debt to output          26                37                      49                       63
   Output                   1                 0                      -3                       -6


Table 3 shows that spreads, debt to output, and output have sizable differences as partial default
varies. Spreads in periods of no default are on average 4%. During small and medium defaults,
spreads rise modestly to an average of 7%. During large defaults, however, spreads more than
double and are on average 15%. Debt to output in periods of no default is on average 26%
and is higher in periods when sovereigns partially default. Debt to output rises monotonically to
37%, 49%, and 63% in periods of small, medium, and large defaults. The higher debt-to-output
ratios during partial default run counter to the benchmark narrative that governments default
to reduce their debt burden. The increase in debt during default occurs because defaulted debt
is accumulated as debt in arrears and because governments continue to borrow new loans while
partial default is positive. Finally, output in periods of no default is on average 1% above trend.
Output deteriorates as default rises and reaches -6% below trend during large defaults.5




   5
     These comovements are related to results in Cruces and Trebesch (2013) and Tomz and Wright (2013).
Cruces and Trebesch (2013) find that spreads are higher following default episodes with large haircuts during
renegotiations. Tomz and Wright (2013) document that output tends to be lower during default episodes.

                                                     11
3     The Model

Our environment consists of a small open economy with a stochastic endowment stream, that
borrows long-term bonds, and that can choose to partially default on the debt due. The debt
defaulted on accumulates as arrears and partial default imposes future resource costs to the econ-
omy that are increasing in the intensity of the default. Borrowing rates reflect default risk and
compensate creditors for expected losses. We discuss the details of the model environment (Sec-
tion 3.1) and its recursive formulation (Section 3.2). We then characterize the model equilibrium
(Section 3.3) and develop empirical measures for haircuts and maturity extensions during default
episodes in the model economy (Section 3.4).



3.1    Model Environment

The sovereign receives each period a stochastic endowment zt that follows a Markov process with
transition probabilities  (zt +1 , zt ). The sovereign discounts the future at rate  and maximizes
expected utility over consumption sequences, ct , with preferences given by

                                            
                                       E            t u (ct ) .                                (2)
                                            t =0


The actual income of the sovereign, yt , is the endowment zt net of any costs associated with
default.

The sovereign trades long-term bonds with international lenders. Long-term bonds are perpetuity
contracts with coupon payments that decay at rate  , as in Hatchondo and Martinez (2009).
The contract specifies a price qt and a face value bt such that the sovereign receives qt bt units
of goods in period t and promises to pay, conditional on not defaulting,  n-1 bt units of goods
in every future period t + n. This specification allows for long maturity debt within a tractable
structure, as a single state variable will incorporate all past borrowing.

Each period, the borrower has total payments due, at , which consist of all the obligations from
past borrowing and defaulted debt. It chooses which fraction of these obligations to partially
default on, dt , and new borrowing, bt . The sovereign can also buy back debt at its market
price by choosing negative borrowing bt < 0. The bond price is a function q (at +1 , dt , zt ) that
depends on total debt due the following period at +1 , partial default today dt , and the endowment

                                                   12
zt because these variables determine future defaults. Consumption is constrained by income less
total debt service due net of default, at (1 - dt ), plus new borrowing

                                 ct = yt - at (1 - dt ) + q (at +1 , dt , zt ) bt .                            (3)

Default carries a direct resource cost that is increasing in the intensity of the default and depends
on the shock, such that income in the period after default is yt +1 = zt +1 (dt , zt +1 )  zt +1 .

A factor  of the debt defaulted on, dt at , becomes future debt obligations. Such an amount is
annuitized into perpetuities with decay rate  so that (1 -  ) of dt at is added to next period's
obligations at +1 . The total debt obligations due next period at +1 include the accumulation of the
defaulted debt (1 -  )dt at , the coupon payments due from the long-term legacy debt  at , and
the new borrowing bt . Formally,

                                    at +1 =  at + (1 -  )  dt at + bt .                                        (4)


Since  represents the fraction of the defaulted value today that is carried over as an obligation
in the next period, we refer to  as the debt recovery factor. This recovery factor controls the
haircut from default under the assumption that no further defaults occur in the future.6 As we
explore in detail below, actual haircuts constructed from empirical measures for default episodes
do not only depend on  because episodes in general last for several periods and vary in their
intensity, all of which affect haircuts.

The sovereign borrows from many identical competitive risk neutral international lenders. A lender
purchases sovereign bonds by issuing securities at the risk-free world gross interest rate R . In each
subsequent period, the claims of the lender against the sovereign consist of the promised coupons
from the initial bond and, potentially, any accumulated defaulted debt that results from a partial
default on the bond.

The sovereign chooses borrowing and partial default to maximize utility taking as given the bond
price function. Free entry among international lenders determines bond prices by driving expected
profits from lending to zero, taking as given the sovereign's future partial default and borrowing
decisions. Since bonds issued in different periods are perfectly substitutable and part of the total
                                                       - )
    6
      This nominal haircut can be shown to be 1 - (1  1+r - . Note that when  = (1 + r -  )/(1 -  ) > 1, the
nominal haircut is zero as defaulted coupons accumulate at the risk free rate, and that when  = 1 defaulted debt
is accumulated at no discount on its face value but the nominal haircut is still positive because defaulted coupons
do not carry an interest.

                                                        13
face value of the debt at +1 , the price of new bonds is also the price of existing bonds in the
secondary market.



3.2    Recursive Formulation

We focus on recursive Markov equilibria and represent the infinite horizon decision problem of the
sovereign borrower as a recursive dynamic programming problem, and the lenders' value also as a
recursive functional equation. The state vector of the model consists of three variables {a, y , z }:
a is total debt due, y is the income of the economy, and z is the endowment shock, which we
need to keep track of due to the Markovian structure of shocks. In this context, the bond price is
a function, q (a , d , z ), of what is known at the time of borrowing about the state tomorrow that
will determine partial default and future borrowing. This state consists of the debt due tomorrow
a (we are now switching to standard recursive notation where primes denote future values), the
partial default decision today d because of its effect on output tomorrow, and today's endowment
shock z because it helps predict tomorrow's shock.



Borrower The recursive problem of the borrower with state {a, y , z } is to choose new borrowing
b , partial default d , and consumption c to maximize its value

                      V (a, y , z ) = max {u (c ) +           (z , z )V (a , y , z )},           (5)
                                    b ,d ,c
                                                         z


subject to the budget constraint that indicates that consumption is income minus net debt repay-
ment
                               c = y - (1 - d ) a + q (a , d , z ) b ,                       (6)

the law of motion for the evolution of debt due that incorporates defaulted debt and new borrowing

                                   a =  a + (1 -  ) d a + b ,                                    (7)

the evolution of income which depends on partial default and on the shock

                                              y = z (d , z ),                                    (8)




                                                    14
and the constraint that default cannot exceed the debt due and is weakly positive

                                                    0  d  1.                                                 (9)


This problem determines the optimal borrowing and partial default policy functions b (a, y , z ) and
d (a, y , z ), and the evolution of the debt due a (a, y , z ), as well as the consumption function
c (a, y , z ).



Lenders There are many identical competitive risk neutral lenders that discount time at rate
1/R . The value of one unit of debt H (a, y , z ) equals the expected discounted stream of payments,
and contains the amount paid today plus the expected discounted continuation value such that

                                          1
  H (a, y , z ) = [1 - d (a, y , z )] +     [ + (1 -  )  d (a, y , z )]
                                          R
                                                     (z , z ) H (a (a, y , z ), z [d (a, y , z ), z ], z ) . (10)
                                                    z


This expression reflects explicitely that partial default d (a, y , z ) reduces the value for lenders
today and increases it tomorrow, as the defaulted debt accumulates and comes due in the future.
Partial default also reduces expected tomorrow's output through the  function. An additional
channel, implicit in the equation, arises through the evolution of debt due a (a, y , z ) which affects
the future value H (a , y , z ): everything else equal, as seen in (7), both higher partial default and
additional borrowing increase total debt due tomorrow which tends to reduce the value of debt.



Equilibrium We now define the equilibrium for this economy. The equilibrium entails the
sovereign solving its problem understanding how its behavior, and the behavior of its future selves,
affect the prices it faces, and that competition among lenders leads to zero profits in expected
value on loans. Formally:

Definition 1 A recursive Markov equilibrium consists of (i) the borrower's decision rules for
borrowing b (a, y , z ), partial default d (a, y , z ), and consumption c (a, y , z ) which induce rules of
debt due a (a, y , z ), (ii) the value of existing debt H (a, y , z ), and (iii) the bond price function
q (a , d , z ) such that


   1. Taking as given the bond price function q (a , d , z ), the borrower's decision rules satisfy the

                                                         15
         borrower's optimization problem in eq. (5) subject to (6) to (9).

   2. Taking as given borrowers' behavior, the value of debt H (a , d , z ) satisfies its recursive
      formulation described in eq. (10).

   3. Bond prices q (a , d , z ) yield expected zero profits to lenders such that

                                                       1
                                    q (a , d , z ) =            (z , z ) H (a , z (d , z ), z ) .                 (11)
                                                       R   z




3.3          Characterization of Equilibrium

In this section we discuss the factors weighing in the sovereign's decisions to partially default and
borrow. We also examine the price of bonds, an important factor in those decisions, by spelling
out the links between future decisions to borrow and partially default and the shape of the pricing
function.



Borrowing and Partial Default To understand the trade-offs involved in the choice of bor-
rowing b and partial default d , we analyze the optimality conditions for the sovereign. In these
derivations, we follow an heuristic approach and assume that the price function q (z , a , d ), the
value function v (z , a, y ), and the default cost function (d , z ) are differentiable.7 For notational
convenience, we also define the bond price as a direct function of the decisions b and d and the
state a using the law of motion of debt such that Q (z , b , d , a)  q (z ,  a + b + (1 -  ) d a, d ),
where the derivates of the price function correspond to Qb = qa and Qd = qa (1 -  )a + qd .

Using compact notation, the first-order conditions for an interior solution for the problem in eq. (5)
with respect to b and d are:

        b:     uc (c ) [ q + Qb b ] =  E {uc (c ) (d , q ) },                                                     (12)
                           borrowing gain                        debt burden



        d:     uc (c ) [     a + Qd b       ] =  E {uc (c ) [ (1 -  )  a (d , q ) - z d ]},                       (13)
                       partial default gain                              debt burden          default cost

    7
     We know from the work of Clausen and Strub (2016) that in the short term debt sovereign default problem
there are states where the functions involved are not differentiable. Still, it is convenient to describe the trade-offs
using derivatives which are valid in the region where these functions are differentiable.

                                                               16
where the term (d , q ) captures the reduction in resources tomorrow from a one unit increase
in a that results from increasing b and d , which reads

                      (d , q )           1-d              + [ + (1 -  )  d ] q .
                                   tomorrow's repayment        further repayments


These two optimality equations illustrate how the borrower can transfer future resources to the
present by borrowing b or by defaulting d . They equate the marginal gain in utility from borrowing
or from partially defaulting to the marginal reduction in utility to repaying the future debt burden
and default costs implied by each type of action. Effectively b and d are different ways to alter
the debt position, each one with its own costs and benefits. Borrowing may mean higher interest
rates while partial default leads to a future output loss.

The left hand side (LHS) terms in square brackets in eq. (12) and eq. (13) capture the gains
from borrowing and defaulting, which depend on the bond price function. The right hand side
(RHS) terms of both expressions illustrate the costs of repaying the current and future coupons
as well as the accumulated defaulted debt, which are evaluated at the price q . The costs also
incorporate the resource costs from default.

Consider first the optimality condition for b in eq. (12) which is similar to that arising in many
dynamic sovereign default models. The LHS contains the marginal benefit from borrowing one
unit of b which increases consumption by q but is discounted by the decrease in the price with more
borrowing, qb < 0. In our model, as it is typical in models of sovereign default, the resources
raised by borrowing are capped by a Laffer curve; at the top of the Laffer curve the marginal
benefit of borrowing is zero. Such Laffer curve arises because default risk limits the possibility of
inter-temporally transferring resources with loans.

The RHS of eq. (12) is the discounted marginal cost from borrowing which contains the terms
in (d , q ) corresponding to repaying back the next period's coupon as well as refinancing the
future coupons and the defaulted debt in arrears. The debt burden  includes the fraction of
the coupon payment tomorrow that is paid back (1 - d ), and the continuation amount which
includes the surviving fraction of the long term debt  and the fraction not paid but accumulated
(1 -  )d evaluated at tomorrow's debt price q . The accumulation of the defaulted debt allows
the borrower to create long-term debt regardless of the duration of the debt, including when  = 0
and the stock of debt is short-term.

Consider now the optimality conditions for partial default d in eq. (13). This condition contains the

                                                   17
trade-off for partially defaulting on the debt, accumulating the defaulted debt, and experiencing
the default costs. The LHS of this equation shows the marginal gain from defaulting fraction d
as consumption is increased by a but this benefit is discounted by the fact that the price q of new
debt b falls as d decreases. This fall in the bond price, described by Qd = (1 -  )aqa + qd , is
due to both a direct effect qd < 0 and, via qa < 0, due to the increase in a induced by d . Raising
resources through partial default does not have the acquiescence of lenders and these resources
are not capped by a Laffer curve but by the total level of debt due a. The costs of partially
defaulting are on the RHS. One component arises because the debt defaulted on is annuitized
and accumulates at the recovery rate . The resulting debt burden from partially defaulting, after
annuitization, (1 -  )a, is also given by (d , q ). Partial default also carries an additional cost
in terms of reduced resources. Such default cost is encoded in d < 0. Note that partial default
tends to be more advantageous for larger levels of debt a as the direct benefit of defaulting are
increasing in a while the direct cost of defaulting is -d which is independent of a.

By combining eqs. (12) and (13), we derive the following condition that equates the expected
returns of borrowing and partial default weighted by marginal utility as follows

                   (d , q )                (1 -  )                   z
    Rb  E     uc              =E     uc               (d , q ) +          (-d )         Rd,       (14)
                   q + Qb b               1 + Qd b /a            (1 -  )a

where R d and R b are the expected returns to be paid out from borrowing and partially defaulting
respectively weighted by marginal utility.

The implication from eq. (13) to eq. (14) is that those weighted expected returns (discounted)
from borrowing and partial default are equated to current marginal utility,  -1 uc (c ) = R b = R d ,
when these two choices are positive and interior. These conditions also imply that when partial
default is zero, d = 0, then it must be that R b  R d so that the rate of return to be paid from
borrowing is lower than that from partially defaulting.

The shape of the price function and the default costs are the determinants of the optimal portfolio
of b and d . A positive b is an attractive choice when the price q is high and not too steep, such
that |qa | is small, which means low and insensitive future default probabilities. Here b is attractive
because the marginal increase in consumption with b is high, and any future default costs are
minimized. A positive d becomes attractive only when q is low and steep. Here paying the default
costs, encoded in d < 0, may be worth doing since it allows to increase consumption today at a
rate of 1. The extra costs from d in terms of the price of new loans can be eliminated by setting
new loans b close to zero. The attractiveness of d also depends on the accumulation factor .


                                                  18
Partial default is most attractive when arrears accumulate at a low  rate.

Condition (14) also highlights that the shape of the penalty function  and, in particular, its
derivative (-d ) are important for when default will be partial, total, or zero. As we will see in
the quantitative section, when (-d ) is increasing with d , default is most likely partial because
it becomes increasingly costly, so it is optimal to stop defaulting before d = 1.



Bond Price Function We have seen how the sovereign's optimality conditions contain the
bond price function q and the response of equilibrium prices to further indebtedness or additional
default through the derivatives qa and qd . By substitution of function H from (10) into the
equilibrium condition (11), we can write the pricing function q recursively as

                 1
  q (a , d , z ) = E {[1 - d (a , z (d , z ), z )] + [ + (1 -  )d (a , z (d , z ), z )]
                R
  q ( a + b (a , z (d , z ), z ) + (1 -  )d (a , z (d , z ), z )a , d (a , z (d , z ), z ), z )} , (15)

or, more compactly,

                          1                                     1
                     q=     E {(1 - d ) + [ + (1 -  ) d ] q } =   E {(d , q )}.                                (16)
                          R                                     R


The price responses, as expressed in the derivatives qa and qd , are themselves functions of equilib-
rium behavior, albeit in future periods. Sovereign default environments display time inconsistency
in that current decision makers, if they could commit, would make choices for future actions
that are different from the actual equilibrium future actions. Time inconsistency transforms the
equilibrium decision rule from the solution of a mere maximization problem into the result of a
game of the sovereign against its future selves, while the recursive representation of equilibrium
restricts it to be Markov Perfect.8 We can use results in Mateos-Planas and R´    ios-Rull (2015) to
derive the expressions for the derivatives of the price function q .




    8
     See Krusell and Smith (2003) for a discussion of these issues. Mateos-Planas and R´ ios-Rull (2015) characterize
the equilibrium of sovereign default economies with the aid of Generalized Euler Equations (GEE), effectively
substituting the derivatives of prices with future decision rules and their derivatives, which the current sovereign
takes as given.

                                                         19
The derivative of q with respect to future debt due a is

        1
qa =      E   - da [1 - (1 -  ) q ]                direct loss from not paying
        R
              + [ + (1 -  ) d ]                   continuation amount gets diluted because more future debt


                   E {uc (d , q )} - q uc
                                          [ + (1 -  ) d + ba ]                   carries over and induces further borrowing
                           b uc
                          E {uc [(d , q ) (1 -  )a - z d ]} - a uc
              + da                                                                   and more future partial default
                                             b uc

and the derivative with respect to partial default d reads

        1
qd =      E   - dy d z [1 - (1 -  ) q ]                   lower output tomorrow yields more default
        R
              + [ + (1 -  ) d ]                              continuation amount gets diluted because
                   E {uc (d , q )} - q uc
                                          by d z +                   less output tomorrow induces further borrowing
                           b uc
                  E {uc [(d , q ) (1 -  )a - z d ]} - a uc
                                                           dy d z                     and more future partial default     .
                                     b uc

The derivatives of the bond price function with respect to today's choices for borrowing and partial
default, a and d , depend on future policy rules for borrowing, partial default, and consumption.
We see that the derivative of the price with respect to tomorrow's debt due a has both a direct
negative effect, that arises from a higher likelihood of a loss from not paying, and a continuation
effect, the so called dilution effect.9 The continuation amount, ( + (1 -  ) d ), is diluted
because higher future debt induces further borrowing, ( + (1 -  ) d + ba ), which is weighted
by the continuation value of the debt represented in the marginal utilities, and leads to more
future partial default, da , which generates further future output costs. The derivative of the price
with respect to partial default d also has a direct effect from the output cost that induces higher
partial default tomorrow, and the dilution effect on the continuation amount ( + (1 -  ) d ).
This dilution occurs because less output tomorrow induces more borrowing tomorrow, (by d z ),
and higher partial default, (dy d z ), both of which reduce the continuation value of the debt.
The marginal rates of substitution affect the size of the dilution effects because they reflect the

    9
     See Hatchondo, Martinez, and Sosa-Padilla (2016) for a quantitative study of dilution in the standard complete
default model.

                                                        20
responses of the future continuation bond prices via the optimality conditions of the sovereign's
future selves.



3.4     Default Episodes: Length, Haircut, Maturity Extensions

Below we compare our model to data on the duration of default episodes as well as haircuts
and maturity extensions during these episodes. In this section, we develop expressions for these
variables that are consistent with empirical measures.

In our model the duration, debt haircuts, and maturity extensions are endogenous and depend
on when the sovereign chooses to start defaulting on the debt, when to exit by repaying the
accumulated debt in arrears, and the path of partial default and borrowing during the episode.
We define a default episode as a sequence of periods of time with consecutive positive partial
default, which is the same definition we use on the data. The default episode length is the number
of periods with positive partial default.

We follow the methodology in Benjamin and Wright (2013) and Cruces and Trebesch (2013)
to compute haircuts and maturity extensions of default episodes. This methodology compares
present values of streams of old defaulted debt instruments, hereafter DD , to new restructured
debt instrument. We discount the streams at the risk free rate and define duration using the
standard Macaulay concept.10 To develop the expressions for haircuts and maturity extensions,
consider a default episode that starts in period 1 and ends in period N , such that dN +1 = 0. The
face values of the defaulted debt during the episode are given by {d0 a0 , d1 a1 , d2 a2 , ...dN aN }. The
present value of the of old defaulted debt instruments value (DD ) and its duration, dur (DD ), are

                                  N                                                      N
                                         dt a t                              1                        dt a t
             value(DD ) =                          ,         dur(DD ) =                        t                .
                              t =1
                                      (1 + r )t -1                      value(DD )      t =1
                                                                                                   (1 + r )t -1

The new restructured debt instruments, hereafter ND , correspond to the arrears that get paid
during the default episode and the terminal value of these arrears. The face values of the debt due
   10
      Macaulay debt duration is the weighted average of the time of each coupon payment, with weights equal to
the fraction of the bond's value on each payment. The duration of a default-free perpetuity bonds with decay  is

                                        1                n-1           1    1+r          1+r
                        duration =                n                =                  =       .
                                        q   n=1
                                                      (1 + r )n        q (1 + r -  )2   1+r -

                                    1
where the discount price is q =   1+r - .


                                                                  21
{a2 , a3 , ...aN +1 } contain both the coupons from legacy debt that have not been defaulted on as
well as the arrears that accumulate as new debt instruments dt at (1 -  ). This latter component
of arrears can be expressed recursively as

                                      ND                          ND
                                     at  = (1 -  )dt -1 at -1 +  at -1


for t = 2, ..., N + 1. The new debt instruments in each period correspond to the arrears paid
                                                             ND
during the default episode net of partial default, (1 - dt )at  plus the value of the terminal coupon
 ND
aN +1 . The present value of the new debt instruments is given by

                                          N                ND      ND
                                                (1 - dt )at       aN +1     1+r
                          value(ND ) =                        +
                                         t =2
                                                 (1 + r )t -1   (1 + r )N 1 + r - 

while their duration is
                                 N                  ND       ND
                     1                   (1 - dt )at        aN +1            1+r        1
     dur(ND ) =                        t          t - 1
                                                        +             N            +       2
                                                                                                  .
                value(ND )      t =2
                                          (1 + r )        (1 + r )N        1 + r -  (1 - 1+ r
                                                                                              )

We define the haircut as one minus the ratio of the value of the new debt instruments ND to the
defaulted debt instruments DD , and the maturity extension as the difference in duration between
these two instruments

                                                            value(ND )
                                           haircut = 1 -               ,                              (17)
                                                            value(DD )
                             maturity extension = dur(ND ) - dur(DD ).                                (18)

The debt haircut and maturity extensions depend in our model on the path and intensity of partial
default during the episode, on the length of the episode, and on the recovery factor . Larger
partial defaults and longer episodes are associated with larger debt haircuts.




4     Quantitative Results

We now study the quantitative properties of our model and compare them to the data on sovereign
defaults in emerging markets from Section 2. We map the model to the data and illustrate its
mechanics by analyzing the resulting decision rules and impulse response functions. We then
confront the implications of our model for the distribution of partial default and the properties of


                                                      22
default episodes against the data.



4.1     Specification and Parameterization

                                                            1-
Functional Forms. The utility function is u (c ) = c    1-
                                                           . We pose a 10 state Tauchen (1986)-
approximation of an autoregressive process for log z with autocorrelation  and Normal innovations
with standard deviation  .

Recall that output depends on the shock and on default costs in such a way that output next
period is y = z (z , d ). Following the quantitative sovereign default literature (Arellano (2008)
and Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012)), the output costs of default are assumed to be increasing
and convex in the shock. Specifically, we assume that default costs are only realized for z above a
threshold z  and are then linearly increasing in z with slope 1 . We also assume that these costs
are increasing and convex in partial default, d , with slope parameter 0 and curvature parameter
 . The functional form we consider is

                               (z , d ) = (1 - 0 d  )(1 - ^1 (z - z  )),                               (19)

where ^1 = 1 if d > 0 and z > z  , and zero otherwise.11

We use existing studies to assign some parameters and target moments of the model economy to
specify the remaining ones. We choose parameters so the variables in the model are measured at
a quarterly frequency.



Parameters Specified Ex-ante. We assigned directly standard values for risk aversion  = 2
and the risk-free interest rate r = 1%. The decay parameter  is set so that the duration of the
debt equals 5 years, which is similar to the average duration of debt in emerging markets. The
bottom panel of Table 4 displays these choices.



Parameters from Matching Moments. The remaining eight parameters,

                                     = {0 , 1 ,  , z  ,  , , ,  },
   11
    This specification extends that in Arellano (2008) and Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012) with an intensive
margin of default. See our discussion around the standard reference model in Appendix D.

                                                    23
are estimated by minimizing the sum of the proportional square residuals of ten moments from
emerging markets data.12 The first four moments that we target summarize the empirical distri-
bution of partial default. These targets are the frequency, mean and standard deviation of partial
default, and the mean of small defaults as reported in Tables 1 and 3. Four additional moments
concern the properties of debt and interest rate spreads, and they are the mean debt-to-output
ratio, the standard deviations of debt to output and of sovereign spreads, and the correlation
of spreads with output. These eight moments are the means across the 38 emerging countries
in Section 2 (for example, the target correlation of output and spreads is the mean correlation
across these countries). Finally, we also include as targets the standard deviation and persistence
of output in Argentina as reported in Arellano (2008).

We solve our model with global methods and outline the algorithm to compute the model in
Appendix B. To compare the model moments to the data targets, we simulate the model and
aggregate the quarterly model time series to an annual frequency. We simulate the model for
750,000 periods and discard the initial 10% of observations. This long simulation approximates
the limiting distribution across the states {z , a, y }. We construct the series for the ratio of the
value of debt to yearly output as q                  ¯ = 1/(1 -  + r ) is the risk-free price of coupon
                                    ¯at /4yt , where q
at . Given the series for quarterly price of bonds qt , we construct the annualized spreads from the
bond price as
                                     st = (1/qt +  )4 - (1 + r )4 .                                 (20)

The standard deviation and persistence of output in the simulation are directly compared to
the corresponding quarterly data moments. The remaining eight data moments related to debt,
partial default, and spreads are based on observations at annual frequency. Hence, we annualize
the model series for debt service due, defaulted debt, and output by summing over the observations
from the corresponding four quarters, and for spreads by averaging over those four quarters. The
total value of debt can then be calculated using the risk-free price in the same way as it was done
for the quarterly series, and annualized partial default is the ratio of annual defaulted debt over
annual debt due. Table 4 displays the parameter values.



Discussion of Estimates The threshold parameter z  is such that default costs are positive
when the shock is above 93% of the mean. The value of 0 says that the loss of output due
to the intensity of default can be 4% at most, when default is total. As we will see below these
parameters produce very minor default costs. The debt recovery factor  implies a 7% default
   12
     The weights on the residuals are uniform across moments, except for the frequency and mean level of partial
default which receive double weight.

                                                      24
                                     Table 4: Parameter Values

                                      Estimated Parameters
                    Default costs                 0 = 0.04   1 = 0.206
                                                           
                                                  = 1.621 z = 0.933 × z
                    Discount factor               = 0.987
                    Debt recovery factor          = 0.926
                    Shock process                 = 0.928     = 0.028
                                       Assigned Parameters
                    Risk aversion                      =2
                    Risk-free rate (quarterly)      r = 0.01
                    Decay parameter (quarterly)     = 0.96


discount in the face value of coupon payments defaulted.

The eight parameters have consequences for all of the ten targeted moments. However, our
experience in the estimation process makes us associate some of the parameters closely to certain
moments. For instance, the parameters controlling the z shock are primarily related to the
persistence and volatility of output. The persistence and volatility for productivity have to be
slightly smaller than those for the targeted output process. In a similar vain, the discount rate
 is closely connected to the debt-to-output ratio. The two parameters describing the fixed
component of the penalty for default, 1 and z  , have an impact on the frequency of defaults
and the size of defaults at the low quantile. A larger z  , which waives the fixed cost at low shock
levels, raises the frequency of default and reduces the size of partial defaults. A larger 1 works in
the opposite direction; a bigger cost discourages very small partial defaults. The parameters  and
0 , describing the penalty for default that depends on its intensity, mainly affect the size of partial
default and its volatility, as well as the correlation of spreads with output. A larger  decreases the
size and volatility of partial default and increases the correlation of spreads with output. A larger
0 , in contrast, increases the size and volatility of partial default yet also increases the correlation
of spreads with output. Finally, the parameter that controls the accumulation of defaulted debt 
increases the volatilities of spreads and debt and decreases the correlation of spreads with output.



4.2    Moments in Model and Data

Table 5 shows moments of the model and the data. In the model and the data, partial default
is positive about one-third of the time. On average, default amounts to one-third of the debt


                                                  25
repayment due. Partial default, conditional on being positive, is volatile and features many small
defaults in both the model and the data. In the model, the standard deviation of partial default
is 24%, and the average partial default of small defaults is 7%. These moments are moderately
higher than the data counterparts of 16% and 3%.

Debt is high and volatile in both the model and the data. In the model, the mean of debt to output
is 36% with a standard deviation of 18%. These moments are close to the data counterparts of
37% and 21%. In terms of the interest rate spreads, the model produces a volatility similar to the
data and a spread that is negatively correlated with output, with a correlation comparable to the
empirical counterpart. The model also matches well the resulting series for output in terms of its
persistence and standard deviation.

Overall, we think that the fit of the model is very good. Note that while the average percentage
residual is 23% of the value of the target this is mainly the result of the poor match of the
average size of small defaults that has a residual more than 100%. We found that small changes
in the parameter values yield large changes to this moment, which makes it hard to target it with
precision. Without this moment, average residuals are just 11%.

                             Table 5: Moments in Model and Data

                                                                       Data    Model
                                         Target Moments
            Partial default frequency (in %)                             35       34
            Partial default mean (in %)                                  35       31
            Partial default st. dev. (in %)                              16       24
            Small (0 - 25%) partial defaults (in %)                       3        7
            Debt-to-output ratio (in %) mean                             37       36
            Debt-to-output ratio (in %) st. dev.                         21       18
            Interest Rate Spread (in %) st. dev.                        3.6      3.9
            Correlation (output, spread)                               -.30     -.32
            Output persistence                                         0.93     0.93
            Output (in %) st. dev.                                     0.08     0.08
                                          Residuals
            Average Residual (as % of target)                                   22.9
            Residuals Excluding Small Defaults (as % of target)                 11.2
                                       Other Moments
            Debt service to output (in %) mean                             7        7
            Corr. (debt, spread)                                         .24      .47
            Spread (in %) mean                                           5.3      1.2


                                               26
Table 5 also reports some additional untargeted moments from the model and compares them
with the data. The model generates a mean level of debt due relative to output of 7%, which is
equal to the average in the data.13 As shown in Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), models with
long-term debt, as our model, are able to reproduce both debt stocks and debt flow payments.
The model generates a positive correlation between debt and spreads, which is also a feature of
the data. Higher debt increases default probabilities in both the model and the data.

In terms of mean spreads, the model predicts a mean spread of 1.2%, which is lower than the
average in the data of 5.3%. The discrepancy arises partly because we are matching default
frequencies and partial default, which determine the expected losses for creditors, and are modeling
creditors as risk neutral. The wedge between spreads and expected default losses is related to the
credit spread puzzle in corporate bonds where default losses cannot explain the observed spreads,
as explored in Chen, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2009). Longstaff et al. (2011) find that a
similar wedge arises for sovereign spreads and estimate, for example, that about 64% of sovereign
spreads can be attributed to a single global factor that contains large risk premia. The spread
more directly comparable to our model's corresponds to the remaining proportion, or 1.9% (5.3%
×0.36), which is much closer to the model's prediction.



4.3     Decision Rules and Impulse Responses

In this subsection we study the model's decision rules and impulse responses for partial default,
interest rate spreads, borrowing, and consumption.



Decision Rules Figure 3a plots the default decision d (z , a, y ) as a function of the level of debt
due a for two levels of the shock z = {z3 , z5 }, a low value and the median. We scale the total
debt due by the risk-free discount price 1/(1 + r -  ) relative to mean output. The level for
current output in the decision rules equals the level of the shock y = z . The figure shows that
partial default increases with the level of debt due and decreases with the level of output. When
debt is small enough, partial default is zero; as debt increases, partial default increases; and when
debt is large enough, default is total.14 Comparing the two curves also shows how partial default

   13
     We measure debt due as the sum of debt service paid and arrears.
   14
     Note that for the low shock, the change in default is continuous since it does not carry a fixed cost. For the
larger shock level, default presents a discontinuity where partial default jumps to a positive value, reflecting the
fixed cost from defaulting in this case.

                                                        27
decreases monotonically with output, given debt due.

Our model generalizes the results from models of full default that feature default being more likely
with high debt and low output (Arellano (2008)) to the case of partial default. In our model, not
only is positive partial default more likely with high debt and low output, but also the intensity of
default increases with high debt and low output.

Consider now the spread schedule s (z , a , d ), constructed from bond prices as in (20 ). In Fig-
ure 3b, we plot the spread schedule as a function of next period's debt due a (also scaled by the
risk-free discount price and relative to mean output) for the same two levels of the shocks z as
above, and with partial default equal to zero d = 0. We also plot an additional curve in the low
output state for positive default, specifically d = 1, in order to gauge the impact of defaulting
on spreads coming solely from the future output loss. With long-term debt and accumulation of
arrears, future debt due a depends not only on borrowing b but also on today's debt due a and
default d , with a =  a + b + (1 -  )da. The spread schedules with d = 0 and d = 1 in the
figure have different underlying legacy debt  a and borrowing b because we condition on the same
debt due tomorrow a across schedules.

The figure shows that spreads increase as future debt due increases. Low levels of future debt due
have zero spreads because predicted partial default is low. The increase in spreads as a function of
future debt due is fairly smooth in our model because, as discussed above, default intensity varies
gradually. The figure also shows that spreads are higher when output is low today, as this indicates
a higher likelihood of low output in the future and hence of higher partial default. Finally, the
spread schedule also depends on the partial default decision today d , the reason being that higher
d induces a larger output loss next period, and hence the possibility of higher partial default in
the future. The direct output loss from partial default in the future, however, only has a modest
impact on spreads which is an indication of the small estimated output costs from default.

The default policy rule suggests a direct impact of debt on default intensity, which tends to impart
a positive correlation between these two variables. From the spread function, since the influence
of default via the penalty is weak, the correlation between default intensity and spread must reflect
the two common factors, output shocks and debt, driving a positive comovement between the
two variables. These policy rules, however, do not account for the feedback effect of default on
the accumulation of debt and hence spreads, which, as we describe below, is important for the
time series comovements.



                                                 28
                                                                            0.25
                    1
                                                                             0.2
                   0.8             d(z3,a)
 Partial Default




                                                                                             spr(z3,a',d=0)




                                                                   Spread
                                                                            0.15
                   0.6

                   0.4                                                       0.1
                                                                                         spr(z3,a',d=1)
                   0.2                             d(z5,a)                  0.05
                                                                                                              spr(z5,a',d=0)
                    0
                     0    0.2     0.4        0.6      0.8                      0   0.2      0.4     0.6    0.8             1
                                    Debt                                                  Debt Next Period
                         (a) Default Decision Rule                                  (b) Spread Schedule

                                             Figure 3: Partial Default and Spreads


We consider next the policy rules for borrowing. As discussed above, in our model the country
can transfer future resources to the present by borrowing or by partially defaulting. The optimal
portfolio mix for borrowing and default changes with debt and income. Figure 4 plots the total
resources raised with borrowing q (z , a , d , )b (z , a, y ) and with partial default d (z , a, y )a (relative
to mean output) as a function of debt due a for the shocks z = z3 and z = z5 with y = z .
When debt is low, the country uses only borrowing to raise external resources. As debt rises,
the portfolio shifts toward partial default, with borrowing declining sharply and partial default
rising toward 100%. The reason behind the portfolio switch is the shape of the spread schedules
encoded in q (z , a , d ). As debt due a increases, the interest rate spread for additional borrowing
b increases because default risk is higher with higher total debt due tomorrow a =  a + b . The
states with high a are associated with severely restricted credit access, which makes it optimal for
the country to use default as a way to raise resources. The policy rules for the optimal portfolio
mix suggest that during default episodes, borrowing and default will move in opposite directions
as long as debt accumulates within those episodes.

Figure 4 also shows that high z shocks are associated with less borrowing when current debt is
less than about 50% of output. For higher levels of debt, however, this pattern is reversed and
borrowing is higher for high levels of the shock. Such procyclical borrowing is typical in sovereign
default models because of the more lenient price schedules in booms.




                                                              29
                     0.20                                                                                0.20


                               borrowing z3           partial default z3                                        borrowing z5           partial default z5

                     0.15                                                                                0.15




                                                                                      Resources Raised
  Resources Raised




                     0.10                                                                                0.10




                     0.05                                                                                0.05



                       0                                                                                   0
                        0           0.2         0.4              0.6       0.8                              0        0.2         0.4              0.6       0.8
                                               Debt                                                                             Debt

                                          Low Shock                                                                        High Shock

                                                Figure 4: Portfolio of Borrowing and Default


4.3.1                       Impulse Responses


We now analyze the equilibrium time series of partial default and spreads, as well as borrowing,
total debt due, and output, in response to shocks. We construct impulse response functions in
our nonlinear model as follows. We simulate 1, 000, 000 paths from the model for 1, 000 periods.
From periods 1 to 500 the aggregate shocks follow their underlying Markov chains. In period
501 we reduce the value of productivity z in each simulation. From period 501 on the aggregate
shocks follow the conditional Markov chains. The impulse responses plot the average, across
the 1, 000, 000 paths, of the variables from period 500 to 600. The time series in this impulse
responses are at a quarterly frequency.

Figure 5 contains impulse responses for a small (solid lines) and a large (dashed lines) shock in
period 0. The small shock is generated by reducing the values of z one grid index, which is a
decline of 4.3% or about half of the standard deviation, and the large shock is generated by a
reduction of two grid indexes, which is a decline of 8.6%. The top left panel of the figure plots the
paths for the shocks z in percentage deviations. The paths for output essentially mirror the paths
for productivity as the impact of default costs is not large.15 The right top panel shows the path
for consumption, which on impact falls less than output but stays depressed longer than output

      15
     Output depends not only on the shock but also on partial default y = z (z , d ), but in these impulse
response functions output is extremely close to the shock. The main deviation is in period 1 with output falling
0.1% more than the shock. These small differences also show how our estimated output costs of default are quite
low.

                                                                                 30
1.00                                                    1.00

                    z shock - small

0.95                                                    0.95
           z shock - large                                              Consumption

0.90                                                    0.90
       0       20            40       60     80                0   20      40      60    80



0.35                                                   0.020

                       Partial Default                 0.018
0.30
                                                       0.016
0.25                                                                       Borrowing
                                                       0.014
0.20
                                                       0.012
0.15
       0       20            40       60     80                0   20      40      60    80


                                                         2.5

0.42                                  Debt
0.40                                                     2.0                    Spread

0.38

0.36                                                     1.5

0.34
       0       20            40       60     80                0   20      40      60    80




                             Figure 5: Impulse Response Functions




                                                  31
does. Default risk restricts the ability of the economy to smooth consumption, which leads to a
large decline on impact. Consumption remains depressed because debt accumulates and remains
persistently high.

The middle panels of Figure 5 plot the paths for the portfolio choices of partial default d and
borrowing b . Partial default increases by about 8% on impact and features a response that is more
persistent than the shock. By period 40, the shock has largely recovered, while partial default
                                                                                 ¯ = 1/(1 + r -  )
remains above trend. Borrowing in the figure is scaled by the default-free price q
to convert it to a value and reported relative to mean output. Borrowing also increases on impact,
but the effect is much less persistent than the effect on partial default.

The bottom left panel plots the response for debt due a, also scaled by q
                                                                        ¯ relative to mean output,
that results from the choices of partial default d and borrowing b . The stock of debt features
a hump shape, increasing for the first 20 periods after the shock and then slowly decreasing.
The rise in partial default and borrowing both increase total debt due; partial default delays the
repayment of debt through the accumulation of arrears, and borrowing directly increases the total
debt due. The impulse response of total debt is slow and quite persistent. Debt remains elevated
for much longer after the shock has returned to its mean.

Finally, the bottom right panel in the figure plots the path for the interest rate spread. Spreads
rise on impact about 60 basis points and decrease slowly. Spreads rise because, as discussed in
Section 4.3, partial default increases with low shocks and higher debt due. The effects on spreads
are also very persistent. In period 40, for example, spreads continue to be 25 basis points higher
than before the shock.

The impulse response functions to a larger negative shock are shown in Figure 5 with dashed
lines. The responses of the variables have a larger magnitude and are more persistent than the
responses to the smaller shock. To see this higher persistence, consider the paths for total debt.
By period 60, the small and larger shocks have both recovered, yet debt is about 2 percentage
points higher after the larger negative shock. The more persistent debt dynamics introduce more
persistence in all the remaining variables.16

These impulse responses illustrate the propagation and amplification mechanisms in our model.
Adverse shocks tighten spread schedules, making it more costly to roll over the debt. Partial
   16
     The impulse response functions to positive shocks are almost exactly the mirror image of the impulse response
functions to negative shocks. Only the dynamics of spreads are asymmetric. Booms feature smaller reductions in
spreads.

                                                       32
default increases to alleviate the consumption decline arising from low output and tight finan-
cial conditions. New borrowing expands moderately despite spreads being high also to support
consumption. The rise in partial default and borrowing both increase the future debt due and
create a dynamic amplification of shocks. As debt stays elevated, partial default and spreads
remain persistently high even as the shock returns to its mean. Moreover, the larger the shock
the stronger the propagation and amplification. Recessions in our model have long-lasting effects
on the functioning of international financial markets as debt levels rise with the accumulation of
defaulted debt.

Having described the impulse response functions, we now turn to discuss the implications for the
comovement of the variables of interest. As for the comovements of the intensity of partial default,
the amplification effect of default on debt accumulation strengthens the correlation with debt.
The tight comovements of partial default with both output and spreads should be reflected in
large correlations with the anticipated sign. Regarding default episodes, the amplification in debt
accumulation via default may very well imply that episodes of default end with levels of debt that
are larger than they were at the start, and that episodes characterized by higher default will tend
to last longer. That borrowing returns to trend faster than default suggests that during default
episodes, with sustained default and increased debt, credit may become increasingly restricted.



4.4    Default Intensity

We now compare the quantitative implications of our model against the data with regard to default
intensity. We show that the model can replicate the empirical comovement of partial default with
spreads, debt, and output documented for emerging markets in Section 2. We construct these
statistics from the long simulation with annualized series.

We first analyze the mean spread, debt to output, and output across bins based on the intensity
of default. We partition the limiting distribution based on partial default into four bins. The no-
default bin corresponds to the observations with zero partial default (recall that they amount to
65% of the observations in the data and 64% in the model). The bins labeled small, medium, and
large correspond to periods with values for positive partial default of sizes (0-25%), (25%-75%),
and (75%-100%). In Table 6 we report the averages of partial default, spreads, debt to output,
and output across these default bins in both the data and the model.

The distributions of partial default in the model and data have a wide range, with zero, small,

                                                33
                      Table 6: Partial Default, Spreads, Debt, and Output

                    No default                         Partial default > 0
  Means (%)                       Small (0 - 25%)     Medium (25 - 75%) Large (75 - 100%)
                                                         Data
  Partial default        0                3                     27                     82
  Debt to output         26              37                     49                     63
  Output                  1               0                     -3                     -6
  Spreads                 0               3                      3                     11
                                                        Model
  Partial default        0                7                     27                     64
  Debt to output         28              40                     49                    68
  Output                  4              -4                     -8                    -12
  Spreads                 0               1                      1                     7


medium, and large partial defaults, although the distribution is a bit narrower in the model relative
to the data. As Table 6 reports, the model and data have many observations that feature positive
but small defaults as reflected by the mean of partial default for small defaults of 7% and 3% for
the model and the data respectively. This moment was a target for the specification of parameters
and was already reported in Table 5. The model and data also have many observations with large
defaults, as reflected by the mean of partial defaults for large defaults of 64% and 82% in the
model and data, respectively. The model produces medium defaults of 27%, the same size as in
the data.

The table shows that debt to output monotonically increases with partial default intensity in the
model, ranging from 40% to 68%, similar to the data which ranges from 37% to 63%. Output
in the model also decreases monotonically with partial default in both the model and the data,
although this relation is stronger in the model.

In the table we report the difference in the mean spread across the four groups relative to the
no-default group. As explained above, our model produces a lower mean spread; the comovement
of spreads with partial default, however, mirrors the data. In both the model and the data, spreads
are narrower during smaller defaults. Small and medium defaults have somewhat narrow spreads
in both the model and the data. The spread difference for these groups is 1% and 3% in the
model and data, respectively. Large defaults have larger spreads, with a spread difference equal
to 7% and 11% in the model and data, respectively.

We analyze these comovements also with correlations of spreads, debt, and output with partial

                                                 34
default, conditional on positive partial default. Table 7 shows that both in our model and the
data, periods of large partial default are associated with high spreads, high debt, and low output.
Correlations in the model have the same sign as in the data, although they are somewhat stronger.

                           Table 7: Comovement with Partial Default

                                                    Data       Model
                            Correlation with partial default
                            Spread                    25         59
                            Debt to output            44         72
                            Output                    -12       -70


The comovements of the spreads, debt to output, and output with partial default reflect the
response of these variables to shocks and the dynamics of debt illustrated with the decision rules
and the impulse response functions analyzed in Section 4.3.



4.5    Default Episodes

As we have documented, countries go in and out of partial default recurrently. Our model has
implications not only for the conditions that lead countries to partially default but also for the
properties of default episodes. Recall that we define the default episode in the model the same
way as we did for the data, that is, as a sequence of periods of uninterrupted positive partial
default, d > 0, that are preceded and followed by at least one period with zero default, d = 0.
In this section, we explore the model's quantitative implications for the length and dynamics of
default episodes, and the resulting haircuts and maturity extensions.

In the model, the length of the default episode depends on the length of the recession and the
degree of debt accumulation during the recession. The economy enters into partial default when
hit by a large enough low shock, given its level of debt. As long as the economy continues
in recession, it accumulates debt and remains in the default episode. When output recovers
sufficiently, the economy exits partial default and the default episode ends. In this framework,
longer default episodes arise from longer recessions with larger accumulation of debt.

To illustrate these mechanics, we plot the average paths for the variables of interest during
default episodes. We consider paths for short default episodes lasting 3 years and long default
episodes lasting 10 years. In particular, we simulate the economy for 1,000,000 periods and sort


                                                 35
default episodes based on their length. We then draw the means of the shock, output, debt due,
borrowing, partial default, and spreads for short and long default episodes. The resulting paths
are shown in Figure 6.



          1.00                                                      1.00


          0.95                                                      0.95


          0.90                                 z shock              0.90                       Output

          0.85                                                      0.85
              0     2       4      6      8         10   12             0   2   4   6   8       10      12


                                                                   0.022
           0.6                                                     0.020
                  Debt                                                                      Borrowing
                                                                   0.018
           0.5
                                                                   0.016
           0.4                                                     0.014

             0      2       4      6      8         10   12            0    2   4   6   8       10      12


           0.6                                                        4
                                 Default Episode Long                                         Spread
                  Partial                                             3
           0.4    Default
                                                                      2
           0.2              Default Episode Short
                                                                      1

            0                                                         0
             0      2       4      6      8         10   12            0    2   4   6   8       10      12




                                              Figure 6: Default Episodes

The short and long default episodes start in period 1 of Figure 6 when output is about 6% below its
mean. During short default episodes, output falls for one more period and then recovers. During
the long default episode, output remains depressed until period 8 before it recovers. Longer
episodes also feature larger declines in output than shorter default episodes. The episodes end
when output recovers sufficiently. The level of output that leads to an end of the episode, however,
is higher in the long than in the short episode.

Debt accumulates during the episode mainly because partial default increases and the defaulted
debt accumulates as new borrowing is small and falls after the initial periods. Spreads also increase
during the episode. In longer episodes, debt and spreads increase by more. The long episode
requires higher output upon exit precisely because the long episode leads to larger accumulated
debt.


                                                              36
In the model, the dynamics of output and debt during default episodes are consistent with the
empirical findings of Benjamin and Wright (2013) who study default episodes in emerging markets.
They find that default episodes are more likely to start when output is below trend and that they
end when output has returned to trend. They also find that debt upon exiting the default episode
is no smaller than it was prior to the episode, and in many cases it is strictly larger. The dynamics
of output and debt that our model generates during default episodes are consistent with these
findings.

We now compare the properties of default episode length in the model to our cross-country data.
Table 8 shows that on average default episodes last several years, in both the model and the data,
although in the model they are shorter and equal to 5 years compared to 9 years in the data.
The model generates a large fraction of short default episodes. About 44% of defaults in the
model last less than 2 years, close to the data fraction of 38%. The model and data feature large
heterogeneity in default episode length, with a very similar coefficient of variation of around 1.
                                    Table 8: Default Episodes

                                                                  Data    Model
                                      Properties of Episodes
                    Mean episode length (years)                       9        5
                    Percentage of short episodes ( 2)                38       45
                    Coefficient of variation for episode length     1.1      1.2
                    Haircut (%)                                      36       30
                    Maturity extension                                6        5
                                       Debt in episode (%)
                    Before                                          35        37
                    Beginning                                       40        40
                    Middle                                          47        45
                    After                                           36        44
                                         Correlations (%)
                    Correlation (length, haircut)                   62        91
                    Correlation (length, partial default)           54        74

In interpreting these results, it is important to note that our model abstracts from coordina-
tion failures among lenders, which is the leading theory for the length of default episodes, as in
Benjamin and Wright (2013). These authors show that coordination failures can account quan-
titatively for large delays in resolving default episodes. Their framework, however, is unable to
generate the skewness of the length distribution that contains a large fraction of short default
episodes. We view our theory of default episode length as complementary to the one based on

                                                 37
coordination failures.

In terms of debt dynamics, in the second section of Table 8, we compare the evolution of debt
to output during default episodes in the model to the one in the data. Our model features the
hump-shaped evolution of debt during default episodes present in the data. In the model, debt
to output in the period before the default episode is equal to 37%. At the start of the default
episode, debt rises to 40% and continues to grow. In the middle of the episode, debt is 45%, and
toward the end of the episode, it falls modestly to 44%. In our model, as in the data, default
episodes do not lead to reductions in debt, and debt ratios continue to rise during the default
episode.

We also compute in our model default episodes the haircuts that lenders experience and the
maturity extensions, as well as the the correlation between haircuts and episode length. We
compare our model statistics with empirical estimates of haircuts and maturity extensions in
Meyer, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2018) and in Fang, Schumacher, and Trebesch (2016), and
estimates of the comovement of haircuts and default episode length in Benjamin and Wright
(2013).17 These authors find that haircuts after default episodes are 36% on average and that
resolutions of default episodes involve debt exchanges with maturity extensions that increase the
duration of the debt by 5.5 years. As shown in Table 8, our model also predicts sizable haircuts
and maturity extensions during default episodes. Haircuts and maturity extensions in the model
are on average 30% and 5.4 years, respectively, which are close to the estimates for the data.
Finally, in terms of correlations, the bottom of Table 8 shows that in our model longer default
episodes feature larger haircuts and higher levels of partial default, just as in the data. The
magnitudes of the correlations in the model of are a bit larger than their data counterpart.




5        Counterfactuals

In this section we compare the implications of our model to two alternative environments that
represent policies aimed at improving the resolution of defaults and debt sustainability. The first
counterfactual (Section 5.1) considers an environment where the country does not have access
to international markets when default is positive. As we will see, such an environment is similar
to adding more stringent pari passu clauses to the bond contracts in our model. The second

    17
    We use these external sources for these estimates as our dataset does not contain enough information to
compute the implied haircuts and maturity extensions given that it lacks the entire cash-flow structure of the debt.

                                                        38
counterfactual (Section 5.2) considers the case of higher debt relief from default which results
from a parameterization with a lower value of the recovery factor . We use this counterfactual
as a way to study the debt relief initiative for Highly Indebted Poor Countries. Our results suggest
that pari passu clauses lead to lower default frequency, shorter default episodes, and lower haircuts
from defaults. Debt relief policies, in contrast, increase haircuts, lower debt-to-output ratios, and
reduce the incidence of large defaults.



5.1     No Market Access during Default (Pari Passu)

An important feature of our model that differs from many sovereign default models is that the
economy continues to have access to financial markets during default episodes. As we have seen,
bond markets are endogenously somewhat restricted in our model because of elevated default
risk during periods with positive partial default, but modest levels of new bonds continue to be
issued. In this subsection, we explore the effects of financial market access during defaults by
comparing our model to a modified framework in which new borrowing during periods of partial
default carries an additional cost that effectively shuts down market access during default.

Recall that in our model all the coupon payments due from past issuances are combined into
a single state variable a. Payments for these coupons are treated equally across issuances as
the partial default choice d is applied to the entire sum of coupons a. Nevertheless, empirical
measures of haircuts as derived in equation (17) will differ across vintages of bonds issued at
different points in time during a default episode. For example, haircuts on bonds issued later in
the default episode are smaller than the haircuts on the original legacy debt the economy held
at the beginning of the episode. The reason is that bonds issued later in the episode experience
fewer periods with positive partial default compared to bonds issued earlier.18 Such instances
of differential treatment across bonds during default episodes are classic violations of pari passu
clauses in bond markets, which require that all creditors are treated equally.19

In this context, the comparative statics we consider in this section that shuts down new borrowing
during default episodes ameliorates pari pasu concerns. In fact, we can directly interpret the

   18
       Average haircuts in the benchmark model during default episodes of 5 years are, for example, 25% for the
legacy debt outstanding at the beginning of the episode and 10% for bond issues during the last year of the
episode.
    19
       As explained in Olivares-Caminal (2013), bonds with pari passu clauses, sometimes called most favored
creditor clauses, stipulate that "during default episodes, if subsequent settlements have better terms, those terms
will also be extended to the previously exchanged bonds."

                                                        39
implicit additional costs for borrowing during default episodes as costs from additional pari passu
clauses and potential litigation during default.

In the first two columns of Table 9 we compare the results from an economy with no market
access during default to our benchmark model. The effects on the distribution of partial default
are sizable. Without market access, partial defaults are less frequent and more homogeneous. The
default frequency drops from 34% to 14%, and small and large defaults are largely eliminated,
reflected by a drop in the standard deviation of partial default by a third. These changes in partial
default are reflected in smaller and less volatile interest rate spreads.20 Default episodes become
slightly shorter for two reasons. First, not having access to international markets adds extra
costs from defaults which encourage faster exit from default episodes. Second, debt increases less
during default episodes than in the benchmark because no new bond issuances occur, for example,
debt to output increases only about 5% during default episodes that last 10 years, compared to
the increase of close to 20% for the benchmark model (as seen in Figure 6). With less debt
accumulated during default episodes, the economy can exit default faster. Shorter episodes with
no market access also lead to smaller haircuts and somewhat smaller maturity extensions.

This experiment suggests that pari passu clauses that remove market access during default episodes
could have sizable implications for defaults, making them less frequent, more homogeneous, and
shorter.



5.2      HIPC Initiative: Larger Debt Relief

Another important feature of our model that differs from the sovereign default literature is that
the defaulted debt does not dissipate after default, but instead accumulates, with a fraction  of
the defaulted debt coming due in the future. We now turn to explore the implications of lowering
the recovery factor  from 0.926 in the benchmark to 0.85, which essentially doubles the debt
relief on the face value of debt relative to the baseline.

Since 1996, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have promoted the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) debt relief initiative. Countries that qualify for this program
experience debt relief from multilateral institutions and bilateral creditors. The purpose of this

   20
      Although the economy is not issuing any new loans during periods of positive partial default in this comparative
static, the debt accumulates as defaulted debt during the episode and carries a corresponding spread priced in
secondary markets. The measure of spreads we use for this comparative static are these secondary market spreads.

                                                         40
                      Table 9: Properties of Alternative Environments (in %)

                                       Benchmark           Pari Passu   High Debt Relief       Full Default
                                                        (no mkt access)    (lower )             Reference
                                                               Partial Default | > 0
 Partial default frequency                  34                14                  33                 2
 Partial default mean                       31                26                  28               100
 Partial default st. dev.                   24                16                  22                0
 Small partial defaults                      7                11                   7               100
 Large partial defaults                     64                46                  58               100
                                                                Default Episodes
 Mean episode length                        5                 4                    5                 5
 Fraction of short episodes ( 2)           45                45                   45                20
 Haircut                                   30                26                   36                100
 Maturity extension                        5.4               5.3                  5.4                ­
 Corr. (length, partial default)           74                60                   77                 0
 Corr. (length, haircut)                   91                91                   94                 0
                                                        Overall First and Second Moments
 Spread mean                               1.2               0.3                1.2                 3.4
 Spread st. dev.                           3.9               0.5                1.8                 2.0
 Debt-to-output mean                        36                34                 28                 33
 Debt-to-output st. dev.                   18                 14                 15                 15
 Corr. (partial default, spread)           59                 83                 83                  ­
 Corr. (partial default, debt)             72                 51                 71                  ­
 Corr. (partial default, output)           -70               -54                -70                  ­
 Corr. (spread, output)                    -32               -57                -55                 -26
 Corr. (spread, debt)                      47                 52                 61                 44


initiative is to bring debt to sustainable levels and free-up resources for spending. While many
countries that have qualified for the HIPC initiative have levels of output per capita below those in
emerging markets, a few of the countries in the initiative are quite similar to emerging markets.21
Honduras, Bolivia, and Guyana, for example, that are part of the HIPC initiative, have very similar
output per capita, ranging from $5,000 to $9,000 PPP U.S. dollars, to Nigeria, El Salvador, and
Philippines which are emerging markets that are not part of the initiative. In this context, we use
our model to evaluate the effects of larger debt relief for these borderline countries.

The third column of Table 9 shows the results of the experiment where we lower  while keeping
all other parameters at their benchmark values. Lowering the recovery factor  reduces the size
  21
     Most of the HIPC countries such as Burundi, Niger, Mozambique, Sierra Leona, Madagascar, Togo, Guinea
Bissau, and Burkina Faso have output per capita of less than $2,000 PPP U.S. dollars in 2018.

                                                   41
of defaults, especially of the large partial defaults, reduces the volatility of spreads, increases
haircuts, and lowers debt-to-output ratios. The other properties of partial default, spreads, and
debt, however, experience only moderate changes. With lower , partial default is somewhat lower
on average and less volatile, and large partial defaults are reduced from 64% to 58%, haircuts
increase from 30% to 36%, and average debt-to-output ratios are reduced from 36% to 28%.
With higher haircuts, borrowing becomes more restricted because creditors adjust the bond price
schedule to avoid losses. The volatility of sovereign spreads is reduced by half and the correlations
of spreads with partial default, output, and debt are strengthened.

This counterfactual shows that debt relief initiatives can be useful to eliminate large defaults and
lower the volatility of interest rate spreads but do not change much mean spreads or mean partial
default. These results illustrate that high debt relief lowers debt sustainability levels because
creditors respond with tighter bond price schedules leaving equilibrium mean spreads and partial
default unchanged. In practice, the HIPC initiative has had mixed results in terms of alleviating the
debt burden of countries. Our counterfactual illustrates that general equilibrium forces respond
to these policies and somewhat offset them.




6     Fresh Start: Full Default Reference Sovereign Debt Model

The reference model of debt and default in the literature, e.g., Arellano (2008) or Chatterjee
and Eyigungor (2012), is one where defaults affect all of the debt payments, both present and
future. We modify our model to obtain a version of this reference standard model as follows.
We impose that default can only be total, upon which the entire stock of debt vanishes, and the
country is temporarily excluded from financial markets. With probability  the country re-enters
financial markets holding zero debt, a fresh start. A default episode here is defined to contain the
period when the sovereign defaults and the periods when it remains excluded from credit markets
subsequently. The duration of the episode is therefore exogenous.

For a proper comparison between the two models, we will not be using the same parameter values,
but will instead consider the two models as alternative lenses through which to look at the same
data. Consequently, we proceed to estimate this version of the standard model using some of
the same targets as in Section 4. We estimate the discount factor, the parameters controlling
the output costs from default, and the re-entry probability  so that the model delivers the best
approximation to these moments: average level of debt over output, standard deviation of spreads,


                                                 42
correlation of spreads with output, and mean default episode length. Of course with complete
default, we cannot include as targets the mean and standard deviations of the default size. The
details are in Appendix D.

The last column in Table 9 presents the results from the reference model. Default here is very
infrequent, only 2% of the time, in contrast with the benchmark frequency of 34%, and when
default occurs, it is on 100% of the debt, which makes the model silent on the correlations
of partial default with other variables. The model can deliver similar moments for spreads and
debt to output, yet default episodes are impasse states, characterized by financial exclusion and
exogenous duration.
         1.2                                                     1.2


         1.1       Output                                        1.1       Consumption

           1                                                      1


         0.9                                                     0.9

               0   2      4     6      8       10     12               0   2    4        6   8   10   12


                                                                 0.2
         0.6
                                                                0.15       Borrowing
         0.4
                                                                 0.1

         0.2                        Debt
                                                                0.05


           0                                                      0
               0   2      4     6      8       10     12               0   2    4        6   8   10   12


                                                                  8
           1

         0.8                        Full Default                  6
                                    Partial Default                        Spread
         0.6
                                                                  4
         0.4
                                                                  2
         0.2

           0                                                      0
               0   2      4     6      8       10     12               0   2    4        6   8   10   12


                       Figure 7: Default Episodes in Reference Full Default Model

We contrast default episodes in the full default model to our partial default model. Figure 7
plots the paths for the variables of interest for default episodes lasting 10 years. Although the
length of default episodes of 5 years on average is exogenous in the full default model, we choose
realized paths with exactly 10 years of exclusion after default, and average the variables across
these realizations.

                                                           43
The top two panels in the figure show the paths of output and consumption relative to period 0.
Output in both models is depressed during default episodes, but for different reasons. Output in
our model is depressed because of selection effects, as the country chooses to remain in default
only during recessions, while in the full default model, output is depressed because of default costs.
Consumption is also depressed in both models during default episodes, although the decline is
larger in our model as the country continues to repay some of the debt. In period 11, the first
period after the end of the default episode, the full default model displays a large increase in
consumption of about 15%. In contrast, consumption in our model after default increases quite
mildly, and is only close to trend. This burst in consumption following a default episode in the
full default model arises because the country experiences a fresh start. The middle panels in
the figure illustrate the paths for total debt relative to output and borrowing. In the full default
model, debt is eliminated after default, no borrowing occurs during the episode, and the country
borrows heavily in period 11, following its fresh start. Such sharp surge in borrowing after the
episode is the reason for the consumption boom. The bottom two panels show partial default and
spreads. In the full default model, these default episodes are impasse states with no dynamics in
debt, partial default, or spreads.

The standard model is at odds with the data in several dimensions. As we have described, major
shortcomings of the full default model have to do with its extreme assumptions on the default size
and its consequences. Additional discrepancies with data are the sharp increases in consumption
and borrowing upon recovering access to financial markets at the end of a default episode.




7     Conclusion

Based on the evidence for sovereign debt crises in emerging markets, we have provided a new
model of sovereign debt, where partial default acts as an alternative form of borrowing and is a
powerful amplifying mechanism for debt crises. The framework contains empirical implications
that fit the data for the intensity of partial default, the length of default episodes, and the
debt haircuts and maturity extensions from default episodes. The model also delivers empirically
consistent implications for the distribution of partial default, the correlations of partial default
with spreads, debt, and output, and the path of debt during default episodes.

We use the framework to study the consequences of pari pasu clauses and debt relief policies, and
find that pari passu clauses make default less likely and shorter, while debt relief policies reduce


                                                 44
the incidence or large defaults but reduce debt sustainability.

This paper has presented a theory that modifies the standard paradigm of default in most of
sovereign default models. In standard theory, default is the culmination of the crisis and is followed
by an impasse period with no debt repayment or borrowing, after which the economy reemerges
making a fresh start with reduced debt. The focus of that theory has been on the dynamics prior to
the default and has not been designed to study life during default episodes. Emerging economies,
however, spend more than a third of the time in default episodes, and hence abstracting from
these periods misses a large part of the dynamics. In our theory, we have integrated the dynamics
prior to default with the dynamics occurring during default episodes by recognizing that partial
default may lead to more debt and more default. Our framework embraces the non-commitment
environment inherent in sovereign debt markets; the same lack of commitment that underpins
sovereign default also rules out automatic debt relief after default. Accumulated defaulted debt
leads to higher interest rate spreads, more debt, and longer and deeper debt crises.

Our quantitative and empirical findings also suggest that existing default resolution mechanisms
are not effective at reducing the debt burden for emerging markets experiencing defaults. In prac-
tice, default has led to more default and countries exit default episodes with as much debt as they
enter with. We think that a salient oversight for debt restructuring efforts, led by multinational
organizations, international creditors, and also the academic literature, is abstracting from the
dynamics of debt during default episodes. We view our framework as a potentially useful one
to analyze debt restructuring mechanisms because it incorporates the important debt dynamics
during defaults.




                                                 45
References
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath. 2006. "Defaultable debt, interest rates and the current account."
  Journal of international Economics 69 (1):64­83.

Arellano, Cristina. 2008. "Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies."
  American Economic Review 98 (3):690­712.

Benjamin, David and Mark L.J Wright. 2013. "Recovery Before Redemption? A Theory of Delay
  in Sovereign Default." Mimeo, State University of New York, Buffalo.

Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff. 1989. "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt."
  Journal of Political Economy 97 (1):155­178.

Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, M. Nakajima, and J-V. R´
                                                  ios-Rull. 2007. "A Quantitative Theory of
  Unsecured Consumer Credit with Risk of Default." Econometrica 75:1528­1589.

Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor. 2012. "Maturity, indebtedness, and default risk." The
  American Economic Review 102 (6):2674­2699.

Chen, Long, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert Goldstein. 2009. "On the relation between the
  credit spread puzzle and the equity premium puzzle." Review of Financial Studies 22:336­409.

Clausen, Andrew and Carlo Strub. 2016. "A General and Intuitive Envelope Theorem." Unpub-
  lished manuscript, University of Edinburgh.

Cruces, Juan J. and Christoph Trebesch. 2013. "Sovereign Defaults: The Price of Haircuts."
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5 (3):85­117.

Dawsey, A.E. and L.M. Ausubel. 2004. "Informal Default." Manuscript, University of Maryland.

Dvorkin, Maximiliano, Juan M. Sanchez, Horacio Sapriza, and Emircan Yurdagul. 2018.
  "Sovereign Debt Restructurings." Working Papers 2018-13, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
  URL https://ideas.repec.org/p/fip/fedlwp/2018-013.html.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz. 1981. "Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and
  Empirical Analysis." Review of Economic Studies 48 (2):289­309.

Erce, Aitor and Enrico Mallucci. 2018. "Selective Sovereign Defaults." International Finance
  Discussion Papers 1239, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.). URL
  https://ideas.repec.org/p/fip/fedgif/1239.html.


                                               46
Fang, Chuck, Julian Schumacher, and Christoph Trebesch. 2016. "Do Collective Action Clauses
  Work? Evidence from Sovereign Bond Restructurings." Kiel Institute.

Gordon, Grey and Pablo Guerron-Quintana. 2018. "A Quantitative Theory of Hard and Soft
  Sovereign Defaults." Mimeo Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.

Hatchondo, Juan Carlos and Leonardo Martinez. 2009. "Long-duration bonds and sovereign
  defaults." Journal of International Economics 79 (1):117­125. URL http://ideas.repec.
  org/a/eee/inecon/v79y2009i1p117-125.html.

Hatchondo, Juan Carlos, Leonardo Martinez, and C´    esar Sosa-Padilla. 2016. "Debt dilution and
  sovereign default risk." Journal of Political Economy 124 (5):1383­1422.

Herkenhoff, Kyle F and Lee E Ohanian. 2015. "The Impact of Foreclosure Delay on U.S.
  Employment." Working Paper 21532, National Bureau of Economic Research. URL http:
  //www.nber.org/papers/w21532.

Jorda, Oscar and Massimiliano Marcellino. 2004. "Time-scale transformations of discrete time
  processes." Journal of Time Series Analysis 25 (6):873­894.

Krusell, Per and Anthony A. Smith. 2003. "Consumption-Savings Decisions with Quasi-Geometric
  Discounting." Econometrica 71:365­375.

Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michelle Tertilt. 2007. "Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh Start."
  American Economic Review 97 (1):402­418.

Longstaff, Francis A, Jun Pan, Lasse H Pedersen, and Kenneth J Singleton. 2011. "How sovereign
  is sovereign credit risk?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (2):75­103.

Mateos-Planas, Xavier and Jos´
                             e-V´
                                ictor R´
                                       ios-Rull. 2015. "The Generalized Euler Equation and
 the Bankruptcy­Sovereign Default Problem." URL http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~vr0j/
 slides/vvucl.pdf. Slides, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.

Mateos-Planas, Xavier and Giulio Seccia. 2014. "Consumer default with complete markets:
 default-based pricing and finite punishment." Economic Theory 56 (3):549­583.

Meyer, Josefin, Carmen Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. 2018. "Sovereign Bonds since Water-
 loo." Kiel Institute.

Mihalache, Gabriel. 2017. "Sovereign Default Resolution Through Maturity Extension." Depart-
  ment of economics working papers, Stony Brook University, Department of Economics. URL
  https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:nys:sunysb:17-08.

                                              47
Olivares-Caminal, Rodrigo. 2013. "The Pari Passu Clause in Sovereign Debt Instruments: Devel-
  opments in Recent Litigation." BIS Paper No. 72, BIS Paper No. 72u.

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
  Financial Folly. Princeton University Press.

Tauchen, George. 1986. "Finite State Markov-Chain Approximations to Univariate and Vector
  Autoregressions." Economics Letters 20 (2):177­181.

Tomz, Michael and Mark L.J. Wright. 2013. "Empirical Research on Sovereign Debt and De-
  fault." Annual Review of Economics 5 (1):247­272. URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/
  anr/reveco/v5y2013p247-272.html.

Yue, Vivian Z. 2010.        "Sovereign default and debt renegotiation."  Journal of
  International Economics 80 (2):176­187. URL http://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/inecon/
  v80y2010i2p176-187.html.




                                             48
                                          Appendix


A     Data sources and variables

Our sample of countries consists of all 38 emerging countries from the J.P. Morgan Emerging
Market Bond Index (EMBI+). The countries in the sample are: Argentina, Bulgaria, Belize,
Brazil, Chile ,Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Gabon, Ghana, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Morocco,
Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Russian Federation, El Salvador,
Serbia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, South Africa, China,
Colombia, Egypt, Hungary, Korea, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, and Tunisia. The data is annual and comes
from the World Development Indicators (WDI) and the Global Financial Database (GFD). The
data span 1970 to 2010, and the time series coverage for each variable is based on availability.
The spread data from GFD is the country EMBI(+) spread. From the WDI dataset we construct
the following variables:


    · Partial default is the ratio of arrears public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) relative to the
      sum of debt service PPG and arrears PPG. The observations for positive partial default
      contain those with partial default greater than .1%.

    · Debt to output is that ratio of debt PPG to gross national income.

    · Output is the linearly detrended log of gross national income with country specific trends.

    · Default episode is the window of time with consecutive periods with positive partial default
      after and before periods with zero partial default.




B     Computation

We describe computation aspects for the model with stochastic recovery factor . We have used
this slight generalization of the benchmark model to verify the robustness of the results.

Model with stochastic . In this case,  can take on values i in some discrete set with an iid
probability i . Since this extension does not affect the definition of the state, the model is as set

                                                 49
out in section 3 except for a few simple details that we include for completeness. The evolution
of debt payments for the sovereign includes i so it becomes

                                          a =  a + (1 -  )i da + b .                                             (B.1)

The value to the lender evaluates continuation values over the distribution of  so that

  H (z , a, y ) = 1 - d (z , a, y )
            1
        +          i [ + (1 -  )i d (z , a, y )]              (z , z )H (z , a (z , a, y , i ), y (z , z , a, y )) (B.2)
            R i                                         z


where a (z , a, y , i ) =  a + (1 -  )i d (z , a, y )a + b (z , a, y ).

The expected value conditional on a , that is after the realization of the recovery shock i , gives
an ex-post price
                                                 1
                                 q
                                 ~(z , a , d ) =   Ez [H (z , a , y )].                      (B.3)
                                                 R
The relevant price is the ex-ante value over the distribution of i :

                          q (z , b , d , a) =         ~(z ,  a + b + (1 -  )i da, d ).
                                                    i q
                                                i


This is now the price showing in the sovereign's constraint which becomes

                                     c = y - a(1 - d ) + q (z , b , d , a) b                                     (B.4)


Grids and interpolation. We define grids for the state (z , a, y ), and the decisions (b , d ).
Continuation values V and H need to be evaluated on real values for y and a off the grid. Also
we represent borrowing and default decisions, b and d , that are continuous (at least piece-wise).
Therefore, in order to obtain q , q  ~ must be evaluated at continuous values a . Likewise, q will
have to be evaluated on continuous values for b and d . To achieve this, we have considered a
mixture of interpolation schemes, including linear and cubic splines. Since outcomes are robust,
the results reported are based on the following choice: bilinear interpolation over (y , a) for V and
H ; bilinear interpolation over (b , d ) for q ; linear interpolation over a for q
                                                                                 ~.

Discontinuity of default. The default decision rule D (z , a, y ) may not be continuous every-
where. One reason is that in some states there is a fixed component to the cost of defaulting,


                                                            50
i.e., a discrete drop in  as d becomes strictly positive. There, default will jump discontinuously.
Treating d (z , a, y ) as continuous in (y , a) is inappropriate, and may produce misleading outcomes:
Interpolation near the discontinuity may appear to yield some default where there is no default, or
some partial default where there should be full default. To deal with this situation, we introduce
a discrete decision variable for the extensive margin, whether to default or not at all, d01  {0, 1}.
The agent's decision is broken down as follows. There is a value to defaulting


                   V D (z , a, y ) = max u (c ) +                     j        (z , z )V (z , a , y )
                                      b ,d
                                                              j           z


subject to the constraints spelled out in the main text. This yields continuous decision rules d D (.)
and b D (.). And there is a value to not-defaulting


                   V ND (z , a, y ) = max u (c ) +                     (z , z )V (z ,  a + b , z ) ,
                                         b
                                                                  z


which yields b ND (.). The ex-ante value

                             V (z , a, y ) = max{V D (z , A, z ), V ND (z , a, y )},

yielding the extensive-margin discrete default decision d01 (z , a, y ). The enveloping intensive-
margin default rule is

                                                     0             d01 (z , a, y ) = 0
                              d (z , a, y ) =          D
                                                     d (z , a, y ) d01 (z , a, y ) = 1

The discontinuity of default will cause H to be discontinuous where the discrete decision d01 (...)
switches. Two sections are defined accordingly, one for the default states D and another for
no-default states ND . In a defaulting state

                                             1
  H D (z , a, y ) = (1 - d (z , a, y )) +            j ( + (1 -  )j d (z , a, y ))                (z , z )H (z , a , y ),
                                             R   j                                           z


while in a no-defaulting state

                                                         1
                            H ND (z , a, y ) = 1 +                     (z , z )H (z , a , y ),
                                                         R        z




                                                           51
where a =  a + b (z , a, y ) + (1 -  )j d (z , a, y )a, y = z (d (z , a, y ), z ). So H is:

               H (z , a, y ) = d01 (z , a, y )H D (z , a, y ) + (1 - d01 (z , a, y ))H ND (z , a, y ).


Continuation values. In the agent's decision problem, one issue is how to evaluate the contin-
uation values of the envelope function V at points outside of the 2-dim grid defined over (y , a).
Such a point would be inside a box defined by the four grid points, say (yj , yj +1 , ai , ai +1 ). If
d01 (z , ai , yj +1 ) = 1, defaulting also must be the option in all the 4 points, and V obtains by
interpolating V D between the four grid points. If d01 (z , ai +1 , yj ) = 0, no-defaulting also must be
the option in all the 4 points, and V obtains by interpolating V ND between the four grid points.
In the other cases, where the default extensive-margin discrete choice is not the same in all points
of the box, interpolate V D and V ND separately, and pick the value that dominates. For the price
function,
                                          1
                          q
                          ~(z , a , d ) =      (z , z )H ((z , A , z + )(d , z ))
                                          R z

we have the continuation value of H which has to be evaluated at points outside of the 2-dim grid
defined over (y , A). We proceed similarly as above, defining a 2-dimensional box and interpolating
either H D or H ND .

Optimization. In the default case d01 = 1, over the two dimensions b and d , use the minimization
routine PRAXIS based on the principal axis method (Richard Brent; FORTRAN90 version by John
Burkardt. URL: http://people.sc.fsu.edu/~jburkardt/f_src/praxis/praxis.html). For
the no-default case d01 = 0, over the single dimension b , we use Golden Section search, with
the bracketing using Fortran90 intrinsic procedure maxloc on the grid. The algorithm for our
moment-matching exercise is based on the software BOBYQA, authored by Michael J. D. Powell,
that minimizes the sum of squares of the target moments with bound constraints, by combining
the trust region method and the Levenberg-Marquardt method.

Algorithm. The solution is found by iterating backwards starting from some terminal conditions.
The objects that need initialisation are as follows. The algorithm starts from the outcomes of a
finite economy which means the following terminal values: H = H D = 0, H ND = 1, v D = u (y ),
v ND < v D , and d01 = 1. The algorithm in each iteration solves the following sequence: updating
of debt prices; agent decision; lender values. Specifically, initialise H D , H ND , H , d01 , v D , v ND
and iterate over the following updating sequence:




                                                        52
    · Prices

         ­ H D , H ND , d01  q
                             ~
           ~q
         ­ q

    · Sovereign:

         ­ q , v D , v ND , d01  v D , b D , d D , d
         ­ q , v D , v ND , d01  v ND , b ND
         ­ v D , v ND , b D , b ND , d D  d01 , b , d

    · Lender's value:

         ­ H , bD , d D  H D
         ­ H , b ND  H ND
         ­ H D , H ND , d01  H


Convergence. Regarding convergence, one clear challenge is the feedback between the agent's
decisions d and b and the contract valuation H and therefore prices q . The practical procedure
must involve a first long run of iterations, possibly followed by some damping. We have found
that damping is not necessary for our main results.

Convexity and multiple local optima. The value function (as a function of debt a) may become
eventually flat, so it must feature a convex section. This is because when default approaches
100% the penalty cannot increase further even if debts increase. The convex section can create
multiplicity and discontinuous decisions.This may be relevant in equilibrium because, given that
debt is long term, there is positive recovery even at high-default positions so debt prices do not fall
fast enough to prevent this type of situations. Nonetheless, in our calculations these problematic
regions appear to lie outside of the ergodic set and pose no difficulty.

This research has utilised Queen Mary's Apocrita HPC facility http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.438045.




C     Haircut and maturity extensions

Remember coupon payments are such that: at +1 =  at + bt + (1 -  )dt at .

                                                        53
Without default risk. It is useful to start with the case without default risk. The value of the
payments to a bond that pays one unit 1 today is:
                                                                     t -1
                                                                                 1+r
                                         val =                              =
                                                   t =1
                                                              1+r               1+r -

Its duration measured by the Macaulay duration:

                                                                            t -1                1
                                                   t -1                 
                  1                                            t =1 t 1+r                                     1+r
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                            (1- 1+ r
                                                                                                     )
            dur               t                           =               t -1       =        1+r        =         ,
                 val   t =1
                                       1+r                             
                                                                                             1+r -
                                                                                                             1+r -
                                                                 t =1 1+r


where the second equality follows from the fact that                            tx t -1 = 1/(1 - x )2 .

Old debt instruments. The present value and the duration of the of old defaulted debt instru-
ments DD from time zero are
                                   N                                                         N
                                            dt a t                        1                             dt a t
                  valDD =                             ,        durDD =                           t                .
                                  t =1
                                         (1 + r )t -1                  valDD             t =1
                                                                                                     (1 + r )t -1


New debt instruments. Regarding the new debt instruments, in each period t there is new
coupons due arising from the defaults occurred in the preceding periods t = 1, 1, 3, ..., t - 1 within
                        ND
the episode we denote at   for "new debt". In other words,

               ND
              at   (1 -  )[dt -1 at -1 +  dt -2 at -2 +  2 dt -3 at -3 + ... +  t -2 d1 a1 ].

                                                ND                            ND
Note this can be constructed recursively as at       = (1 -  )dt -1 at -1 +  at -1 for t = 2, ..., N + 1
      ND
with a1 = 0. To calculate the current value of these new bonds at t , we subtract the part of
 ND                                    ND
at  that is defaulted at t , so it is at  (1 - dt ). The present value is calculated as

                                           N                        ND               
                                                  ND
                                                 at  (1 - dt )     aN +1                         t -1
                       valND =                                 +
                                          t =2
                                                  (1 + r )t -1   (1 + r )N           t =1
                                                                                             (1 + r )t -1
                                                    N                ND       ND
                                                          (1 - dt )at        aN +1    1+r
                                               =                   t - 1
                                                                         +         N
                                                   t =2
                                                           (1 + r )        (1 + r ) 1 + r - 




                                                                54
The duration of the new debt instruments is therefore

                          N                            ND                
             1                   ND
                                at  (1 - dt )         aN +1                         t -1
  durND =                                   -
                                                t +                                          (N + t )
          valND          t =2
                                 (1 + r ) t   1     (1 + r )N            t =1
                                                                                (1 + r )t -1
                   N      ND                  ND                                           t -1                    t -1
          1              at  (1 - dt )       aN +1                                                            
     =                                 t +                         N                              +                       t
       valND      t =2
                          (1 + r )t -1     (1 + r )N                     t =1
                                                                                  1+r                 t =1
                                                                                                             1+r
                                N                      ND      ND
                  1                         (1 - dt )at       aN +1                   1+r        1
             =                          t                 +                     N           +       2
               valND          t =2
                                             (1 + r )t -1   (1 + r )N               1 + r -  (1 - 1+ r
                                                                                                       )




Haircuts for different vintages. Here we consider haircuts on different debt vintages within
                                                                                L
an episode. Consider an episode with dt > 0 over t = 1, ..., N . Denote by at     (j ) the coupon due
in period t = 2, ..., N + 1 of new (i.e., not-yet-defaulted) debt whose first payment was due in
period j , for j = 1, ..., N + 1. We can refer to j as the vintage of this new debt. It is a fact that
  L
at  (j ) > 0 only if t  j . More specifically, we have:

                  L                      t -j aj if j = 1, t = 2, 3, ..., N
                 at (j ) =               t -j
                                         bj -1 if j = 2, ..., N + 1, t = j , j + 1, ..., N + 1

The value of defaulted debt of vintage j = 1, ..., N :

                                                                   N            L
                                                                           dt a t (j )
                                                 valDD L (j ) =                        .
                                                                  t =2
                                                                         (1 + r )t -1

                                                                                        ND ,L
The default on new debt generates new restructured debt corresponding to each vintage, at     (j ),
which can be calculated recursively

                                     ND ,L                      L             ND ,L
                                    at     (j ) = (1 -  )dt -1 at -1 (j ) +  at -1 (j )


                                                          ND ,L
for t = 2, 3, ..., N + 1 and for j = 1, ..., N + 1, with a1     = 0. The value, after adjusting for
current default,

                                                  N      ND ,L                 ND ,L
                                                        at     (j )(1 - dt )  aN     (j ) 1 + r
                                    L
                         valND (j ) =                                t - 1
                                                                             + +1 N
                                                 t =2
                                                           (1 + r )           (1 + r ) 1 + r - 




                                                                  55
     ND ,L            ND ,L
Let at     =     j   at                                                           ND
                            (j ). Going back to total arrears aND , we know at = at     L
                                                                                     + at , so

                                 ND                  ND      L          ND
                                at  = (1 -  )dt -1 (at -1 + at -1 ) +  at -1 ,


                                               ND         ND ,L
which makes clear that the difference between at   and at       is that the latter does not include
coupons defaulted in previous periods. With valND L (j ) and valDD L (j ) we can calculate haircuts
for the different vintages j .




D       Details of the reference model

This reference model can be seen as a special case of our model that obtains after imposing
certain restrictions: Default is a binary choice, either zero or total, d  {0, 1}, so there is no
intensive margin in the default decision; defaulted payments are not recoverable and are fully
discounted, i.e.,  = 0; furthermore, the act of defaulting today cancels the entire bond and,
when in default, the sovereign is excluded from world markets and cannot therefore borrow or
save, which dispenses with the joint portfolio choice of borrowing and defaulting.

We speak of a default episode as including periods when the sovereign remains excluded from
markets following a default decision. Specifically, following a decision to default, the sovereign
enters default status with d = 1, and only leaves that status with some exogenous reentry
probability . Unlike in our benchmark model, in this reference model default episodes are therefore
characterised by passive autarky and their duration is entirely exogenous. We model the penalty
for being in default status in the same way as in Equation (8) of our benchmark model, that is
as a loss of output in the following period.

The above assumptions deliver a reference model that is comparable to Arellano (2008) with
short-term debt  = 0, and to Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012) with long-term debt  > 0.22 For
consistency with the setting of our benchmark model, we use long-term debt.

Given the binary default choice in this reference model, we need to specifiy a value function for
the default status v D and one for the clean status v ND , with the optimal value consisting of


   22
     Except that they draw the distinction between coupon payments and maturity of bonds, a minor distinction for
our present purpose. Another slight difference is that those papers assume that the output loss is contemporaneous
with default.

                                                       56
the envelope max{v D , v ND }.23 It is known that the computation of this model with long-term
debt would generally face issues of convergence and non-monotonicity in the decision rule for
borrowing. We find these issues are due to the non-convexities arising from a poor approximation
to the pricing of debt. In the spirit of Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), we introduce stochastic
iid shocks to output with the purpose of smoothing out the slope of the price of debt with respect
to the level of debt.24 More specifically, the expression for income in Equation (8) is now replaced
by yt +1 = (zt +1 + et +1 )(dt , zt +1 ) where, besides the usual persistent Markov shock zt +1 , the
new added shock et +1 follows a zero-mean Normal distribution with standard deviation e .

For the numerical implementation, the model is set up to an annual frequency. Accordingly, the
interest rate r = 0.04, and the maturity parameter  = 0.8341 in order to match the duration of
debt of 5.05 years of our benchmark model. The reentry probability  = 0.20 implies a length of
default episodes of 5 years, similar to the endogenous length in our benchmark model.  is taken
unchanged from Table 4, and  = 0 by assumption.

For income, we aim at a persistence of 0.74 and standard deviation of about 0.07.25 These
targeted moments will be mainly influenced by the persistence and volatility, z and  , of the
process z , and by the volatility e of the new iid shock e . We choose a technical e = 0.05
which generally works to deal with the non-convexities. Since this shock raises the volatility of
the income process and lowers its persistence, we need to adjust the parameters z and  to
correct for that. Our choice z = 0.85 and  = 0.04 results in an autocorrelation of output of
0.66 and a standard deviation of 0.10 which we see as a good compromise given the tension in
matching the two moments. Finally, the number of points of the Markov chain approximating the
process for z has been doubled from 10 to 20 since this appears to help overcome the numerical
difficulties discussed.

The remaining parameters are the discount rate  and the parameters of the penalty function
(z , d ) in (19),  , 0 , 1 , and z  . The parameter  is irrelevant since default can only be 100%,
and 0 can be set to zero in keeping with the specification typical of existing literature.26 We are
thus left with three parameters  , 1 and z  which we pin down to match the average level of
debt over output, the standard deviation of spreads, and the correlation of spreads with output,
   23
      As explained in Appendix B, we are already making this distinction in the the benchmark model.
   24
      As it transpires from Appendix B, the intensive margin in the (partial) default decision in our benchmark
model appears to overcome this type difficulty without need of resorting to such additional shocks.
   25
      The moments at quarterly frequency in Table 5 have been converted to annual frequency moments so that
                                                                        2×(4-1)
persistence is 0.934 and the standard deviation becomes 0.08 × j =0             0.93j . See, for instance, Jorda and
Marcellino (2004).
   26
      At this point, it is worth noting that the cost function in Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012) is the special case

                                                         57
targets that have also been used for our benchmark model. The resulting calibrated parameters are
 = 0.8731, 1 = 1.55077 and z  = 0.8 × z     ¯. Table 10 below shows the targeted moments in the
data and in the calibrated reference model. The one visible discrepancy is in the underestimation
of the standard deviation of the spreads.

                          Table 10: Reference Model - Calibration Moments

                                                                 Data     Model
                               Debt-to-output mean               0.35       0.33
                               Spread standard deviation        0.036      0.020
                               Correlation output-spread        -0.29      -0.26




of our specification (19) when 0 = 0. In their papern, given the shock z , output is

                                              z                0 + 1 z < 0
                                 output =
                                              z (1 - 0 - 1 z ) otherwise

Defining the cost threshold as z   -0 /1 , the term in the second line becomes z (1 + 1 z  - 1 z ). This is
identical to output in our benchmark model z (z , d ) according to (19) once we substitute 1 = 1 .

                                                       58
