                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DOES THE HEALTHCARE EDUCATIONAL MARKET RESPOND TO SHORT-RUN
                          LOCAL DEMAND?

                                       Marcus Dillender
                                      Andrew I. Friedson
                                        Cong T. Gian
                                       Kosali I. Simon

                                     Working Paper 26088
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26088


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019




The authors thank Hannah Maxey, Joanne Spetz and seminar participants at Ball State University
for their comments and suggestions. The authors also thank Livia Crim, Maggie Hopkins,
Siddartha Rao and Jeanette Samyn for excellent research assistance. This research did not
receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit
sectors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Marcus Dillender, Andrew I. Friedson, Cong T. Gian, and Kosali I. Simon. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does the Healthcare Educational Market Respond to Short-Run Local Demand?
Marcus Dillender, Andrew I. Friedson, Cong T. Gian, and Kosali I. Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 26088
July 2019
JEL No. I11,I23,I25

                                           ABSTRACT

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) increased demand for healthcare across
the U.S., but it is unclear if or how the supply side has responded to meet this demand. In this
paper, we take advantage of plausibly exogenous geographical heterogeneity in the ACA to
examine the healthcare education sector's response to increased demand for healthcare services.
We look across educational fields, types of degrees, and types of institutions, paying particular
attention to settings where our conceptual model predicts heightened responses. We find no
statistically significant evidence of increases in graduates and can rule out fairly modest effects.
This implies that healthcare production may have adjusted to increased demand from insurance
expansion in other ways rather than primarily through new graduates of local healthcare
educational markets.


Marcus Dillender                                 Cong T. Gian
W.E. Upjohn Institute for                        Doctoral Student
Employment Research                              O'Neil School of Public and
300 S. Westnedge Ave.                            Environmental Affairs
Kalamazoo, MI 49007                              Indiana University
marcusdillender@gmail.com                        Rm 300
                                                 1315 East Tenth Street
Andrew I. Friedson                               Bloomington, IN 47408
Department of Economics                          tgian@iu.edu
University of Colorado Denver
Lawrence Street Center 460T                      Kosali I. Simon
Campus Box 181                                   O'Neill School of Public and
P.O. Box 173364                                  Environmental Affairs
Denver, CO 80217-3364                            Indiana University
andrew.friedson@ucdenver.edu                     Rm 357
                                                 1315 East Tenth Street
                                                 Bloomington, IN 47408
                                                 and NBER
                                                 simonkos@indiana.edu
1. Introduction


Concern regarding the adequacy of the U.S. healthcare workforce has guided public policy for
several decades (McHugh et al., 2008, Bärnighausen & Bloom 2011, Donelan et al., 2010).
Policy interventions (e.g., visa waivers, federal loan programs) have attempted to influence
demand and supply for healthcare workers along both geographic and specialty lines (Richards,
Chou, & Sasso, 2009). Additionally, the recent rise in opioid overdose mortality has heightened
concerns about the adequacy of the existing workforce to treat addiction disorders, leading to
large infusions of government funds to increase workforce education and training (Beck,
Manderscheid, & Buerhaus, 2018). Sustained recruitment policy efforts suggest a lack of
adequate response in the educational market to demand for workers in the healthcare sector.


Evidence from studies of local economic conditions suggests that the educational sector on the
whole appears very responsive to local economic conditions for workers in general (Blom,
Cadena, & Keys, 2015; Hershbein, 2012; Kahn, 2010; Johnson, 2013) as well as to expectations
about future returns to specific degrees (Baker et al., 2018; Long, Goldhaber, & Huntington-
Klein, 2015; Wiswall & Zafar, 2015). However, these studies also provide evidence suggesting
that students are often not fully aware of labor market conditions when choosing general
educational avenues. Furthermore, the political sustainability of the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act (ACA) has been in question from its inception, with over 50 congressional
attempts at repeal by early 2014 (O'Keefe, 2014); this may have affected long-term decision-
making regarding career choices. Thus, it is not clear that healthcare education would respond to
the increased demand for healthcare arising from insurance enrollment gains following policies
such as the ACA. Understanding the education sector response is important for economists
insofar as it provides evidence on structural economic adjustment behavior to downstream
demand shocks, particularly when such shocks occur through upstream public policy actions.


In this study, we examine whether increases in demand for healthcare resulting from the ACA
led to subsequent responses in the education market (i.e. training additional workers to meet that
demand) in the short run. The 2014 provisions of the ACA insured about 20 million low-to-
middle-income non-elderly adults (Garrett & Gangopadhyaya, 2016). Going at least as far back

                                                 2
as the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (Manning et al., 1987), there is a considerable body
of evidence demonstrating that expanded health insurance coverage and increased health
insurance generosity increase utilization of healthcare by lowering the amount that the consumer
pays for care. Indeed, the 2014 components of the ACA expanded both insurance enrollment
and utilization of care considerably (Courtemanche et al., 2017; Courtemanche et al., 2019;
Frean, Gruber, & Sommers, 2017; Kaestner et al., 2017; Simon, Soni, & Cawley, 2017; Shartzer,
Long, & Anderson, 2015; Sommers, Blendon, & Orav, 2016; Sommers et al., 2015; Wherry &
Miller, 2016; Miller & Wherry, 2017). However, it is unclear how, if at all, the supply side of the
healthcare market adjusted to the influx of newly insured under the ACA.


Shortages of healthcare workers were a major concern even before the ACA was fully
implemented (Sargen, Hooker, & Cooper, 2011; Frogner et al., 2015; Ku et al., 2009;
Bodenheimer & Pham, 2010; Juraschek et al., 2012; Dall et al., 2017; Parente et al., 2017;
Staiger, Auerbach, & Buerhaus, 2012; Kaiser Family Foundation, 2009). If the healthcare sector
did not have excess capacity prior to the ACA, then to avoid congestion problems, other
adjustments within the healthcare market would be necessary to meet the new demand for care
upon full implementation of the ACA. For example, the market could increase utilization of
labor inputs (increasing hours, hiring more workers, or adjusting the mix of workers to take
greater advantage of gains from specialization) or could employ new technologies that allow for
greater worker productivity (for example, Telehealth; Chen, Mehrotra, & Auerbach, 2014).
However, to some extent the market did not fully adjust, or did not adjust as quickly as
necessary: congestion problems have already been observed in wait times for Medicaid
appointments (Miller & Wherry, 2017) and in the ambulance sector (Courtemanche et al., 2019).


Dillender (2018) documents that the healthcare sector did increase the demand for healthcare
labor as measured by additional job postings. However, it is unknown if this demand for new
workers was met, and if so, if it was met by existing reserve workers, by workers from other
countries or sectors, or by newly trained workers. Similarly, it is not clear if students or schools
have reacted to the increased demand, or if they even perceived the increased demand to likely




                                                  3
last in the long term given the ACA's political uncertainty. 1 Our study complements this work by
exploring the extent to which the educational pipeline for health professionals responded to
additional demand in the healthcare labor market. Specifically, we examine whether the number
of healthcare degrees completed, which is the joint product of demand and supply in the
education market, increased in states that expanded Medicaid under the ACA relative to states
that did not expand Medicaid. Our investigation rests on the assumption that the difference in
new healthcare demand between states that expanded Medicaid and states that did not expand
Medicaid is adequate for detecting statistically meaningful estimates of the local healthcare
educational sector response. To detect this response, we utilize graduation counts in health
professional training programs that were mandatorily reported via the Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System (IPEDS). We find no evidence of educational pipeline increases and are
able to rule out fairly small magnitudes, even in the case of subsectors that might be particularly
responsive (such as one-year degrees). Our results thus imply that pipeline increases for
healthcare degrees do not represent one of the major ways in which the supply side is adjusting.


2. Background & Literature Review
During the implementation of the ACA, many stakeholders pointed to the need for increased
education and training of healthcare workers and argued that the ACA would be a boon for the
healthcare industry (Institute of Medicine, 2014; White, 2018). This suggests potential for the
ACA to lead to an increase in healthcare education enrollment. However, it remains unclear
whether the ACA's Medicaid expansions, which account for much of the increase in health
insurance coverage, indeed influenced education decisions, particularly given the tendency of
Medicaid to reimburse providers at lower rates than other forms of insurance (Zuckerman,
Williams, & Stockley, 2009; Mabry et al., 2016).


While the ACA did not include major changes to funding for medical education, it did
redistribute the allocation of resident slots for physicians so that hospitals in states with lower
resident-to-population ratios have more slots as of 2011. As many non-Medicaid-expansion



1
  It is also possible that schools in non-expansion states expected to have their state expand in the near future and
initiated steps to expand their programs. For the case of nurses, there is some evidence in DiNardi (2019) that
demand may have been met through an increase in hours worked.

                                                           4
states had low resident-to-population ratios prior to the ACA (Mullan, Chen, & Steinmetz,
2013), this redistribution likely brought more resident slots to states that did not expand
Medicaid. This redistribution could have reduced the need for additional physicians in states that
gained resident slots. However, since the market for physicians tends to be national, we would
not expect changes to local conditions to have large effects on physician training. Other changes
to medical education from the ACA are small. For example, the ACA funded nurse practitioner
programs as part of a demonstration project limited to 5 hospitals and their associated care
networks (Barnes et al., 2018, Clark-Shirley et al., 2018). Other recent reforms, such as the
Massachusetts Health Insurance Reform of 2006, expanded state-level loan forgiveness
programs, which incentivized interstate migration of healthcare labor (Massachusetts Department
of Public Health, 2008; Friedson & Marier, 2017). 2


While prices in private markets can freely adjust through market forces to address shortages,
Medicaid and Medicare payments are set by the government, potentially causing imbalances
between demand and supply sides of relevant markets (such as labor shortages) to persist. Given
concerns about shortages of healthcare workers, which in many cases pre-date the ACA (Sargen,
Hooker, & Cooper, 2011; Frogner et al., 2015; Ku et al., 2009; Bodenheimer & Pham, 2010;
Juraschek et al., 2012; Dall et al., 2017; Staiger, Auerbach, & Buerhaus, 2012; and Kaiser
Family Foundation, 2009), coupled with the fact that demand from public health insurance is
expected to continue to grow as more states adopt Medicaid expansions and more of the U.S.
population becomes age-eligible for Medicare, the health education pipeline response to
increased demand for healthcare has important implications for the health of the entire sector.


The ACA Medicaid Expansions
Medicaid is a federal-state partnership program that provides health insurance to people with low
incomes and to those with qualifying disabilities. Though the federal government sets baselines
for which populations qualify and for what services must be covered by the plan, each state is
allowed some leeway in increasing generosity while using federal matching funds, and greater
leeway in expansions that involve state-only funds. While Medicaid has traditionally provided


2
  Staiger, Auerbach, & Buerhaus (2011) also found that healthcare employment grew faster in Massachusetts
relative to control states following the Massachusetts health insurance reform.

                                                       5
coverage to low-income families with children, the ACA initially required that states expand
Medicaid coverage to all non-elderly adults with incomes below 138 percent of the Federal
Poverty Level (FPL) in 2014 or lose all federal Medicaid funding. 3 However, in the 2012 case
of National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius, the Supreme Court ruled that taking
away all other Medicaid funding for noncompliance was unconstitutional, meaning that states
could opt out of the Medicaid expansion without punishment. As of the end of 2017, 33 states
and the District of Columbia had adopted the ACA's Medicaid expansion.


Previous research has documented the effect of the ACA's Medicaid expansions on health
insurance coverage. These studies have found that the expansion increased the number of insured
Americans and their use of healthcare services (Courtemanche et al., 2017; Courtemanche et al.,
2019; Frean, Gruber, & Sommers, 2017; Kaestner et al., 2017; Simon, Soni, & Cawley, 2017;
Shartzer, Long, & Anderson, 2015; Sommers, Blendon, & Orav, 2016; Sommers et al., 2015;
Wherry & Miller, 2016). As with other Medicaid expansions, the research that considers crowd-
out arising from the ACA's Medicaid expansions finds that the ACA's Medicaid expansion
crowded out some private coverage. For example, Kaestner et al. (2017) find that about 25
percent of people who received Medicaid coverage from the ACA's Medicaid expansion would
have had private coverage if not for the Medicaid expansion. Given that private coverage tends
to reimburse at higher rates than Medicaid does, this crowd-out has implications for the potential
educational response to the ACA's Medicaid expansion at the margin. To the extent that there
was crowding out of private coverage that reimburses providers at high rates, the Medicaid
expansion may have led to a smaller increase in the educational pipeline for new healthcare
workers. However, it should be noted that the ACA temporarily increased Medicaid
reimbursement rates to equal Medicare reimbursement rates for primary care services for 2013
and 2014, so Medicaid's reimbursement rates were not as far below private reimbursement rates
during these years (Alexander and Schnell, 2019).




3
  Under the Medicaid expansion, the federal government provided a proportion of the additional funds needed for
the program expansion that was far larger that its usual contribution. Prior to the ACA expansion, usual federal
contributions covered between 50 and 73.05 percent of a state's Medicaid program, whereas under the expansion,
the newly insured would receive 100 percent federal funding for the first year, falling eventually to 90 percent
federal funding for 2020 and onwards. See Rudowitz (2014) for further details.

                                                        6
The increases in health insurance coverage from the ACA would be expected to increase the
demand for healthcare. Ahead of the ACA's full implementation, Abraham (2014) produced a
variety of estimates of the likely impact of the ACA's coverage expansions on the demand for
healthcare using data from the Medical Expenditure Survey (MEPS) and estimates of the effect
of health insurance coverage from the prior literature. Abraham's MEPS analysis, which assumes
that the newly insured would respond to having health insurance in the same way as the typical
publicly insured patient, suggests that the ACA would be expected to increase inpatient stays,
emergency department visits, office-based visits, and prescription drugs by 3 to 6 percent. The
implied effects from estimates in the literature suggest a wider range of possible effects of the
ACA for inpatient stays, emergency department visits, and prescription drugs, while the implied
effect on office-based visits is a 6 to 10 percent increase. Estimates of the effect of the ACA's
Medicaid expansion vary widely across studies and settings, but the evidence points to sizable
increases in the use of healthcare as a result of the expansions, particularly for elective services,
like primary care, mental healthcare, and preventive care. Mazurenko et al. (2018) and Gruber
and Sommers (2019) provide a review of research on the effects of the ACA's Medicaid
expansion.


The increase in the use of healthcare services due to the ACA, coupled with concerns about
shortages of healthcare workers, raises concerns of increased wait times and decreased access to
care. Early research examining spillovers has found mixed results. While Benitez et al. (2018)
and Carey et al. (2018) do not find evidence that the Medicaid expansion increased wait times or
had negative spillovers on the previously insured, Courtemanche et al. (2019) find evidence that
counties that experienced larger increases in health insurance coverage from the ACA also
experienced increased wait times for ambulances, and Miller and Wherry (2017) find that
Medicaid enrollees faced longer wait times to obtain appointments in states that expanded their
Medicaid programs.


Evidence on the impact of the ACA on local labor market outcomes has been limited. Dillender
(2018) finds that healthcare employers have posted more advertisements for healthcare workers
in response to the ACA's Medicaid expansions. This finding is consistent with earlier findings
that dental providers respond to Medicaid dental expansions by hiring more hygienists

                                                  7
(Buchmueller, Miller, & Vujicic, 2016). However, while Dillender's (2018) study suggests an
attempted employer hiring response to increased Medicaid coverage, it is unclear whether the
positions were filled, and if so where the workers came from, especially since the increase in
attempted hiring largely applied to lower-skilled, less mobile professions and because
unemployment for healthcare sector workers was already low prior to the ACA. A change in the
education pipeline is one possible source of additional healthcare workers, but little research has
explored the impact of Medicaid expansions on this pipeline.


3. Conceptual Framework
In general, educational decisions respond to local economic conditions (Betts and McFarland,
1995; Blom, Cadena, & Keys, 2015; Hershbein, 2012; Kahn, 2010; Johnson, 2013) as well as to
expectations about the future returns of specific degrees (Arcidiacono, Hotz, and Kang, 2010;
Baker et al., 2018; Beffy, Fougère, and Maurel, 2012; Betts, 1996; Binelli, 2017; Long,
Goldhaber, & Huntington-Klein, 2015; Wiswall & Zafar, 2015; Zafar, 2011). However,
responsiveness depends on how well such signals are transmitted to potential students (Hastings,
Neilson, & Zimmerman, 2015; Hastings et al., 2018). This holds true in the healthcare sector as
well, where educational decisions and specialty choices are driven by an individual's rate of
return for a degree and specialty. 4 The main difference for the healthcare sector is that, due to
strict licensure requirements in many parts of the healthcare workforce, the expected return of
education often includes economic rents due to restricted entry (Kleiner et al., 2016).


We expect that the impact of the ACA on the educational pipeline will depend on how the ACA
influenced an individual's perceived rate of return for medical education. As the ACA did not
directly influence licensure requirements or other barriers to entry, any changes would stem from
an individual's perception of future employment stability and earnings. 5 From the point of view
of a potential student in healthcare, the effect of the ACA on these outcomes is somewhat
ambiguous: individual earnings will be determined in part by the volume and payer mix of
patients seen by an individual's employer. Thus, an increase in individuals with Medicaid health



4
 See Nicholson and Propper (2011) for a review of the relevant literature.
5
 We assume that the ACA did not systematically change individuals' perception of other sources of utility from a
medical career, such as job satisfaction.

                                                        8
insurance could increase worker earnings; it could also decrease those earnings if the patient mix
shifts towards patients with less generous insurance plans, such as Medicaid. Further, to the
extent that potential students see the ACA as temporary, any effect of the policy on their
decisions would be muted. 6


It is also possible that the ACA has impacted the educational pipeline for the healthcare
workforce by influencing the behavior of educational institutions; since graduation outcomes are
the joint product of individual- and organization-level choices, it is unclear how the educational
sector's output would be affected. Schools would need to be convinced that the ACA creates
additional demand for their educational services, that this increase is worth expanding their
offerings (either by increasing cohort sizes or by offering new programs), and that the increase is
sustainable (i.e. that the ACA will not be short-lived). But even if schools want to increase their
healthcare offerings, it is unclear whether they will be able to do so, as an inability to find faculty
or clinical sites can prevent schools from expanding healthcare education (Cleary et al., 2009).
For example, it is possible that increases in utilization of care may force hospitals to reallocate
labor resources toward meeting patient needs and away from traineeship offerings, making it
difficult for schools to facilitate students' clinical experience. Additionally, institutions that
depend heavily on public funding may be less flexible if public budgets are not adjusted to match
the institution's desired growth.


The above conceptual framework helps to make some predictions. If the ACA Medicaid
expansion has indeed induced the healthcare educational pipeline to increase the volume of new
healthcare workers, then we might expect certain types of degrees to be more responsive.
Specifically, degrees that take less time to complete would represent a smaller time investment
for students and a smaller resource investment for educational institutions, and as such may be
the quickest to respond to any signals from the labor market when the changes to those signals
have an uncertain future. These short programs also tend to prepare students for careers with
smaller barriers to entry upon graduation, such as fewer and less complicated licensing exams.


6
  Potential students may be constrained by their ability to afford schooling or may run up against borrowing limits
that constrain their ability to finance a degree. However, loan limits are higher for healthcare degrees than for other
degrees at a similar level of education. See, for example, the limits on unsubsidized Stafford loans:
https://www.edvisors.com/college-loans/federal/stafford/graduate/

                                                           9
4. Data
Our institution-level data on degree completion come from the Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System (IPEDS), which is compiled from surveys conducted by the U.S.
Department of Education's National Center for Education Statistics. By an amendment to the
Higher Education Act of 1965, participation in the surveys is required for all colleges,
universities, and technical and vocational institutions participating in the federal student financial
aid programs. In addition to containing information about each academic institution, IPEDS
contains counts of the number of graduates receiving degrees for each of the school's programs,
which are the main outcome of interest in this study. This program-level information includes the
Classification of Instructional Programs code (CIPCODE), the number of years the program
takes to complete, and whether the program is online. For more information on IPEDS data, refer
to the IPEDS Data Center (2018). 7


As our focus is on the educational pipeline for healthcare workers, we limit our analytical sample
to degrees in healthcare professions, which are those with a two-digit CIPCODE of 51. We
exclude from this sample medical degrees (MD and DO degrees) and dental degrees (D.D.S. and
D.M.D.) as the physician and dentist labor market tends to be national, and changes in the rules
for residency slots as part of the ACA make it difficult to accurately identify the sole effect of the
Medicaid expansion as the number of slots increased in "control" states. Additionally, as
physicians take many years to complete their education and enter the workforce, any response to
the Medicaid expansion would only be partially captured in the time horizon of our data. This
leaves all other postsecondary degrees tied to healthcare professionals. 8' 9 To ensure that our
sample includes several years both before and after the ACA Medicaid expansions, we study the
school years ending between 2010 and 2017, which gives us 4 years of post-ACA data, making
the interpretation of our results a short-run effect. IPEDS data also include information on type

7
  For examples of other studies that use IPEDS data, refer to Deming et al. (2016); Denning, Marx, & Turner (2019);
and Gilpin, Saunders, & Stoddard (2015).
8
  This includes degrees that are required before career advancement for practicing professionals, such as a Master's
in Science in Nursing (which is usually obtained by a Registered Nurse before becoming a Nurse Practitioner).
Detailed definitions of degrees contained within each CIPCODE, as well as descriptions of degree length and
institutional definitions within IPEDS, can be found in Appendix B.
9
  Distributions of graduates by number of years of completion and healthcare profession for our sample are
presented in Appendix Figures A1-A3.

                                                        10
of institution; dividing institutions according to type of control and degree levels offered, we
arrive at nine institutional categories. 10


Information on states' decisions about adopting the Medicaid expansions comes from the Kaiser
Family Foundation (2019). Most states that adopted the Medicaid expansion did so in January
2014 as the ACA originally stipulated, though several states did so at later dates. For our baseline
results, we focus on states that expanded Medicaid in 2014. 11 Additionally, several states had
expanded health insurance coverage to childless adults substantially prior to 2014, and so were
not fully treated by the ACA's Medicaid expansion. To avoid including states that are only
partially treated in the treatment group, we exclude these states as well. 12 Each state's status as
an early, on-time, late, or non-expander is shown in Figure 1.


We combine information from several other sources to arrive at our final analysis samples at both
the state and county levels. We obtain population and unemployment rates from the Census
Population Estimate and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). County-level versions of these
variables come from the Census Bureau's Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates (SAIPE).
Other county-level characteristics come from the County Health Rankings file from the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation.


Table 1 reports means and standard deviations for the variables most pertinent to our analyses at
both the state and county levels. The first row of Table 1 shows means and standard deviations
for the number of graduates in the healthcare sector in general. The next seven rows show means
and standard deviations for relevant subsets of graduates based on field of study, length of study,
and institution type. 13 The next 5 rows show the descriptive statistics for variables used as
controls.



10
   Control categories are public, private not-for-profit, and private for-profit. Level categories are 4-year and higher
(4 year), 2- but less than 4-year (2 year), and less than 2-year. For example: public 4-year is one of the institution
types.
11
   This excludes NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, and LA.
12
   This excludes CA, CT, MN, NJ, and WA. Several existing papers also classify these states as partial expansion
states (see Wherry & Miller, 2016; Soni et al., 2017; Kaestner et al., 2017; McMorrow et al., 2017).
13
   Additional information on the distribution of degrees by type and length to completion can be found in Appendix
Figures A1-A3.

                                                           11
5. Empirical Strategy
To examine the effect of the ACA Medicaid expansion on the educational pipeline for the
healthcare workforce, we first estimate the following difference-in-differences model using
ordinary least squares (OLS):


 = 0 + 1 ( ×  ) + 2  +  +  +                                                                               (1),


where yst is number of degrees granted in all or subsets of healthcare educational programs for
state s in year t.  ×  is a binary variable that takes on the value 1 during the
time period in which a state has expanded its Medicaid program; it takes on the value 0
otherwise, making 1 the difference-in-differences estimator for the effect of the Medicaid
expansion. Under the assumptions that degrees granted in expansion and non-expansion states
followed parallel trends prior to the ACA, and that no other circumstances changed
systematically in one group at the same time as the ACA Medicaid expansion, 1 , the

difference-in-differences estimator, is an estimate of the causal effect of the ACA Medicaid
expansion on the number of degrees granted in the short run.  is a vector of state fixed effects,
 is a vector of year fixed effects, and  is a idiosyncratic error term.  is a vector of time-
varying state-level control variables including the unemployment rate, median household
income, and the poverty rate. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. We also estimate
the same model where the unit of observation is the county-year rather than the state-year. In
these models we drop all counties with a population under 10,000 in the 2010 census to avoid
control variables calculated with unreasonably small sample sizes. 14 For county-level analyses,
we also test for openings or closings of the only healthcare educational program in a county due
to the Medicaid expansion by estimating equation (1) with a binary variable for whether a county
has any graduates as an outcome. The standard errors for the county-level analyses are also
clustered at the state level.




14
  We also conducted county-level "dose response" analyses similar to the analyses found in Courtemanche et al.
(2019) but did not obtain additional insights from them. We do not present the results in the main body of the paper
as these analyses failed the test for parallel trends, but they can be found in Appendix C.

                                                         12
We first estimate equation (1) for all healthcare degrees in the IPEDS. We then look at degrees
that take less than one year to complete. We expect that programs with shorter time to
completion are able to respond to increases in demand for additional workers more rapidly. 15
Though all institutional forms may see increased demand for education, it may be that private
institutions are the savviest at adjusting to market conditions; they also may use more aggressive
recruitment strategies (such as advertisement). We thus estimate equation (1) for for-profit
institutions. We then run the analysis for several subsets of the data. We analyze the four most
commonly awarded healthcare degree categories as a group and individually: Registered,
Clinical Nursing, Nursing Administration, and Research (CIPCODE 51.38); Allied Health and
Medical Assisting Services (CIPCODE 51.08); Health and Medical Admin Services (CIPCODE
51.07); and Practical Nursing, Vocational Nursing, and Nursing Assistants (CIPCODE 51.39).


To assess whether pre-treatment trends differ between expansion and non-expansion states, as
well as to explore the time pattern of the treatment effect, we use a full event study regression
model as follows:


 = 0 + 2017
       =2010   1[ = ]   + 2  +  +  +                                                               (2)


The vector of coefficients  in equation (2) for the pre-treatment interactions allows us to form a
test for the parallel trend assumption, whereas the coefficients of post-treatment interactions help
us capture additional impact in the years following the reform as well as the overall treatment
effect. We use 2013, the year before most states expanded Medicaid, as the omitted year (year
zero in event time). We estimate equation (2) for all of the subsamples used for equation (1).


While we can directly test for differential pre-trends between expansion and non-expansion
states, it may still be the case that certain non-expansion states would provide more satisfactory
counterfactuals than others. To help reinforce the validity of our analysis, in addition to
estimating standard difference-in-differences models, we also implement the synthetic control


15
  We also conduct this analysis for degrees taking one year or less excluding nursing degrees, to remove the effect
of nursing continuing education for career advancement, which does not represent "new" entrants into the
workforce. Results are similar with this additional restriction and are available upon request.

                                                         13
method described by Abadie, Diamond, & Hainmueller (2010), which produces a set of weights
for all non-expansion states that minimizes the difference between pre-intervention outcomes in
expansion and non-expansion states. After selecting the weights for our synthetic control group,
we then calculate the estimated effect of the Medicaid expansion as the difference in mean
degree completions between the expansion states and the synthetic control group following the
Medicaid expansion.


We assess the statistical significance of our synthetic control estimates using permutation tests.
Specifically, we randomly select 1,000 sets of 22 treatment states and then replicate the synthetic
control approach for each set of randomly chosen treatment states. We then calculate the share of
estimates from the randomly selected treatment states that are larger than our original estimate,
which is the p-value from a one-sided test and reflects the likelihood that we would obtain
similarly sized estimates from randomly chosen treatment states. 16


6. Results
Graphical Evidence
Figure 2 plots trends in the number of graduates with healthcare degrees separately for expansion
and non-expansion states; the vertical dashed line is 2013, the last year before the
implementation of the ACA Medicaid expansions. For both expansion and non-expansion states,
the number of graduates remains steady and roughly parallel both pre- and post-ACA. Thus,
these figures show no obvious changes in the overall data before or after the ACA expansion, in
states with vs. without the expansion.


The above graphical analysis is repeated in Figure 3, Panel A. Panels B, C, and D show trends in
graduates separately for the four most common health professions in the IPEDS, for all
healthcare degrees that take less than one year to complete, and for healthcare degrees from for-
profit institutions, respectively. Again, there is no obvious change in trend for Medicaid
expansion states at the same time as the ACA Medicaid expansion. For degrees from for-profit
institutions, there is a slight uptick in the number of degrees awarded in the non-Medicaid


16
 See Hu et al. (2018) for an example of a study that takes a similar approach to study the effects of the ACA's
Medicaid expansion.

                                                        14
expansion states starting in 2015. In Figure 4, we plot trends in the number of graduates for each
of the four most common degrees individually. There is also no obvious change in trend for
Medicaid expansion states during the ACA Medicaid expansion in these subgroups. This
graphical analysis suggests that healthcare degree receipt trended similarly prior to the ACA for
both expansion and non-expansion states and also suggests that there were no major trend breaks
after the ACA.


Difference-in-Differences
Table 2 reports results from our estimation of equation (1). Column 1 reports 1 for equations

with the state-year as the unit of observation, whereas columns 2 and 3 are for equations with the
county-year as the unit of observation. Columns 1 and 2 use number of graduates as the outcome
variable, and column 3 uses a binary variable taking on the value of 1 if a county has at least one
graduate and the value of 0 otherwise. 17 Each Panel (A through D4) represents a different subset
of degrees, corresponding to the subsets used in the above graphical analysis. Only the
difference-in-differences estimators (1 ) are reported.
                                                        18




We do not find an effect of Medicaid expansion on the number of graduates at either the state or
county level that is significant at conventional levels; we are able to rule out year-over-year
changes in state-wide graduation as small as 1,715 graduates (5.6% of baseline), with 90 percent
confidence in our main specification. 19 In our alternate specification that sets the dependent
variable to be the log of the number of graduates plus one (Appendix Table A1), we can rule out
increases as large as 2.8 percent of baseline, with 90 percent confidence. A full consideration of
the reasonableness of this magnitude would consider which plausible increases in the healthcare
workforce would be adequate to provide care for the difference in newly insured residents caused
by the identification strategy we use: a difference in difference analysis of expansion vs. non
expansion states over time. We encourage future research to consider different ways of assessing
the ranges of estimates we can rule out, but for now, we draw comparison to other research using

17
   Full event time analyses and stratification based on type of program for this outcome can be found in Appendix D.
18
   Full regression results are available upon request.
19
   We arrive at this number by taking the coefficient (0.06) and standard error (0.99) reported in row 1, column 1 of
panel A in Table 2, which leads to an upper bound CI of is 0.06+0.99*1.645 = 1.715 (in thousands). The baseline
number of graduates in 2013 is 30,910 (Table A2, first column, reports baseline mean), thus the 1,715 represents
5.6%.

                                                         15
IPEDS to examine response to wage increases. Long, Goldhaber, and Huntington-Klein (2015)
also use the IPEDs and find that increasing wages in a general field by 10% predicts an increase
in graduations for majors associated with that field by up to 2.21%. Thus, the magnitude of
effects we can rule out resulting from the ACA is similar to that associated with small but not
miniscule incentive changes from other contexts. As states have an average of roughly 240,000
healthcare workers as of 2016, 20 the 90 percent confidence interval of our estimates can rule out
a short-run increase in the annual rate of growth of the number of healthcare workers through
degree attainment of more than 0.7 percent (1,715/240,000) for states on average.


This pattern of results, which indicates insignificant coefficients that can rule out fairly small
effects, is consistent for all subsamples: in eight estimations of the effect of the Medicaid
expansion at the state level and eight estimations of the effect of the Medicaid expansion at the
county level, we consistently find results that are not statistically significant at conventional
levels with narrow confidence intervals. The sole exception is Panel D3, the effect of the
Medicaid expansion on the number of degrees in Health and Medical Administrative services,
which shows a decrease in the number of graduates significant at the 10 percent level; although
marginally significant, these results are opposite those suggested by theory.


County-level estimates are also largely indicative of no effect of expansion on the educational
market. We do estimate a small but unexpected negative effect (a one percent decrease) of the
Medicaid expansion on the likelihood of a county having at least one graduate for all healthcare
sector degrees. This result is statistically significant at the 5 percent level and appears to be
driven largely by degrees in the most common fields; we estimate a 2 percent reduction from
Medicaid expansion on the likelihood of a county having at least one graduate in the top 4
professions. This estimate is statistically significant at the one percent level. There is a similar,
statistically significant estimate for degrees in Health and Medical Administrative services; there
are negative (but insignificant) point estimates for all other types of degrees except for those
taking less than one year to complete. These decreases in the likelihood of counties having




20
   The national healthcare workforce is 12.4 million (BLS, 2016). Thus we obtain 240,000 as the average over 50
states and Washington D.C.

                                                       16
graduates without corresponding changes in the overall number of graduates are consistent with
a consolidation of larger programs into fewer counties.


Event Study
We plot event time results and 95 percent confidence intervals around the estimates in Figures 5
and 6 for state-level analyses; we provide full regression results in Appendix Tables A1 and
A2. 21 Recall that 2013 is the omitted year in the event time analysis and as such is not reported
on the figures. None of the analyses have strongly noticeable pre-ACA trends, and the figures
that may be slightly suggestive of a pre-ACA trend (Figure 5, Panel C and Figure 6 Panel A) do
not have any point estimates in the pre-ACA period that are statistically significant at
conventional levels. Out of 48 total pre-ACA point estimates, only one is statistically significant
at the 10 percent level, well within the expected rate for that confidence level.


Post-ACA estimates are either flat or suggestive of a decrease in the number of degrees awarded
in Medicaid expansion states relative to non-expansion states, particularly for the healthcare
sector as a whole, the top 4 professions, for-profit institutions, and for health and medical
administrative services; the point estimates are only consistently significant at conventional
levels for the last of these subsamples.


Synthetic Control
Figures 7 and 8 plot synthetic control analyses in event time; the relevant dependent variable
means (to show the appropriateness of the match of the synthetic control) as well as tests for
significance of the estimates can be found in Appendix Tables A3 and A4. Broadly, the
synthetic control estimation reinforces the story emerging from the difference-in-differences and
event time analyses: the ACA Medicaid expansion either has no effect of on the number of
graduates or results in a small (and in the synthetic control analyses statistically insignificant at
conventional levels) decrease in the number of graduates.


7. Extensions



21
     Event time figures for county-level analyses are qualitatively similar and available upon request.

                                                            17
We next extend our analysis in two ways. Our first extension examines an additional data source
on the volume of new labor inputs passing through the healthcare educational pipeline.
Specifically, we examine test passing counts for the U.S.'s national examination for nursing
certification: The National Council Licensure Examination (NCLEX) for both Registered Nurses
(the NCLEX-RN) and Practical Nurses (the NCLEX-PN). All nurses who practice in the U.S.
are required to pass these exams before they can obtain their licenses, and neither NCLEX exam
limits the number of people who may take the exam at any given time. The robustness of our
insights from the IPEDS analysis can be strengthened through a comparison of results with this
alternate measure of state level healthcare labor inflows. Our second extension is to examine
data on state-level spending on higher education from the Annual Survey of State and Local
Government Finances. These financial data allow us to examine one possible mechanism for the
null findings above: public funding for higher education may not have changed in response to the
ACA, making it difficult for educational programs that rely on this source of funding to grow.


NCLEX
To study the impact of the ACA on the volume of people taking the NCLEX, we draw data from
the 2010-2017 NCLEX Examination Statistics, which are put out annually by the National
Council of State Boards of Nursing. 22 These annual reports contain information on the number
of individuals passing each exam in each state, which serves as a measure of the volume of
nurses entering the labor force (the exam passing numbers include individuals who graduated
from programs in previous years but did not take or pass the exam in those years). Only
individuals who have completed accredited nursing programs can register to take the NCLEX.
Figure 9 reports the number of individuals passing the exam in Medicaid expanding and non-
expanding states over the same time period as the above analysis using the IPEDS. The general
pattern is similar to that seen in the IPEDS graduation data: expansion and non-expansion states
follow similar trends, and expansion states do not display increases in the volume of exam
passers in a noticeable manner at the time of the ACA Medicaid expansions.


We next conduct difference-in-differences and event study analyses (estimation of equations 1
and 2) using the state level NCLEX pass counts. These results are reported in Table 3 and

22
     All annual NCLEX reports can be found at https://www.ncsbn.org/1236.htm.

                                                        18
Figure 10. We find a small but insignificant positive effect of the Medicaid expansion on the
number of people passing the NCLEX-PN and a negative and significant effect of the Medicaid
expansion on the number of people passing the NCLEX-RN, which appears to be an artifact of a
pre-existing negative trend. Neither of these results contradict our earlier findings of a null effect
of the Medicaid expansion on the number of graduates with U.S. healthcare degrees.


The NCLEX Examination Statistics also provide information on the number of international
graduates passing the two NCLEX exams each year. The data do not report information on
where these graduates intend to practice, or if they intend to move to the U.S. at all (as passing
the NCLEX gives an individual the ability but not the obligation to practice nursing in the U.S.).
However, the time series of international exam pass volume, which is reported in Figure 11, does
provide some suggestive evidence as to the international component of flows into U.S. nursing
labor supply. When the ACA came into effect in 2014, there was an immediate (but temporary)
uptick in the number of international students who passed the NCLEX-PN. After 2 years, this
increase subsided, but was replaced with a larger increase in international students who passed
the NCLEX-RN. This evidence is merely suggestive and not well-identified in an econometric
sense, but does suggest the possibility that one reason for a muted response in the number of
domestic healthcare graduates is that some of the labor demand was being met by in-migration
from the international healthcare workforce or from new international NCLEX passers. The
literature would benefit from future research on the geography of where foreign healthcare
professional in-migrants chose to locate.


State and Local Education Spending
Using the U.S. Census Bureau's Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances
between 2010 and 2016 (the most recent year of available data), we collect for each state the
total spent on higher education, as well as the per capita amount spent on higher education.
Figure 12 reports these values in a time-series. We then use these variables as outcomes for the
difference-in-differences analysis in equation 1 and the event time analysis in equation 2.


Results of these analyses are presented in Table 4 and Figure 13. We again do not find any
effect of the ACA Medicaid expansion that is statistically significant at conventional levels.

                                                 19
Also, the estimate of the impact of the Medicaid expansion on total expenditures is negative and
larger than its standard error, providing some weak evidence that states that expanded Medicaid
may have seen decreases in spending on higher education. Together, this analysis provides some
weak evidence that lack of additional government funding to education (or even a possible
decrease) may have helped to constrain growth in the healthcare educational pipeline, serving as
one possible mechanism for our above results on the number of healthcare profession graduates.


8. Discussion & Conclusion
In this paper, we examine whether the healthcare education market responds in the short run to
the increase in the demand for healthcare labor, which was spurred by the ACA insurance
expansion and its demonstrated increase in access to care. Our conceptual framework suggests
that longer-duration programs may be slower to increase enrollment and graduation and that
local demand conditions may matter less among degrees for occupations with national job
markets. However, we hypothesize that short-duration degrees with local labor markets should
respond to local changes in healthcare demand arising from the ACA's health insurance
expansion.


We test this hypothesis using data from the 2010 to 2017 IPEDS. Our most robust models that
pass the parallel trends tests consistently find either no effect of the ACA Medicaid expansion on
the healthcare workforce educational pipeline or small decreases in graduation numbers. These
results are unchanged across a range of identification strategies and have fairly tight confidence
intervals that allow us to rule out reasonably small levels of growth in the number of graduates.


This pattern of results is somewhat surprising, given the increases in insurance coverage and
utilization of care (Courtemanche et al., 2017; Courtemanche et al., 2019; Frean, Gruber, &
Sommers, 2016; Kaestner et al., 2017; Simon, Soni, & Cawley, 2017; Shartzer, Long, &
Anderson, 2015; Sommers, Blendon, & Orav, 2016; Sommers et al., 2015; Wherry & Miller,
2016), as well as the increases in hiring activity in health fields (Dillender, 2018). A response in
the educational sector would seem likely, given this setting.




                                                 20
There are a few possibilities as to why the educational sector may not have responded.
Dillender's (2018) finding of increased attempted hiring in health fields due to the ACA
Medicaid expansion does not necessarily translate into additional successful hiring or into a
signal of greater potential earnings to students. There is some evidence (Glied & Ma, 2015) that
hospitals were unsuccessful in their hiring attempts, which suggests that unless wages increase
by a large amount it will be difficult to attract more students into the pipeline. In this case,
providers may have been able to stretch capacity by working additional hours (DiNardi 2019),
decreasing the length of patient visits, or taking advantage of technological improvements such
as telemedicine or health information systems (Buntin et al., 2011; Agha, 2014, Chen, Mehrotra,
& Auerbach, 2014).


The other finding in Dillender (2018) was "downskilling," or shifting hiring advertising activity
toward workers with lower levels of human capital and fewer associated skills. A second
possibility is that hiring was successful, but in positions that do not require healthcare degrees.
This would be the case for employees such as medical scribes, who do not have specialized
training, but have been shown to improve the efficiency of existing labor inputs and have
become increasingly popular (Gidwani et al., 2017; Mishra, Kiang, & Grant, 2018; Friedson,
2018).


Since we have access to graduation but not enrollment data, we cannot tell whether enrollment
numbers have risen without affecting graduation rates; it may be that a signal has indeed reached
the healthcare educational pipeline, but that those drawn in by new expansions are less qualified
than those who already would have pursued the field. Another possibility is that institutions may
not be able to expand programs sufficiently, perhaps due to a lack of faculty or insufficient
clinical sites. Lastly, it is possible that actors in the educational market did not see the ACA as a
permanent change and accordingly refrained from altering their investment decisions, or at least
did not do so during the time period studied.


More research is needed to fully understand how the healthcare workforce has adjusted to the
new post-ACA levels of utilization. A lack of increased training is not necessarily indicative of a
future shortfall of capacity but given recent evidence of longer appointment wait times (Miller

                                                  21
and Wherry, 2017), it is becoming increasingly important for economists to understand how
these markets are performing.




                                             22
Acknowledgements

The authors thank Hannah Maxey, Joanne Spetz, and seminar participants at Ball State
University for their comments and suggestions. The authors also thank Livia Crim, Maggie
Hopkins, Siddartha Rao, and Jeanette Samyn for excellent research assistance. This research did
not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit
sectors.

Declaration of Interest: none




                                                23
References
Abadie, A., Diamond, A., & Hainmueller, J. (2010). Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative
Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California's Tobacco Control Program. Journal of the
American statistical Association, 105(490), 493-505.

Abraham, J. (2014). How Might the Affordable Care Act's Coverage Expansion Provisions
Influence Demand for Medical Care? The Milbank Quarterly, 92(1), 63-87.

Agha, L. (2014). The Effect of Health Information Technology on the Costs and Quality of
Medical Care. Journal of Health Economics, 34(March), 19-30.

Alexander, D., and M. Schnell. 2019. "The Impacts of Physician Payments on Patient Access,
Use, and Health" NBER Working Paper No. 26095
Available at https://www.nber.org/papers/w26095

Arcidiacono, P., Hotz, V.J., & Kang, S. (2010). Modeling College Major Choices Using Elicited
Measures of Expectations and Counterfactuals. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Retrieved from http://www.nber.org/papers/w15729.
Baker R., Bettinger, E., Jacob, B., & Marinescu, I. (2018). The Effect of Labor Market
Information on Community College Student's Major Choice. Economics of Education Review,
65(C), 18-30.

Barnes, H., Richard, M., McHugh, M., & Martsolf, G. (2018). Rural and Non-rural Primary Care
Physician Practices Increasingly Rely on Nurse Practitioners. Health Affairs, 37(6), 908-914.

Bärnighausen, T., & Bloom, D.E. (2011). The Global Health Workforce. In Oxford Handbook of
Health Economics, OUP Oxford.

Beck, A., Manderscheid, R., and Buerhaus, P. 2018. "The Future of the Behavioral Health Work-
force: Optimism and Opportunity." American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 54(6), S187-S189.

Beffy, M., Fougère, D., & Maurel, A. (2012). Choosing the Field of Study in Postsecondary
Education: Do Expected Earnings Matter? Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 334-347.

Betts, J.R. (1996). What Do Students Know about Wages? Evidence from a Survey of
Undergraduates. Journal of Human Resources, 31(1), 27-56.

Binelli, C. (2017). Employment and Earnings Expectations of Jobless Young Skilled: Evidence
from Italy, CERPS Working Paper Series. Retrieved from
https://cerspdotorg.files.wordpress.com/2015/09/expectations-skilled-jobless-young-cersp-wp-
15-02.pdf.

Benitez, J.A., Perez, V., & Tipirneni, R. (2018). Did Medicaid Expansion Deteriorate Access to
Care for Privately Insured Patients? Working paper.




                                              24
Betts, J., & McFarland, L. (1995). Safe Port in a Storm: The Impact of Labor- Market Conditions
on Community College Enrollments. Journal of Human Resources, 30(4), 741-765.

Blom, E., Cadena, B.C., & Keys, B. (2015) Investment over the Business Cycle: Insights from
College Major Choice. IZA Discussion Paper 9167.

Bodenheimer, T., & Pham, H.H. 2010. Primary Care: Current Problems and Proposed Solutions.
Health Affairs, 29(5), 799-805.

Buchmueller, T., Miller, S., & Vujicic, M. (2016). How Do Providers Respond to Changes in
Public Health Insurance Coverage? Evidence from Adult Medicaid Dental Benefits. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(4), 70-102.

Buntin, M., Burke, M., Hoaglin, M., & Blumenthal, D. (2011). The Benefit of Health
Information Technology: A Review of the Recent Literature Shows Predominantly Positive
Results. Health Affairs, 30(3), 464-471.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, State Occupational Employment Statistics Survey, May 2016.
Available at https://www.bls.gov/oes/2016/may/oes_nat.htm#29-0000

Carey, C.M., Miller, S., & Wherry, L.R. (2018). The Impact of Insurance Expansions on the
Already Insured: The Affordable Care Act and Medicare. NBER Working Paper No. 25153.

Chen, P.G., Mehrotra, A., & Auerbach, D.I. (2014). Do We Really Need More Physicians?
Responses to Predicted Primary Care Physicians Shortage. Medical Care, 52(2), 95-6.

Cleary, B., McBride, A., McClure, M., & Reinhard, S. (2009). Expanding the Capacity of
Nursing Education. Health Affairs, 28(4), 634-645.

Courtemanche, C., Friedson, A., Koller, A.P., & Rees, D.I. (2019). The Affordable Care Act and
Ambulance Response Times. Journal of Health Economics, 67(in press).

Courtemanche, C., Marton, J., Ukert, B., Yelowitz, A., & Zapata, D. (2017). Early Impacts of the
Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage in Medicaid Expansion and Non-expansion
States. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 36(1), 178-210.

Clark-Shirley, L., Zapata, D., Heck, B., Pedersen, S., Bertane, & C., Gale, B. (2018). Evaluation
of the GNE Demonstration Project, Volume I: Implementation and Impact. Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services. Available from: https://innovation.cms.gov/Files/reports/gne-rtc-
vol1.pdf.

Dall, T., Chakrabarti, R. Iacobucci, W., Hansari, A., & West, T. (2017). "The Complexities of
Physician Supply and Demand: Projections from 2015 to 2030." Washington, DC: Association
of American Medical Colleges. Available https://aamc-
black.global.ssl.fastly.net/production/media/filer_public/a5/c3/a5c3d565-14ec-48fb-974b-
99fafaeecb00/aamc_projections_update_2017.pdf.

                                               25
Deming, D.J., Yuchtman, N., Abulafi, A., Goldin, C., & Katz, L.F. (2016). The Value of
Postsecondary Credentials in the Labor Market: An Experimental Study. American Economic
Review, 106(3), 778-806.

Denning, J.T., Marx, B.M., & Turner, L.J. (2019). ProPelled: The Effects of Grants on
Graduation, Earnings, and Welfare. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(3),
193-224.

Dillender, M. (2018). How Did the ACA's Medicaid Expansion Affect the Demand for Health
Care Workers? Evidence from Vacancy Postings. Working Paper.

DiNardi, M. 2019. "Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions and the Nurse Labor Market"
Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3083464

Donelan, K., Buerhaus, K.I., DesRoches C., & Burke, S.P. (2010). Health Policy
Thoughtleaders' View of the Health Workforce in an Era of Health Reform. Nursing Outlook,
58(4), 175-80

Johnson, M. (2013). The Impact of Business Cycle Fluctuations on Graduate School Enrollment.
Economics of Education Review, 34(June), 122-134.

Frean, M., Gruber, J., & Sommers, B. (2017). Premium Subsidies, the Mandate, and Medicaid
Expansion: Coverage Effects of the Affordable Care Act. Journal of Health Economics,
53(May), 72-86.

Friedson, A. (2018). Medical Scribes as an Input in Healthcare Production: Evidence from a
Randomized Experiment. American Journal of Health Economics, 4(4), 479-503.

Friedson, A., & Marier, A. (2017). Mandated Health Insurance and Provider Reimbursement via
Private Insurance: Evidence from the Massachusetts Health Reform. Health Services Research
and Managerial Epidemiology, 4(Jan-Dec), 1-6.

Frogner, B.K., Spetz, J., Parente, S.T., & Oberlin, S. (2015). The Demand for Health Care
Workers Post ACA. International Journal of Health Economic Management, 15(1), 139-151.

Garrett, B., & Gangopadhyaya, A. (2016). Who Gained Health Insurance Coverage Under the
ACA, and Where Do They Live? The Urban Institute.

Gidwani, R., Nguyen, C., Kofoed, A., Carragee, C., Rydel, T., & Nelligan, I. (2017). Impact of
Scribes on Physician Satisfaction, Patient Satisfaction, and Charting Efficiency: a Randomized
Controlled Trial. The Annals of Family Medicine, 15(5), 427-433.

Gilpin, G.A., Saunders, J., & Stoddard, C. (2015). Why Has For-profit Colleges' Share of Higher
Education Expanded so Rapidly? Estimating the Responsiveness to Labor Market Changes.
Economics of Education Review, 45(C), 53-63.

                                               26
Glied, S., & Ma, S. (2015). How Will the Affordable Care Act Affect the Use of Health Care
Services? Issue Brief, 4(Feb), 1-15. Retrieved from https://www.commonwealthfund.org/

Gruber, J. and B. Sommers. 2019. "The Affordable Care Act's Effects on Patients, Providers and
the Economy: What We've Learned So Far" NBER Working Paper No. 25932, available at
https://www.nber.org/papers/w25932

Hastings, J., Neilson, C.A., & Zimmerman, S.D. (2015). The Effects of Earnings Disclosure on
College Enrollment Decisions. National Bureau of Economic Research. Retrieved from
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21300.

Hastings, J.S., Neilson, C.A., Ramirez, A, & Zimmerman, S.D. (2018). (Un)Informed College
and Major Choice: Evidence from Linked Survey and Administrative Data. National Bureau of
Economic Research. Retrieved from https://www.nber.org/papers/w21330.

Hershbein, B.J. (2012). Graduating High School in a Recession: Work, Education, and Home
Production. The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 12(1), 1-32.

Hu, L., Kaestner, R., Mazumder, B, Miller, S., & Wong, A. (2018). The Effect of the Affordable
Care Act and Medicaid Expansions on Financial Wellbeing. Journal of Public Economics, 163,
99-112.

Institute of Medicine. (2014). The Impacts of the Affordable Care Act on Preparedness
Resources and Programs: Workshop Summary. Washington, DC: The National Academies
Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/18755.

IPEDS Data Center (2018). U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics. http://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/datacenter/

Johnson, M. (2013) The Impact of Business Cycle Fluctuations on Graduate School Enrollment.
Economics of Education Review, 34(C), 122-134.

Juraschek, S.P., Xiaoming, Z., Ranganathan, V.K., & Lin, V.W. (2012). United States Registered
Nurse Workforce Report Card and Shortage Forecast. American Journal of Medical Quality, 27
(3), 241-249.

Kaestner, R., Garrett, B., Chen, J., Gangopadhyaya, A., & Fleming, C. (2017). Effects of ACA
Medicaid expansions on Health Insurance Coverage and Labor Supply. Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 36(3), 608-642.

Kahn, L.B. (2010). The Long-term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from College in a
Bad Economy. Labour Economics, 17(2), 303-316.

Kaiser Family Foundation, (2009). Doctor and Nursing Shortage Could Undermine Health Care
Reform. Accessed 10/15/2018 at https://khn.org/morning-breakout/workforce-3/.

                                              27
Kaiser Family Foundation, (2019) Status of State Action on the Medicaid Expansion Decision.
Accessed 7/7/2019 at https://www.kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/state-activity-around-ex-
panding-medicaid-under-the-affordable-care-act/

Kleiner, M, Marier, A., Park, K.W., & Wing, C. (2016). Relaxing Occupational Licensing
Requirements: Analyzing Wages and Prices for a Medical Service. Journal of Law and
Economics, 59(2), 261-291.

Ku, L., Jones, E., Finnegan, B., Shin, P., & Rosenbaum, S. (2009). How is the Primary Care
Safety Net Faring in Massachusetts? Community Health Centers in the Midst of Health Reform.
Kaiser Family Foundation Report, Available
http://hsrc.himmelfarb.gwu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1275&context=sphhs_policy_facpu
bs.

Long, M.C., Goldhaber, D., & Huntington-Klein, N. (2015). Do Completed College Majors
Respond to Changes in Wages? Economics of Education Review, 49(C), 1-14.

Manning, W.G., Newhouse, J.P, Duan, N., Keeler, E.B., Benjamin, B., & Leibowitz, A. (1987).
Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.
American Economic Review, 77(3), 251-77.

Mabry, C.D., Gurien, L.A., Smith, S.D., & Mehl, S.C. (2016). Are Surgeons Being Paid Fairly
by Medicaid? A National Comparison of Typical Payments for General Surgeons. Journal of the
American College of Surgeons, 222(4), 387-394.

Massachusetts Department of Public Health. (2008). Primary Care Physician Recruitment
Programs in Massachusetts. Boston, MA: Massachusetts Department of Public Health.

Mazurenko, O., Balio, C.P., Agarwal, R., Carroll, A.E. and Menachemi, N. (2018). The Effects
of Medicaid Expansion under the ACA: A Systematic Review. Health Affairs, 37(6), 944-950.

McHugh, M.D., Aiken, L.H., Cooper, R.A., & Miller, P. (2008). The U.S. Presidential Election
and Health Care Workforce Policy. Policy, Politics, & Nursing Practice, 9(1), 6-14.

McMorrow, S., Gates, J.A., Long, S.K., & Kenney, G.M. (2017). Medicaid Expansion Increased
Coverage, Improve Affordability, and Reduced Psychological Distress for Low-income Parents.
Health Affairs, 36(5): 808-818.

Miller, S., & Wherry, L.R. (2017). Health and Access to Care during the First 2 Years of the
ACA Medicaid Expansions. New England Journal of Medicine, 376(10), 947-956.

Mishra, P., Kiang, J.C., & Grant, R.W. (2018). Association of Medical Scribes in Primary Care
with Physician Workflow and Patient Experience. JAMA Internal Medicine, 178(11), 1467-1472.




                                               28
Mullan, F., Chen, C. and Steinmetz, E. (2013). The Geography of Graduate Medical Education:
Imbalances Signal Need for New Distribution Policies. Health Affairs, 32(11), 1914-1921.

Nicholson, S., & Propper, C. (2011). Medical Workforce. In Handbook of Health Economics,
Vol. 2, North Holland, 873-925.

O'Keefe. E. 2014. "The House has voted 54 times in four years on Obamacare. Here's the full
list." Washington Post March 21. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-
fix/wp/2014/03/21/the-house-has-voted-54-times-in-four-years-on-obamacare-heres-the-full-
list/?utm_term=.de6460251064
 Last accessed July 2019.

Parente, S.T., Feldman, R., Spetz, J., Dowd, B. & Baggett, E.E. (2017). Wage Growth for the
Health Care Workforce: Projecting the Affordable Care Act Impact. Health Services Research,
52(2): 741-762.

Richards, M.R., Chou, C.F. & Sasso, A.T. (2009). Importing Medicine: A Look at Citizenship
and Immigration Status for Graduating Residents in New York State from 1998 to 2007. Medical
Care Research and Review, 66(4): 472-85.

Rudowitz, R. (2014). Understanding How States Access the ACA Enhances Medicaid Match
Rates. Kaiser Family Foundation. September 29, 2014. Available:
https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/understanding-how-states-access-the-aca-enhanced-
medicaid-match-rates/.

Sargen, M., Hooker, S.R. & Cooper, A.R. (2011). Gaps in the Supply, of Physicians, Advance
Practice Nurses, and Physician Assistants. Journal of American College of Surgeons, 216(6),
991-999.

Shartzer, D., Long, S., & Anderson, N. (2015). Access to Care and Affordability Have Improved
Following Affordable Care Act Implementation; Problems Remain. Health Affairs, 35(1), 161-
168.

Soni, A., Burns, M.E., Dague, L. & Simon, K.I. (2017). Medicaid Expansion and State Trends in
Supplemental Security Income Program Participation. Health Affairs, 36(8), 1485-1488.

Simon, K., Soni, A., & Cawley, J. (2017). The Impact of Health Insurance on Preventive Care
and Health Behaviors: Evidence from the First Two Years of the ACA Medicaid Expansions.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 36(2), 390-417.

Sommers, B.D., Blendon, R. & Orav, E.J. (2016) Changes in Utilization and Health Among
Low-Income Adults After Medicaid Expansion or Expanded Private Insurance. JAMA Internal
Medicine, 176(10), 1501-1509.




                                             29
Sommers, B.D., Gunja, M.Z., Finegold, K. & Musco, T. (2015) Changes in Self-Reported
Insurance Coverage, Access to Care, and Health under the Affordable Care Act. JAMA, 314(4),
366-374.

Staiger, D.O., Auerbach, D.I. & Buerhaus, P.I. (2011). Health Care Reform and the Health Care
Workforce ­ The Massachusetts Experience. New England Journal of Medicine: Perspective,
365(12), e24(1)-e24(3).

Staiger, D.O., Auerbach, D.I., & Buerhaus, P.I. (2012). Registered Nurse Labor Supply and the
Recession--Are We in a Bubble? New England Journal of Medicine, 366(16), 1463-1465.

Wherry, L.R., & Miller, S. (2016). Early Coverage, Access, Utilization, and Health Effects
Associated with the Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions: A Quasi-Experimental
Study. Annals of Internal Medicine, 164(12), 795-803.

White, S. What Does the ACA Mean for Hospitals? Monster.com
https://www.monster.com/career-advice/article/aca-mean-for-hospitals. Accessed November 15,
2018.

Wiswall, M., & Zafar, B. (2015a). How Do College Students Respond to Public Information
about Earnings. Journal of Human Capital, 9(2), 117-169.

Zafar, B. (2011). How Do College Students Form Expectations? Journal of Labor Economics,
29(2), 301-348.

Zuckerman, S, Williams, A.F., & Stockley, K.E. (2009) Trends in Medicaid Physician Fees,
2003-2008. Health Affairs, 28(3), w510-w519.




                                               30
                                        Tables and Figures
Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                                      State Level               County Level
                                                            Standard                  Standard
                                                 Mean      Deviation         Mean    Deviation
                                                  (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)
 Number of Graduates (Thousands)
   In Health Care Sector (CIPCODE 51)            30.96         23.18         2.63         4.56
   In Top 4 Professions                          20.96         14.73         1.73         3.42
   In Less than One Year                          6.17          5.63         0.51         0.99
   At For-profit Institution                      6.04          6.31         0.49         1.05
   Registered, Clinical Nursing, Nursing
   Admin, and Research (CIPCODE 51.38)            8.23          5.42         0.64         1.37
   Allied Health and Medical Assisting
   Services (CIPCODE 51.08)                       5.49          4.99         0.49         0.84
   Health and Medical Admin Services
   (CIPCODE 51.07)                                3.93          3.57         0.42         1.37
   Practical Nursing, Vocational Nursing,
   and Nursing Assistants (CIPCODE
   51.39)                                         3.31          2.51         0.18         0.30
 Unemployment Rate (%)                            6.30          2.21         7.10         2.81
 Median Household Income ($)                      52,925          8,916       46,437      12,480
 Poverty Rate (%)                                  14.96           3.06        17.13        6.26
 Population (Thousands)                           11,349         11,475         108         263
 Population in 2010 (Thousands)                   11,040         11,475         105         251
 #Obs.                                                       320                      15,744
Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Health un-
insurance rate is from Small Area of Health Insurance Estimates-SAHIE (2013). Unemployment
rate is from Bureau of Labor Statistics. Median household income and poverty rate are from
Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE at the county level. Population count is from
Census Bureau. Sample excludes early expansion states (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA), late expansion
states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties with population count of less than 10,000.
Health Care refers to graduates in CIPCODE 51. Top 4 professions refer to graduates in
CIPCODEs 51.38, 51.39, 51.07, 51.08. Less than One Year refers to graduates with award level
equal to 1. For-profit institution refers to graduates in institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or 9. #
of graduates is weighted by state population in 2010 in (1) and (2) and county population in 2010
in (3) and (4). See Appendix B for detailed coding definitions.




                                                 31
Figure 1. ACA Medicaid Expansions




Source: Kaiser Family Foundation (2019) . Notes: Analysis sample includes expansion and non-
expansion states. Expansion states (22) are AR, AZ, CO, DC, DE, HI, IA, IL, KY, MA, MD, MI,
ND, NM, NV, NY, OH, OR, RI, VT, WI, WV. Non-expansion states (18) are AL, FL, GA, ID,
KS, ME, MO, MS, NC, NE, OK, SC, SD, TN, TX, UT, VA, WY. Analysis sample excludes
early and late expansion states. Early expansion states (5) are CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA. Late
expansion states (6) are NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA.




                                            32
Figure 2. Number of Graduates (Thousands) in the Healthcare Sector




Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Note: Graph
shows # of graduates at the state level (for the average state) among expansion vs non-expansion
states. Sample excludes early expansion states (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA) and late expansion states
(NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA). Graduates from counties with population count of less than 10,000
are not included in these data. Number of graduates is weighted by population count in 2010
(Source: Census Bureau).




                                               33
Figure 3. Number of Graduates (Thousands), State Level, by Expansion Status




Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Note: Graph
shows # of graduates at the state level (average state) in expansion v. non-expansion states.
Figure A includes graduates in health care sector (CIPCODE 51). Figure B includes graduates in
CIPCODEs 51.38, 51.39, 51.07, 51.08. Figure C includes graduates with award level equal to 1.
Figure D includes graduates in institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or 9. Sample excludes early
(CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states. Graduates from
counties with a population of count less than 10,000 are not included in these data. Number of
graduates is weighted by state population count in 2010 (from Census Bureau). See Appendix B
for detailed coding definitions.




                                              34
Figure 4. Number of Graduates (Thousands) in Selected Health Care Professions at the
State Level by Expansion Status




 Source: # of graduates is from Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Note:
Graph shows # of graduates at the state level (average state) in expansion vs non-expansion
states. Figure A includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.38. Figure B includes graduates in
CIPCODE 51.08. Figure C includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.07. Figure D includes graduates
in CIPCODE 51.39. Top 4 professions account for 65% of total health care workforce. Sample
excludes early (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states.
Graduates from counties with population counts of less than 10,000 are not included in these
data. Number of graduates is weighted by state population count in 2010 (Source: Census
Bureau). See Appendix B for detailed coding definitions.




                                             35
Table 2. Difference-in-Difference Regression Results
                                  State Level                  County Level
                                  Number of           Number of
                                                                         Having a
 Dependent Variable               Graduates            Graduates
                                                                         Program
                                    (1000s)             (1000s)
                                      (1)                 (2)               (3)
                               Panel A. All Healthcare Sector
 Post X Medicaid Expansion            0.06                0.02              -0.01**
                                     (0.99)              (0.12)              (0.00)
                               Panel B. Health Care Graduates in Less than One Year
 Post X Medicaid Expansion            0.71                 0.10                 0.01
                                     (0.82)               (0.10)              (0.01)
                               Panel C. Health Care Graduates at For-profit Institutions
 Post X Medicaid Expansion            -1.89                -0.12               -0.02
                                     (1.20)               (0.09)              (0.02)
                               Panel D. Health Care Graduates in Top 4 Professions
 Post X Medicaid Expansion            -0.40                -0.06            -0.02***
                                     (0.73)               (0.12)              (0.00)
                               Panel D1. Registered, Clinical Nursing, and Nursing
                               Administration
 Post X Medicaid Expansion            -0.74                0.01                -0.01
                                     (0.66)               (0.12)              (0.01)
                               Panel D2. Allied Health and Medical Assisting Services
 Post X Medicaid Expansion            0.83                 0.02                -0.01
                                     (0.84)               (0.09)              (0.01)
                               Panel D3. Health and Medical Administrative Services
 Post X Medicaid Expansion           -0.79*                -0.12             -0.01*
                                     (0.45)               (0.11)              (0.01)
                               Panel D4. Practical Nursing, Vocational Nursing, and
                               Nursing Assistants
 Post X Medicaid Expansion            0.29                 0.03                -0.01
                                     (0.46)               (0.04)              (0.02)
 Economic Conditions                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes
 Year Fixed Effect                     Yes                  Yes                 Yes
 State Fixed Effects                   Yes                  No                   No
 County Fixed Effects                  No                   Yes                 Yes
 # Obs.                                320               15,744              15,744



                                              36
Source: Integrated Post-Secondary Education Data System in 2010-17. Notes: Table displays
indicated coefficients from OLS regressions. Sample excludes early (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA) and
late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states. Panel A includes graduates in the health care
sector (CIPCODE 51). Panel B includes graduates with award level equal to 1. Panel C includes
graduates in institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or 9. Panel D includes graduates in CIPCODEs
51.38, 51.07, 51.08, 51.39. Panel D1 includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.38. Panel D2 includes
graduates in CIPCODE 51.07. Panel D3 includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.08. Panel D4
includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.39. Expansion equals 1 if state expanded Medicaid in Jan.
2014. Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after. Economic conditions include unemployment rate (source:
Bureau of Labor Statistics-BLS), median household income, and poverty rate (source: Small
Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE) at the state level in (1) and county level in (2) and
(3). All regressions are weighted by 2010 population counts at the state level in (1) and county
level in (2) and (3). See Appendix B for detailed coding definitions. Standard errors,
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 ***
p<0.01




                                               37
Figure 5. Plot of Coefficients from State-level Event Study Regressions




Sources: Integrated Post-Secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Note: Graph
shows coefficients and confidence intervals from state-level event study regression. Figure A
includes graduates in entire health care sector. Figure B includes graduates in CIPCODEs 51.38,
51.39, 51.07, 51.08. Figure C includes graduates with award level equal to 1. Figure D includes
graduates in institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or 9. Sample excludes early expansion states
(CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties with
population counts of less than 10,000. All regression estimates are weighted by state population
in 2010 (source: U.S. Census Bureau). All regressions control for state fixed effects, year fixed
effects, median household income (source: BLS), poverty rate, and unemployment rate at the
state level (source: Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates). Baseline (omitted) year is 2013.
Confidence intervals are constructed from state-clustered heteroscedasticity-robust state-
clustered standard errors.




                                               38
Figure 6. Plot of Coefficients from State-level Event Study Regression in Selected Health
Care Professions




Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Note: Graph
shows # of graduates at the state level in expansion vs non-expansion states. Figure A includes
graduates in CIPCODE 51.38. Figure B includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.08. Figure C
includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.07. Figure D includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.39. Top 4
professions account for 65% of total health care workforce. Sample excludes early expansion
states (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties
with population counts of less than 10,000. All regression estimates are weighted by state
population in 2010 (Census Bureau). All regressions control for state fixed effects, year fixed
effects, median household income, poverty rate, and unemployment rate at the state level.
Baseline (omitted) year is 2013. Confidence intervals are constructed from state-clustered
heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors.




                                               39
Figure 7. Synthetic Control ­ Number of Graduates in Top 4 Professions, Less than One
Year, at For-profit Institutions




Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Note: Graph
shows # of graduates from state-level synthetic control regression. Figure A includes graduates
in entire health care sector. Figure B includes graduates in CIPCODEs 51.38, 51.39, 51.07,
51.08. Figure C includes graduates with award level equal to 1. Figure D includes graduates in
institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or 9. Sample excludes early expansion states (CA, CT, MN,
NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties with population counts
of less than 10,000. Pre-trend weights are constructed based on # of graduates in each of the pre-
2014 periods.




                                                40
Figure 8. Synthetic Control ­ Number of Graduates in Selected Health Care Professions




Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Note: Graph
shows # of graduates from state-level synthetic control regression. Figure A includes graduates
in CIPCODE 51.38. Figure B includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.08. Figure C includes
graduates in CIPCODE 51.07. Figure D includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.39. Top 4
professions account for 65% of total health care workforce. Sample excludes early expansion
states (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties
with population counts of less than 10,000. Pre-trend weights are constructed based on # of
graduates each of the pre-2014 periods.




                                               41
Figure 9. Number of Candidates Passing the NCLEX Exams




Sources: National Council Licensure Examination for Practical Nurses and Registered Nurses
2010-17. Notes: Figure displays # of candidates by expansion and non-expansion states. Sample
excludes early (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states.




                                             42
Table 3. Difference-in-Differences Regression Results: Number of Candidates Passing
NCLEX Exams
 Dependent Variable: Number of               Practical Nurses          Registered Nurses
 Candidates Passing NCLEX Exams                     (1)                        (2)
 Medicaid Expansion X Post                        0.072                     -0.516*
                                                 (0.202)                    (0.275)
 Economic Conditions                               Yes                        Yes
 State Fixed Effects                               Yes                        Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                                Yes                        Yes
 Baseline Mean (1000s)                            1.765                      4.635
 # Obs.                                            320                        320
Sources: National Council Licensure Examination for Practical Nurses and Registered Nurses
2010-17. Notes: The table displays the indicated coefficients from OLS regressions. Sample
excludes early (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states.
Expansion equals 1 if state expanded Medicaid in Jan. 2014. Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after.
Economic conditions include unemployment rate (source: Bureau of Labor Statistics-BLS),
median household income, and poverty rate (source: Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-
SAPIE) at the state level. All regressions are weighted by 2010 population counts at the state
level. Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *
p<0.10 ** p<0.05 ***




                                              43
Figure 10: Event Study Regression Results: Number of Candidates passing NCLEX exams




Sources: National Council Licensure Examination for Practical Nurses and Registered Nurses
2010-17. Notes: The figure plots coefficients from event study regressions. Sample excludes
early (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states. All
regression control for state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and economic conditions at the state-
year level, including unemployment rate (source: Bureau of Labor Statistics-BLS), median
household income, and poverty rate (source: Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE)
at state level. All regressions are weighted by 2010 population counts at the state level. Baseline
year is 2013.




                                                 44
Figure 11. Number of International Candidates Passing the NCLEX Exams




Sources: National Council Licensure Examination for Practical Nurses and Registered Nurses
2010-17. Notes: Figure displays the # of internationally educated candidates passing the
NCLEX-RN and NCLEX-PN exams.




                                             45
Figure 12. Higher Education Expenditures by Expansion Status




Source: Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances 2010-2016. Notes: Figure
displays higher education expenditure by expansion and non-expansion states. Sample excludes
early (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states.




                                             46
Table 4. Difference-in-Differences Regression Results: State and Local Higher Education
Expenditures

                                            Total Higher
                                                                   Total Expenditure per
                                        Education Expenditure
                                                                       Capita (USD)
                                           (million USD)
                                                  (1)                        (2)
 Medicaid Expansion X Post                      -0.302                     10.721
                                               (0.282)                    (14.274)
 Economic Conditions                              Yes                       Yes
 State Fixed Effects                              Yes                       Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                               Yes                       Yes
 Baseline Mean (1000s)                           7.634                    726.518
 # Obs.                                           273                       273
Source: Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances 2010-2016. Notes: Table
displays the indicated coefficients from OLS regressions. Sample excludes early (CA, CT, MN,
NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states. Expansion equals 1 if state
expanded Medicaid in Jan. 2014. Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after. Economic conditions include
unemployment rate (source: Bureau of Labor Statistics-BLS), median household income, and
poverty rate (source: Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE) at the state level. All
regressions are weighted by 2010 population counts at the state level. Baseline year is 2013.
Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. * p<0.10 **
p<0.05 ***




                                                47
Figure 13. Event Study Regression Results: State and Local Higher Education
Expenditures




Sources: Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances 2010-2016 Notes: Figure
plots coefficients from event study regressions. Sample excludes early (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA)
and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states. All regressions control for state fixed
effects, year fixed effects, and economic conditions at the state-year level, unemployment rate
(source: Bureau of Labor Statistics-BLS), median household income, and poverty rate (source:
Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE) at the state level. All regressions are weighted
by 2010 population counts at state level. Baseline year is 2013.




                                              48
                                         Appendix
Appendix A. Supplementary Tables and Figures

Figure A1. Distribution of Graduates in Top 10 Health Care Professions/Occupations in
2013
 Registered and Clinical Nursing and
 Nursing Administration and Research
               Allied Health and
           Medical Assisting Services
                 Health and Medical
              Administrative Services
       Practical Nursing, Vocational
      Nursing and Nursing Assistants
      Allied Health Diagnostic
Intervention and Treatment Provision
              Dental Support Services
               and Allied Professions
             Somatic Bodywork and
         Related Therapeutic Services
                 Rehabilitation and
              Therapeutic Professions

                         Public Health

              Communication Disorders
               Sciences and Services

                                         0           50          100         150          200
                                             # of Graduates (Thousand)



Source: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System in 2013. Note: The figure displays
the number of graduates in the top ten health care professions (CIPCODEs: 51.38, 51.07, 51.08,
51.39, 51.09, 51.06, 51.35, 51.23, 51.22, 51.02) in 2013. Sample excludes early (CA, CT, MN,
NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states. Top 10 health care professions
account for 85% of total graduates in health care.




                                              49
Figure A2. Distribution of Graduates by Type of Degree in 2013


  Bachelor's Degree and
          Above




        Associate Degree



 Postsecondary award,
      certificate
diploma (from 2 to less
     than 4 years)


   Postsecondary award,
       certificate
   diploma (less than 1
          year)


                           0          50           100         150          200          250
                                     # of Graduates (Thousand)

Source: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System in 2013. Notes: The figure displays
the number of graduates in health care by type of degree in 2013. Sample excludes early (CA,
CT, MN, NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states.




                                              50
Figure A3. Distribution of Graduates by Type of Degree in Top Five Health Care
Professions in 2013


       Allied Health Diagnostic
Intervention and Treatment Provision


       Practical Nursing Vocational
      Nursing and Nursing Assistants


              Health and Medical
             Administrative Services


             Allied Health and
          Medical Assisting Services


  Registered and Clinical Nursing
Nursing Administration and Research


                                       0   20   40   60      80      100    120   140    160    180

                          Less than 1 year                        From 2 to Less Than 4 Years
                          Postsecondary award, certificate        Bachelor Degree and Above

Source: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System in 2013. Note: The figure displays
the number of graduates in the top five health care professions by type of degree in 2013. Sample
excludes early (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states.




                                                     51
Table A1. Difference-in-Difference Regression Results - Log of (# Number of Graduates
+1) as Dependent Variable
                                            State Level                       County Level
                                        Log of (Number of                  Log of (Number of
 Dependent Variable
                                          Graduates+1)                       Graduates+1)
                                                 (1)                              (2)
                                 Panel A. All Healthcare Sector
 Post X Medicaid Expansion                     -0.021                            0.002
                                              (0.029)                          (0.019)
                                 Panel B. Health Care Graduates in Less than One Year
 Post X Medicaid Expansion                     -0.002                            0.028
                                              (0.093)                          (0.034)
                                 Panel C. Health Care Graduates in For-profit Institutions
 Post X Medicaid Expansion                  -0.210***                           -0.033
                                              (0.068)                          (0.022)
                                 Panel D. Health Care Graduates in Top 4 Professions
 Post X Medicaid Expansion                     -0.039                           -0.009
                                              (0.036)                          (0.021)
                                 Panel D1. Registered, Clinical Nursing, and Nursing
                                 Administration
 Post X Medicaid Expansion                     -0.050                           -0.016
                                              (0.039)                          (0.019)
                                 Panel D2. Allied Health and Medical Assisting Services
 Post X Medicaid Expansion                      0.001                           -0.002
                                              (0.066)                          (0.027)
                                 Panel D3. Health and Medical Administrative Services
 Post X Medicaid Expansion                     -0.090                           -0.006
                                              (0.063)                          (0.018)
                                 Panel D4. Practical Nursing, Vocational Nursing, and Nursing
                                 Assistants
 Post X Medicaid Expansion                      0.048                            0.018
                                              (0.065)                          (0.022)
 Economic Conditions
                                                  Yes                              Yes
 Year Fixed Effect                                Yes                              Yes
 State Fixed Effects                              Yes                              No
 County Fixed Effects                             No
                                                                                     Yes
 # Obs.                                           320                               15744
Source: Integrated Post-Secondary Education Data System in 2010-17. Notes: The table
displays the indicated coefficients from OLS regressions. Sample excludes early (CA, CT, MN,
NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states. Panel A includes graduates in the

                                             52
health care sector (CIPCODE 51). Panel B includes graduates with award level equal to 1. Panel
C includes graduates in institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or 9. Panel D includes graduates in
CIPCODEs 51.38, 51.07, 51.08, 51.39. Panel D1 includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.38. Panel
D2 includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.07. Panel D3 includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.08.
Panel D4 includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.39. Expansion equals 1 if state expanded Medicaid
in Jan. 2014. Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after. Economic conditions include unemployment rate
(source: Bureau of Labor Statistics-BLS), median household income, and poverty rate (source:
Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE) at the state level in (1) and county level in
(2). All regressions are weighted by 2010 population counts at the state level in (1) and county
level in (2). See Appendix B for detailed coding definitions. Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-
robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                53
   Table A2. Full Event Study Regression for Graduates
                               State Level                                  County Level
Dependent                               Less                                         Less
Variable:        All                    than       For-        All                   than       For-
Number of       Health     Top 4        One       profit      Health     Top 4       One       profit
Graduates        Care    Professions    Year    Institution    Care    Professions  Year     Institution
                  (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
2010*Medicaid
Expansion        -0.85      -0.40      -3.30         0.69      -0.34      -0.26      -0.12      0.07
                (1.15)     (1.28)     (2.35)        (0.47)    (0.26)     (0.26)     (0.23)     (0.06)
2011*Medicaid
Expansion       -1.93*      -1.56      -0.97         -0.29     -0.19      -0.16      0.08       -0.02
                (1.01)     (1.12)     (1.64)        (0.48)    (0.13)     (0.14)     (0.17)     (0.05)
2012*Medicaid
Expansion        -0.11      0.08       -0.44         -0.07     0.13       0.12       0.03       0.01
                (0.62)     (0.60)     (0.84)        (0.25)    (0.15)     (0.14)     (0.07)     (0.02)
2014*Medicaid
Expansion        0.30       -0.03      0.33          -0.13     0.01       -0.04    0.11**       0.01
                (0.61)     (0.44)     (0.52)        (0.22)    (0.08)     (0.08)    (0.05)      (0.01)
2015*Medicaid
Expansion        -0.29      -0.64      -0.36         -2.45     -0.01      -0.06      0.09       -0.13
                (0.86)     (0.64)     (1.10)        (1.75)    (0.08)     (0.09)     (0.05)     (0.09)
2016*Medicaid
Expansion        -1.45     -1.58*      -0.95         -2.87     -0.13      -0.18      0.07       -0.16
                (1.02)     (0.78)     (1.02)        (2.03)    (0.12)     (0.14)     (0.06)     (0.11)
2017*Medicaid
Expansion        -1.73      -1.66      -0.79         -2.50     -0.21      -0.25      0.11       -0.15
                (1.23)     (1.04)     (1.34)        (1.64)    (0.19)     (0.19)     (0.10)     (0.10)
Economic
Conditions         `        Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Year Fixed
Effect           Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
State Fixed
Effects          Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes       No         No         No         No
County Fixed
Effects           No         No         No           No        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Baseline mean    30.91      21.23      5.65          5.58      2.61       1.74       0.43       0.46
Joint
Significant F
Test             2.40       2.18       1.72         0.98       1.89       1.91      1.55       1.17
P-value          0.08       0.11       0.18         0.41       0.15       0.14      0.22       0.33
# Obs.           320        320        320          320       15,744     15,744    15,744     15,744

                                               54
Source: # of graduates is from Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System in 2010-2017.
Notes: The table displays the indicated coefficients from OLS regressions. Sample excludes
early (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states. (1) and (5)
include graduates in the health care sector (CIPCODE 51). (2) and (6) include graduates in
CIPCODEs 51.38, 51.07, 51.08, 51.39. (3) and (7) include graduates with award levels equal to
1. (4) and (8) include graduates in institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or 9. Expansion equals 1 if
state expanded Medicaid in Jan. 2014. Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after. Economic conditions
include unemployment rate (source: Bureau of Labor Statistics), median household income, and
poverty rate (source: Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE) at the state level in (1) -
(4) and the county level in (5) - (8). Baseline year is 2013. Joint significance F test for
coefficients of pre-2014 interactions jointly equal 0. All regressions are weighted by 2010 county
population. Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. *
p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                55
   Table A3. Full Event Study Regression for Graduates in Selected Health Care Professions
                                  State Level                                    County Level
                Registered,                           Practical Registered,                           Practical
                 Clinical      Allied                 Nursing,   Clinical      Allied                 Nursing,
                 Nursing,      Health      Health    Vocational Nursing,       Health      Health    Vocational
Dependent        Nursing        and         and       Nursing,   Nursing        and         and       Nursing,
Variable:        Admin,       Medical     Medical       and      Admin,       Medical     Medical       and
Number of          and        Assisting    Admin      Nursing      and        Assisting    Admin      Nursing
Graduates        Research     Services    Services   Assistants  Research     Services    Services   Assistants
                   (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
2010*Medicaid
Expansion          1.03        -1.05       -0.25          -0.12    -0.02       -0.06       -0.18       -0.01
                  (0.80)       (0.94)      (0.70)         (0.39)   (0.11)      (0.09)      (0.16)      (0.02)
2011*Medicaid
Expansion          0.89        -1.77       -0.51          -0.17    -0.00       -0.08       -0.05       -0.02
                  (0.66)       (1.09)      (0.46)         (0.20)   (0.08)      (0.11)      (0.05)      (0.02)
2012*Medicaid
Expansion          0.26        -0.35        0.33          -0.16    -0.01        0.03        0.11       -0.01
                  (0.38)       (0.50)      (0.25)         (0.18)   (0.04)      (0.07)      (0.08)      (0.01)
2014*Medicaid
Expansion         -0.14         0.22      -0.45*           0.34     0.01        0.00       -0.08        0.03
                  (0.27)       (0.44)     (0.23)          (0.21)   (0.03)      (0.04)      (0.06)      (0.02)
2015*Medicaid
Expansion          0.06        -0.07      -0.83**          0.21     0.04       -0.01       -0.13        0.03
                  (0.54)       (0.69)      (0.33)         (0.45)   (0.07)      (0.04)      (0.12)      (0.03)
2016*Medicaid
Expansion         -0.22        -0.03      -1.35**          0.03     0.01       -0.01       -0.19        0.01
                  (0.43)       (0.86)      (0.60)         (0.53)   (0.09)      (0.05)      (0.16)      (0.04)
2017*Medicaid
Expansion         -0.66*        0.06      -1.12**          0.05    -0.05       -0.01       -0.20        0.01
                  (0.37)       (0.89)      (0.46)         (0.56)   (0.10)      (0.06)      (0.18)      (0.04)
Economic
Conditions         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Year Fixed
Effect             Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
State Fixed
Effects            Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes      No           No         No          No
County Fixed
Effects             No           No         No             No       Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
Baseline Mean      8.23         5.58       4.04           3.48      0.61        0.49       0.44         0.20
Joint
Significant F
Test               1.75         4.35       1.93           0.78      0.37        4.84       1.36         0.88
P-value            0.17         0.01       0.14           0.51      0.77        0.01       0.27         0.46
# Obs.             320          320         320            320     15,744      15,744     15,744      15,744

                                                     56
Source: # of graduates is from Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System in 2010-2017;.
Notes: The table displays the indicated coefficients from OLS regressions. Sample excludes
early (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA) and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states. (1) and (5)
include graduates in CIPCODE 51.38. (2) and (6) include graduates in CIPCODE 51.08. (3) and
(7) include graduates in CIPCODE 51.07. (4) and (8) include graduates in CIPCODE 51.39. Top
4 professions account for 65% of total health care workforce. Expansion equals 1 if state
expanded Medicaid in Jan. 2014. Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after. Economic conditions include
unemployment rate (source: Bureau of Labor Statistics), median household income, and poverty
rate (source: Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE) at the state level in (1)-(4) and
county level in (5)-(8). Base year is 2013. Joint significance F test of pre-2014 interactions
jointly equal 0. All regressions are weighted by 2010 county population. Standard errors,
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state, are in parentheses. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 ***
p<0.01




                                              57
     Table A4. Mean of Controls in Pre-2014 Periods in Treatment Group vs. Synthetic Control
     Group, Synthetic Control Estimates, and P-values

                                                                                            At For-Profit
                    All Health Care         Top 4 Professions       Less than One Year       Institution
                               Synthetic          Synthetic         Synthetic         Synthetic
                  Treatment     Control Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment Control
                   Group        Group    Group     Group    Group    Group    Group    Group
                     (1)          (2)      (3)       (4)     (5)       (6)     (7)       (8)
Number of
Graduates
2010                22.88           22.95   17.09           17.07     5.66           5.64   5.93           5.75
2011                24.93           25.01   18.61           18.75     5.40           5.39   6.35           6.43
2012                25.80           25.88   19.11           19.05     4.91           4.91   6.63           6.71
2013                24.79           24.86   17.97           18.00     4.13           4.13   6.84           6.71
Synthetic
Control
Estimates                   -1.09                   -1.39                    0.16                  -1.25
P-value (from
one-sided test)             0.53                    0.53                     0.51                  0.83
# of selections
of treatment
group                     1,000                  1,000                       1,000                 1,000

     Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Unemployment
     rate is from Bureau of Labor Statistics. Median household income and poverty rate, both at the
     county level, are from Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE. Population count is
     from Census Bureau. Note: Table shows means of control variables, estimates, and p-value from
     the synthetic control regression. (1) and (2) include graduates in the entire health care sector. (3)
     and (4) include graduates in CIPCODEs 51.38, 51.39, 51.07, 51.08. (5) and (6) include graduates
     with award level equal to 1. (7) and (8) include graduates in institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or
     9. Sample excludes early expansion states (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH,
     PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties with population counts of less than 10,000. Pre-trend
     weights are constructed based on # of graduates in each of pre-2014 periods. P-values are
     obtained from comparing true estimates and distribution of estimates from 1000 random
     selections of treatment group.




                                                        58
  Table A5. Mean of Controls in Pre-2014 Periods in Treatment group vs. Synthetic Control
  group, Synthetic Control Estimates, and P-values in Selected Professions

                                                                                  Practical Nursing,
                  Registered, Clinical Allied Health and                         Vocational Nursing,
                   Nursing, Nursing    Medical Assisting    Health and Medical       and Nursing
                 Admin, and Research        Services         Admin Services           Assistants
                             Synthetic            Synthetic            Synthetic             Synthetic
                 Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment Control Treatment Control
                  Group        Group   Group       Group    Group       Group     Group       Group
                    (1)           (2)    (3)            (4)    (5)            (6)    (7)            (8)
Number of
Graduates
(1000)
2010               6.24           6.21   4.52           4.45   2.93           2.98   3.43           3.41
2011               6.62           6.58   5.02           5.14   3.60           3.54   3.39           3.41
2012               7.04           7.08   5.00           4.85   3.76           3.68   3.33           3.34
2013               7.33           7.35   4.15           4.20   3.22           3.31   3.29           3.27
Synthetic
Control
Estimates                 -0.21                 -0.54                 -0.59                 -0.13
P-value                    0.86                  0.79                  0.79                  0.74
# of Selection
of Treatment
Group                     1,000                 1,000                 1,000                 1,000

  Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Unemployment
  rate is from Bureau of Labor Statistics. Median household income and poverty rate are from
  Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE at the county level. Population count is from
  Census Bureau. Note: Table shows means of control variables, estimates, and p-value from
  synthetic control regression. (1) and (2) include graduates in CIPCODE 51.38. (3) and (4)
  include graduates in CIPCODE 51.08. (5) and (6) include graduates in CIPCODE 51.07. (7) and
  (8) include graduates in in CIPCODE 51.39. Sample excludes early expansion states (CA, CT,
  MN, NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties with population
  counts of less than 10,000. Pre-trend weights are constructed based on # of graduates in each of
  pre-2014 periods. P-values are obtained from comparing true estimates and distribution of
  estimate from 1000 random selections of treatment group.




                                                    59
Appendix B. IPEDS Variables and Explanations

1. IPEDS Definitions of Degrees,
1 - Postsecondary award, certificate, or diploma of (less than 1 academic year)
Less than 900 contact or clock hours
Less than 30 SEMESTER or TRIMESTER credit hours, or
Less than 45 QUARTER credit hours

2 - Postsecondary award, certificate, or diploma of (at least 1 but less than 2 academic years)
At least 900, but less than 1800, contact or clock hours, or
At least 30, but less than 60, SEMESTER OR TRIMESTER HOURS
At least 45, but less than 90, QUARTER HOURS

3 - Associate's degree

4 - Postsecondary award, certificate, or diploma of (at least 2 but less than 4 academic years)
1800 or more contact or clock hours, or
60 or more SEMESTER OR TRIMESTER credit hours, or
90 or more QUARTER credit hours

5 - Bachelor's degree

6 - Postbaccalaureate certificate

7 - Master's degree

8 - Post-master's certificate

2. CIPCODEs in IPEDS

51.38 Registered Nursing, Nursing Administration, Nursing Research, and Clinical
Nursing.
    51.3801 Registered Nursing/Registered Nurse.
    51.3802 Nursing Administration.
    51.3803 Adult Health Nurse/Nursing.
    51.3805 Family Practice Nurse/Nursing.
    51.3806 Maternal/Child Health and Neonatal Nurse/Nursing.
    51.3808 Nursing Science.
    51.3809 Pediatric Nurse/Nursing.
    51.3810 Psychiatric/Mental Health Nurse/Nursing.
    51.3811 Public Health/Community Nurse/Nursing.
    51.3812 Perioperative/Operating Room and Surgical Nurse/Nursing.
    51.3813 Clinical Nurse Specialist.
    51.3814 Critical Care Nursing.
    51.3815 Occupational and Environmental Health Nursing.
    51.3816 Emergency Room/Trauma Nursing.

                                                60
    51.3818 Nursing Practice.
    51.3819 Palliative Care Nursing.
    51.3820 Clinical Nurse Leader.
    51.3821 Geriatric Nurse/Nursing.
    51.3822 Women's Health Nurse/Nursing.
    51.3899 Registered Nursing, Nursing Administration, Nursing Research, and Clinical
Nursing, Other.
51.39 Practical Nursing, Vocational Nursing, and Nursing Assistants.
    51.3901 Licensed Practical/Vocational Nurse Training.
    51.3902 Nursing Assistant/Aide and Patient Care Assistant/Aide.
    51.3999 Practical Nursing, Vocational Nursing, and Nursing Assistants, Other.
51.07 Health and Medical Administrative Services.
   51.0701 Health/Health Care Administration/Management.
   51.0702 Hospital and Health Care Facilities Administration/Management.
   51.0703 Health Unit Coordinator/Ward Clerk.
   51.0704 Health Unit Manager/Ward Supervisor.
   51.0705 Medical Office Management/Administration.
   51.0706 Health Information/Medical Records Administration/Administrator.
   51.0707 Health Information/Medical Records Technology/Technician.
   51.0708 Medical Transcription/Transcriptionist.
   51.0709 Medical Office Computer Specialist/Assistant.
   51.0710 Medical Office Assistant/Specialist.
   51.0711 Medical/Health Management and Clinical Assistant/Specialist.
   51.0712 Medical Reception/Receptionist.
   51.0713 Medical Insurance Coding Specialist/Coder.
   51.0714 Medical Insurance Specialist/Medical Biller.
   51.0715 Health/Medical Claims Examiner.
   51.0716 Medical Administrative/Executive Assistant and Medical Secretary.
   51.0717 Medical Staff Services Technology/Technician.
   51.0718 Long Term Care Administration/Management.
   51.0719 Clinical Research Coordinator.
   51.0799 Health and Medical Administrative Services, Other.
51.08 Allied Health and Medical Assisting Services.
   51.0801 Medical/Clinical Assistant.
   51.0802 Clinical/Medical Laboratory Assistant.
   51.0803 Occupational Therapist Assistant.
   51.0805 Pharmacy Technician/Assistant.
   51.0806 Physical Therapy Technician/Assistant.
   51.0808 Veterinary/Animal Health Technology/Technician and Veterinary Assistant.
   51.0809 Anesthesiologist Assistant.
   51.0810 Emergency Care Attendant (EMT Ambulance).
   51.0811 Pathology/Pathologist Assistant.
   51.0812 Respiratory Therapy Technician/Assistant.

                                            61
   51.0813 Chiropractic Assistant/Technician.
   51.0814 Radiologist Assistant.
   51.0815 Lactation Consultant.
   51.0816 Speech-Language Pathology Assistant.
   51.0899 Allied Health and Medical Assisting Services, Other.

3. IPEDs Definition of Sector Code
     1    Public, 4-year or above
     2    Private not-for-profit, 4-year or above
     3    Private for-profit, 4-year or above
     4    Public, 2-year
     5    Private not-for-profit, 2-year
     6    Private for-profit, 2-year
     7    Public, less than 2-year
     8    Private not-for-profit, less than 2-year
     9    Private for-profit, less than 2-year




                                                62
Appendix C. Analyses with Dose Response Model

To disentangle the ACA Medicaid expansion's county-level impact from its broader effects, such
as the health insurance mandate and the health insurance marketplaces, we use a dose-response
model. To operationalize this model, we utilize estimates of the rate of insurance coverage in
each county from the Census' Small Area Health Insurance Estimates. Following the general
estimation strategy of Courtemanche et al. (2017), and specifically the county-level version of
this strategy used by Courtemanche et al. (2019), we use OLS to estimate the following equation:


 = 0 + 1 ( × 2013 ) + 2 ( × 2013 ×
 ) + 3  +  +  +                                                                    (C.1)


2013 is a county's rate of uninsurance in 2013;  is a vector of state-by-year
fixed effects. Figure C1 shows within-state variation in the 2013 rate of insurance enrollment,
which is used for identification in this model. 1 /100 is the effect of the ACA per 1 percentage

point change in the pre-ACA rate of uninsurance. We thus scale the effect by the median pre-
ACA rate of uninsurance to obtain (2013 )1 , the effect of the ACA (but not the

Medicaid expansion) in a county with the median rate of pre-ACA insurance coverage.


Similarly,  2 /100 is an estimate of the additional effect of the Medicaid expansion in a county

from a 1 percentage point change in the pre-ACA rate of uninsurance, and
( 2013 ) 2 is the additional effect of the Medicaid expansion in a county with the

median rate of pre-ACA insurance coverage. This makes (2013 )(1 +  2 ) the

complete effect of the ACA in the median county within a Medicaid expansion state. These
estimates can be interpreted as causal under assumptions analogous to the difference-in-
differences assumptions: the outcome in counties with differing levels of pre-ACA health
insurance enrollment must follow parallel trends pre-ACA, and there should be no systematic
changes in circumstances in counties with differing levels of pre-ACA health insurance
enrollment, at the same time as ACA implementation.




                                                63
Figure C1. County-Level Health Uninsurance Rate in 2013




Source: Small Area Health Insurance Estimates (SAHIE) in 2013. Note: Graph shows health
uninsurance rate in 2013 at the county level. Sample excludes early (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA) and
late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states.



Tables C1 and C2 report results for the dose response models. The results from these models are
starkly different than the estimates from the difference-in-difference and synthetic control
models, but are unlikely causal estimates due to a lack of parallel trends. Six of the eight
subsamples suggest negative and statistically significant effects of the ACA on graduation,
coupled with smaller positive estimates of the additional effect of the Medicaid expansion.
These results appear to result from a violation of the no pre-reform trends assumption underlying
the model. Tables C3 and C4 report full event time estimates for these dose response models, and
for the six subsamples with the strong estimates of the effect of the ACA; all six have large and
consistently statistically significant point estimates for the pre-ACA time period. The remaining
two subsamples that pass the test of the parallel trends assumption--degrees at for-profit
institutions (Table 3, column 4) and degrees for Registered, Clinical Nursing, Nursing Admin,
and Research (Table 4, column 1)--estimate small and statistically insignificant effects of both
the Medicaid expansion and the ACA in general. While the dose ­response strategy was a priori

                                                 64
a promising one for investigating local educational market responses to ACA-induced demand
increases, the violation of the parallel trends assumption does not permit us to draw any useful
conclusions from this exercise.




                                                65
Table C1. Triple-Difference Regression Results and Implied Effects for Number of
Graduates
                                       All Health     Top 4      Less than     At For-Profit
                                          Care     Professions   One Year       Institution
                                           (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)
 Panel A1. Regression Coefficients: Dependent Variable: # of Graduates (1,000)
 Post X Uninsured 2013                  -9.44**      -7.73**     -5.21***          -1.47
                                         (4.28)       (2.98)       (1.14)         (1.89)
 Post X Uninsured 2013 X Medicaid
 Expansion                                3.48        2.77          0.98                   0.92
                                         (4.46)      (3.12)        (2.51)                 (2.12)
 Panel A2. Implied Effects at Mean Pre-treatment Uninsured Rate:
 ACA w/o Medicaid Expansion             -1.58**     -1.30**      -0.88***                  -0.22
                                         (0.72)      (0.50)        (0.19)                 (0.29)
 Medicaid Expansion                       0.58        0.46          0.17                    0.14
                                         (0.75)      (0.52)        (0.43)                 (0.32)
 Full ACA (with Medicaid expansion)     -1.00**    -0.83***       -0.72*                   -0.08
                                         (0.41)      (0.29)        (0.38)                 (0.12)
 Economic Conditions                      Yes         Yes           Yes                     Yes
 County Fixed Effects                     Yes         Yes           Yes                     Yes
 State-Year Fixed Effects                 Yes         Yes           Yes                     Yes
 Pre-Period Mean of Dependent
 Variable                                    2.61           1.74          0.43             0.46
 # Obs.                                     15,744         15,744        15,744           15,744

Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Health un-
insurance rate is from SAHIE (2013). Note: Each cell reports coefficients of indicated
variables. (1) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51. (2) includes graduates in CIPCODEs 51.38,
51.39, 51.07, 51.08. (3) includes graduates with award level equal to 1. (4) includes graduates in
institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or 9. Sample excludes early expansion states (CA, CT, MN,
NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties with populations less
than 10,000. All regressions are weighted by population count in 2010 (source: Census Bureau).
Expansion equals 1 if state expanded Medicaid in Jan. 2014. Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after.
Economic conditions include unemployment rate (source: Bureau of Labor Statistics), median
household income and poverty rate (source: Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE)
at the county level. All regressions are weighted by 2010 county population (source: Census
Bureau). Heteroskedasticity-robust state-clustered standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10 **
p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                66
Table C2. Triple-Difference Regression Results and Implied Effects for Number of
Graduates in Selected Professions
                             Registered,                                    Practical
                              Clinical                                      Nursing,
                              Nursing,     Allied Health    Health and     Vocational
                              Nursing      and Medical       Medical      Nursing, and
                             Admin, and     Assisting         Admin         Nursing
                              Research       Services        Services      Assistants
                                (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)
 Panel A1. Regression Coefficients: Dependent Variable: # of Graduates (1,000)
 Post X Uninsured 2013         1.94       -4.46***        -3.61*        -1.60**
                              (1.22)        (1.13)        (1.97)         (0.76)
 Post X Uninsured 2013 X
 Medicaid Expansion            -1.88          1.97        2.10               0.58
                              (1.22)         (1.39)      (1.89)             (1.17)
 Panel A2. Implied Effects at Mean Pre-treatment Uninsured Rate:
 ACA w/o Medicaid
 Expansion                      0.32       -0.74***     -0.59*              -0.27**
                              (0.20)         (0.19)      (0.32)              (0.13)
 Medicaid Expansion            -0.31          0.33        0.35                0.10
                              (0.20)         (0.23)      (0.31)              (0.20)
 Full ACA (with
 Medicaid Expansion)            0.01          -0.41**        -0.25**         -0.18
                               (0.08)          (0.16)         (0.11)        (0.16)
 Economic Conditions            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
 County Fixed Effects           Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
 State-Year Fixed Effects       Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
 Pre-Period Mean of
 Dependent Variable                0.61          0.49            0.44           0.20
 # Obs.                           15,744        15,744         15,744         15,744
Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Health un-
insurance rate is from SAHIE (2013). Note: Each cell reports coefficients of indicated
variables. (1) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.38. (2) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.08.
(3) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.07. (4) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.39. Top 4
professions account for 65% of total health care workforce. Sample excludes early expansion
states (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties
with populations less than 10,000. All regressions are weighted by population count in 2010
(source: Census Bureau). Expansion equals 1 if state expanded Medicaid in Jan. 2014. Post
equals 1 if in 2014 or after. Economic conditions include unemployment rate (source: Bureau of
Labor Statistics), median household income, and poverty rate (source: Small Area Income and
Poverty Estimates-SAPIE) at the county level. All regressions are weighted by population count
at the county level in 2010 (source: Census Bureau). Heteroskedasticity-robust state-clustered
standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

                                              67
Table C3. Full Event Study Regression of Dose Response Model for Graduates in Health
Care, Top 4 Professions, in Less than One Year, and at For-Profit Institutions
                                     All Health      Top 4      Less than     For-profit
                                        Care      Professions   One Year      Institution
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)
 2010*Uninsured 2013                  6.46***       6.17***      6.88***       -1.97**
                                       (1.90)        (1.68)       (1.62)        (0.86)
 2011* Uninsured 2013                 6.84***        5.19**       3.06**         -0.15
                                       (2.37)        (2.22)       (1.20)        (0.73)
 2012* Uninsured 2013                    1.98         1.14       1.42***         -0.30
                                       (1.42)        (1.42)       (0.40)        (0.32)
 2014* Uninsured 2013                 -2.18**      -1.61***     -0.77***         -0.36
                                       (0.97)        (0.49)       (0.25)        (0.47)
 2015* Uninsured 2013                   -5.79        -4.83*      -2.44**         -1.34
                                       (3.62)        (2.68)       (1.09)        (2.07)
 2016* Uninsured 2013                   -7.09        -6.23*     -3.19***         -1.57
                                       (5.09)        (3.48)       (0.85)        (2.14)
 2017* Uninsured 2013                  -8.13*       -6.74**     -3.17***         -1.74
                                       (4.33)        (2.89)       (0.72)        (1.82)
 2010*Medicaid
 Expansion*Uninsured 2013               -1.41        -2.03        -0.78          1.26
                                       (2.94)       (2.09)       (2.58)         (0.97)
 2011*Medicaid Expansion*
 Uninsured 2013                         -2.42        -2.17        1.03           0.44
                                       (3.47)       (2.46)       (2.73)         (0.98)
 2012*Medicaid Expansion*
 Uninsured 2013                         3.28         2.24         2.79           1.31
                                       (3.15)       (2.20)       (2.36)         (0.84)
 2014*Medicaid Expansion*
 Uninsured 2013                        1.93*         1.02         1.46           0.40
                                       (0.98)       (0.71)       (0.97)         (0.56)
 2015*Medicaid Expansion*
 Uninsured 2013                         2.96         2.16         1.47           1.17
                                       (3.32)       (2.49)       (1.07)         (2.26)
 2016*Medicaid Expansion*
 Uninsured 2013                         3.64         2.65        1.72*           1.43
                                       (4.84)       (3.32)       (0.98)         (2.28)
 2017*Medicaid Expansion*
 Uninsured 2013                         3.73         2.09         1.21           1.19
                                       (3.93)       (2.69)       (0.96)         (2.06)

                                          68
 Economic Conditions                            Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes
 County Fixed Effects                           Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes
 State -Year Fixed Effects                      Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes
 Baseline Mean                                  2.61           1.74           0.43             0.46
 Joint Significance F- Test                    11.42          12.42           8.20             5.39
 P Value                                        0.00           0.00           0.00             0.00
 # Obs.                                       15,744         15,744         15,744           15,744
Sources: # of graduates is from Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS)
2010-17. Health un-insurance rate is from SAHIE (2013). Note: Each cell reports coefficients
of indicated variables. (1) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.(2) includes graduates in
CIPCODEs 51.38, 51.39, 51.07, 51.08.(3) includes graduates with award level equal to 1. (4)
includes graduates in institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or 9. Sample excludes early expansion
states (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties
with populations less than 10,000. Expansion equals 1 if state expanded Medicaid in Jan. 2014.
Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after. Economic conditions include unemployment rate (source:
Bureau of Labor Statistics), median household income, and poverty rate (source: Small Area
Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE) at the county level. Baseline year is 2013. Joint
significance F test for coefficients of pre-2014 interactions jointly equal 0. All regressions are
weighted by 2010 county population (source: Census Bureau). Heteroskedasticity-robust state-
clustered standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                69
Table C4. Full Event Study Regression of Dose Response Model for Graduates in Selected
Health Care Professions

                                     Registered,                                Practical
                                      Clinical       Allied                     Nursing,
                                      Nursing,     Health and   Health and     Vocational
                                      Nursing       Medical      Medical      Nursing, and
                                     Admin, and    Assisting      Admin         Nursing
                                      Research      Services     Services      Assistants
                                          (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)
 2010* Uninsured 2013                   -1.69       3.31***        5.59*          -0.31
                                       (1.38)        (0.93)       (2.97)         (0.58)
 2011* Uninsured 2013                   -1.81       4.23***       2.88**        0.22***
                                       (1.58)        (1.04)       (1.07)         (0.08)
 2012* Uninsured 2013                   -1.13       1.84***      0.67***          -0.16
                                       (0.74)        (0.60)       (0.18)         (0.20)
 2014* Uninsured 2013                    0.81         -1.75         0.05       -0.49***
                                       (0.58)        (1.12)       (0.26)         (0.18)
 2015* Uninsured 2013                    0.83       -1.73**        -1.61          -2.08
                                       (0.54)        (0.81)       (1.17)         (1.34)
 2016* Uninsured 2013                    0.43       -2.28**        -2.14         -1.96*
                                       (0.51)        (1.03)       (1.64)         (1.12)
 2017* Uninsured 2013                    1.12      -3.03***        -2.02        -2.30**
                                       (0.86)        (1.01)       (1.28)         (1.10)
 2010*Medicaid
 Expansion*Uninsured 2013               1.28         -0.95        -3.85          1.08
                                       (1.48)       (1.25)       (3.04)         (0.95)
 2011*Medicaid
 Expansion*Uninsured 2013               1.82        -2.78**       -1.67          0.16
                                       (1.70)        (1.34)      (1.13)         (0.68)
 2012*Medicaid
 Expansion*Uninsured 2013              1.35*         -0.35        0.08           0.75
                                       (0.78)       (0.86)       (0.86)         (0.72)
 2014*Medicaid
 Expansion*Uninsured 2013               -0.32        1.24         -0.50         0.44*
                                       (0.57)       (1.14)       (0.45)         (0.24)
 2015*Medicaid
 Expansion*Uninsured 2013              -1.21**       0.75         0.93           1.63
                                        (0.56)      (0.94)       (1.04)         (1.27)
 2016*Medicaid
 Expansion*Uninsured 2013               -0.35        0.75         1.42           0.91
                                       (0.73)       (1.09)       (1.44)         (1.19)
                                          70
 2017*Medicaid
 Expansion*Uninsured 2013                      -1.21          0.96            0.97             1.25
                                              (0.90)         (0.98)          (1.08)           (1.12)
 Economic Conditions                            Yes             Yes           Yes               Yes
 County Fixed Effects                           Yes             Yes           Yes               Yes
 State -Year Fixed Effects                      Yes             Yes           Yes               Yes
 Baseline Mean                                 0.64             0.49          0.42             0.18
 Joint Significance F- Test                    1.41            27.79          9.45             8.51
 P Value                                       0.24             0.00          0.00             0.00
 # Obs.                                       15,744          15,744        15,744           15,744
Sources: # of graduates is from Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS)
2010-17. Health un-insurance rate is from SAHIE (2013). Note: Each cell reports coefficients
of indicated variables. (1) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.38. (2) includes graduates in
CIPCODE 51.08. (3) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.07. (4) includes graduates in
CIPCODE 51.39. Top 4 professions account for 65% of total health care workforce. Sample
excludes early expansion states (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK,
MT, LA), and counties with populations less than 10,000. Expansion equals 1 if state expanded
Medicaid in Jan. 2014. Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after. Economic conditions include
unemployment rate (source: Bureau of Labor Statistics), median household income, and poverty
rate (source: Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE) at the county level. Baseline
year is 2013. Joint significance F test for coefficients of pre-2014 interactions jointly equal 0. All
regressions are weighted by population count in 2010 (source: Census Bureau).
Heteroskedasticity-robust state-clustered standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 ***
p<0.01




Appendix C References

Courtemanche, C., Friedson, A., Koller, A.P., & Rees, D.I. (2019). The Affordable Care Act and
Ambulance Response Times. Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.

Courtemanche, C., Marton, J., Ukert, B., Yelowitz, A., & Zapata, D. (2017). Early Impacts of the
Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage in Medicaid Expansion and Non-expansion
States. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 36(1), 178-210.




                                                 71
Appendix D. Supplementary Analysis on Extensive Margin

1. Full Event Study Regression for Having a Program

We use the following specification to model the extensive margin (results are presented in Table
C1)

(,, > 0) = 0 + 2017
               =2010   [ = ]   + 2 ,, +  +  + ,,



Where ,, > 0 is whether a county has a program, Expansion is whether state expanded
Medicaid, ,, is a vector of time-variant county characteristics,  is a vector of county fixed
effects,  is a vector of year fixed effects, and ,, is the error term.




                                               72
         Table D1. Full Event Study Regression of Having a Program

Dependent Variable:   All Health     Top 4       Less than        For-Profit   Registered    Allied      Health     Practical
Having a Program         Care      Professions   One Year        Institution    ,Clinical    Health       and       Nursing,
                                                                                Nursing,      and       Medical    Vocationa
                                                                                Nursing     Medical      Admin     l Nursing,
                                                                                 Admin,     Assisting   Services      and
                                                                                  and       Services                Nursing
                                                                               Research                            Assistants

                         (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
2010*Medicaid          -0.000        0.000       -0.041**         -0.014         0.01        0.02        0.01        0.02
Expansion
                      (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.016)        (0.020)        (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)
2011*Medicaid          0.001         0.000       -0.043**         -0.002         0.01        0.01        0.00        0.02
Expansion
                      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.016)        (0.014)        (0.00)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.02)
2012*Medicaid          0.002         0.002       -0.027**         -0.002         0.00        0.01        -0.00       -0.01
Expansion
                      (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.011)        (0.012)        (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.01)     (0.02)
2014*Medicaid          -0.004      -0.009**        -0.003         -0.009         -0.00       0.01       -0.02**      0.00
Expansion
                      (0.003)        (0.004)      (0.010)        (0.005)        (0.00)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)
2015*Medicaid         -0.007*      -0.016***      -0.021*         -0.028         0.00        0.00        -0.01       0.01
Expansion
                      (0.004)        (0.005)      (0.012)         (0.019)       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)
2016*Medicaid          -0.007      -0.019***       -0.009        -0.044**        -0.00       0.00        0.00        -0.00
Expansion
                       (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.020)        (0.017)       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)
2017*Medicaid         -0.013**     -0.023***     -0.047***       -0.033**        -0.00       -0.00       -0.01       -0.02
Expansion
                      (0.006)       (0.008)       (0.015)        (0.013)        (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.02)
Economic                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Conditions
Year Fixed              Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
Effect
State Fixed             Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes            No          No          No          No
Effects
County Fixed             No           No            No              No           Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
Effects
Baseline Mean           0.86          0.84         0.69            0.57          0.78        0.73        0.76        0.71
Joint Significant       0.26          0.15         2.68            0.46          1.38        0.40        0.59        1.09
F Test
P-value                 0.85         0.93          0.06            0.71          0.26        0.75        0.62        0.37
# Obs.                 15744        15744         15744           15744         15744       15744       15744       15744

                                                            73
Source: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System in 2010-17. Notes: The table displays
the indicated coefficients from OLS regressions. Sample excludes early (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA)
and late (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA) expansion states. Column (1) includes graduates in health
care sector (CIPCODE 51). Column (2) includes graduates with award level equal to 1. Column
(3) includes graduates in institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or 9. Column (4) includes graduates
in CIPCODEs 51.38, 51.07, 51.08, 51.39. Column (5) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.38.
Column (6) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.07. Column (7) includes graduates in CIPCODE
51.08. Column (8) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.39. Expansion equals 1 if state expanded
Medicaid in Jan. 2014. Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after. Economic conditions include
unemployment rate (source: Bureau of Labor Statistics-BLS), median household income, and
poverty rate (source: Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE). See Appendix B for
detailed coding definitions. Baseline year is 2013. Joint significance F test of pre-2014
interactions jointly equal 0. All regressions are weighted by population count at the county level
in 2010. Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered by state are in parentheses. *
p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01.




                                                74
2. Dose Response Model for Having a Program

Table D2: Dose Response Model for Having a Program in Health Care, Top 4 Professions,
in Less than One Year, and at For-Profit Institutions
 Dependent Variable: Having a All Health         Top 4     Less than     For-Profit
 Program                            Care      Professions  One Year      Institution
                                     (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)
 Panel A1. Regression Coefficients: Dependent Variable: Having Graduates
 Post X Uninsured                 -0.26*        -0.34**       0.02          0.02
                                   (0.15)        (0.14)      (0.12)        (0.25)
 Post X Uninsured X Medicaid       0.34*         0.48**     -1.43*          0.20
 Expansion
                                   (0.17)        (0.18)      (0.81)        (0.32)
 Panel A2. Implied Effects at Mean Pre-treatment Uninsured Rate:

ACA w/o Medicaid                     -0.04*          -0.06**        0.00             0.00
Expansion
                                     (0.03)          (0.02)        (0.02)           (0.04)
Medicaid Expansion                   0.06*           0.08**        -0.24*            0.03
                                     (0.03)          (0.03)        (0.14)           (0.05)
Full ACA (with Medicaid               0.01            0.02         -0.24*            0.03
expansion)
                                     (0.01)          (0.02)        (0.13)           (0.03)
Economic Conditions                   Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes
County Fixed Effects                  Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes
State-Year Fixed Effects              Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes
Pre-Period Mean of                    0.86            0.84          0.68             0.57
Dependent Variable
# Obs.                               15,744          15,744        15,744           15,744
Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Health un-
insurance rate is from SAHIE (2013). Note: Each cell reports coefficients of indicated
variables. (1) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51. (2) includes graduates in CIPCODEs 51.38,
51.39, 51.07, 51.08. (3) includes graduates with award level equal to 1. (4) includes graduates in
institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or 9. Sample excludes early expansion states (CA, CT, MN,
NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties with populations less
than 10,000. All regressions are weighted by population count in 2010 (source: Census Bureau).
Expansion equals 1 if state expanded Medicaid in Jan. 2014. Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after.
Economic conditions include unemployment rate (source: Bureau of Labor Statistics), median
household income, and poverty rate (source: Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE)
at the county level. All regressions are weighted by population count at the county level in 2010
(source: Census Bureau). Heteroskedasticity-robust state-clustered standard errors in
parentheses. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01


                                                75
Table D3: Dose Response Model for Having a Program in Selected Profession

Dependent Variable: Having a   Registered,     Allied      Health and     Practical
Program                          Clinical    Health and      Medical      Nursing,
                                 Nursing,     Medical        Admin       Vocational
                                 Nursing      Assisting     Services    Nursing, and
                               Admin, and     Services                    Nursing
                                Research                                 Assistants
                                     (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)
Panel A1. Regression Coefficients: Dependent Variable: Having Graduates
Post X Uninsured                   -0.14      -0.35**          -0.14        -0.17
                                  (0.10)       (0.13)         (0.15)       (0.19)
Post X Uninsured X Medicaid         0.17        0.36            0.12         0.12
Expansion
                                  (0.23)       (0.32)         (0.31)       (0.52)
Panel A2. Implied Effects at Mean Pre-treatment Uninsured Rate:
ACA w/o Medicaid                   -0.02      -0.06**          -0.02        -0.03
Expansion
                                  (0.02)       (0.02)         (0.02)       (0.03)
Medicaid Expansion                  0.03        0.06            0.02         0.02
                                  (0.04)       (0.05)         (0.05)       (0.09)
Full ACA (with Medicaid             0.00        0.00           -0.00        -0.01
Expansion)
                                  (0.03)       (0.05)         (0.04)       (0.08)
Economic Conditions                 Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes
County Fixed Effects                Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes
State-Year Fixed Effects            Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes
Pre-Period Mean of                  0.78        0.73            0.76         0.71
Dependent Variable
# Obs.                              15,744         15,744         15,744          15,744
Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Health un-
insurance rate is from SAHIE (2013). Note: Each cell reports coefficients of indicated
variables. (1) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.38. (2) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.08.
(3) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.07. (4) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.39. Top 4
professions account for 65% of total health care workforce. Sample excludes early expansion
states (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties
with populations less than 10,000. All regressions are weighted by population count in 2010
(source: Census Bureau). Expansion equals 1 if state expanded Medicaid in Jan. 2014. Post
equals 1 if in 2014 or after. Economic conditions include unemployment rate (source: Bureau of
Labor Statistics), median household income, and poverty rate (source: Small Area Income and
Poverty Estimates-SAPIE) at the county level. All regressions are weighted by population count
at the county level in 2010 (source: Census Bureau). Heteroskedasticity-robust state-clustered

                                              76
standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01


3. Event Study Regression for Dose Response Model of Having a Program

We use the following event study specification for dose response model of having a program
(results are presented in Table C4 and Table C5).

,, > 0 = 0 + 2017
             =2010(1, ×  2013 , × 1[ =  ]) +
2017
=2010(1, ×  2013 , ×  × 1[ = ]) + 2 ,, +  + , +
,,

Where ,, > 0 is whether a county has a program, Expansion is whether state expanded
Medicaid, Uninsurance 2013 is county-level uninsurance rate, ,, is a vector of time-variant
county characteristics,  is a vector of county fixed effects, , is a vector of state-year fixed
effects, and ,, is the error term.




                                               77
Table D4. Full Event Study Regression for Dose Response Model of Having a Program in
Health Care, Top 4 Professions, in Less than One Year, and at For-Profit Institutions

                                                 All Health    Top 4      Less than   For-Profit
                                                    Care    Professions   One Year    Institution
 Dependent Variable: Having a Program                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)
 2010* Uninsurance 2013                              0.05        0.06       -0.85*        0.17
                                                   (0.05)      (0.12)       (0.46)      (0.36)
 2011* Uninsurance 2013                              0.04       -0.01        -0.70       -0.15
                                                   (0.05)      (0.06)       (0.54)      (0.27)
 2012* Uninsurance 2013                             -0.03       -0.00        -0.41       -0.17
                                                   (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.26)      (0.27)
 2014* Uninsurance 2013                           -0.23*      -0.32**        -0.28       -0.24
                                                   (0.13)      (0.14)       (0.40)      (0.15)
 2015* Uninsurance 2013                             -0.24     -0.32**       -0.55*       -0.06
                                                   (0.16)      (0.16)       (0.30)      (0.23)
 2016* Uninsurance 2013                             -0.26      -0.37*      -0.68**        0.02
                                                   (0.17)      (0.19)       (0.31)      (0.28)
 2017* Uninsurance 2013                             -0.28       -0.31        -0.52        0.25
                                                   (0.19)      (0.20)       (0.32)      (0.27)
 2010*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013           -0.06       -0.09        1.05*        0.19
                                                   (0.10)      (0.13)       (0.59)      (0.53)
 2011*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013           -0.12       -0.11         1.09        0.22
                                                   (0.08)      (0.15)       (0.66)      (0.29)
 2012*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013            0.04       -0.02        0.68*        0.30
                                                   (0.05)      (0.06)       (0.39)      (0.29)
 2014*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013          0.30*       0.38**         0.09        0.23
                                                   (0.15)      (0.14)       (0.49)      (0.19)
 2015*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013            0.27      0.38**         0.43        0.54
                                                   (0.17)      (0.17)       (0.39)      (0.48)
 2016*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013            0.28      0.46**         0.16        0.53
                                                   (0.18)      (0.21)       (0.58)      (0.48)
 2017*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013            0.35        0.50        -3.70        0.22
                                                   (0.22)      (0.32)       (2.47)      (0.47)
 Economic Conditions                               Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 County Fixed Effects                              Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 State -Year Fixed Effects                         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 Baseline Mean                                     0.86        0.84         0.68        0.57
 Joint Significance F- Test                        4.85        0.35          1.6        0.79
 P Value                                            0          0.91         0.17        0.58
 # Obs.                                           15,744      15,744       15,744      15,744


                                            78
Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Health un-
insurance rate is from SAHIE (2013). Note: Each cell reports coefficients of indicated
variables. (1) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51. (2) includes graduates in CIPCODEs 51.38,
51.39, 51.07, 51.08. (3) includes graduates with award level equal to 1. (4) includes graduates in
institutions with sector codes 3, 6, or 9. Sample excludes early expansion states (CA, CT, MN,
NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties with populations less
than 10,000. All regressions are weighted by population count in 2010 (source: Census Bureau).
Expansion equals 1 if state expanded Medicaid in Jan. 2014. Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after.
Economic conditions include unemployment rate (source: Bureau of Labor Statistics), median
household income, and poverty rate (source: Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE)
at the county level. Baseline year is 2013. Joint significance F test of pre-2014 interactions
jointly equal 0. All regressions are weighted by population count at the county level in 2010
(source: Census Bureau). Heteroskedasticity-robust state-clustered standard errors in
parentheses. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                79
Table D5. Full Event Study Regression for Dose Response Model of Having a Program in
Selected Health Care Professions

                                                Registered,    Allied                  Practical
                                                                           Health
                                                 Clinical      Health                  Nursing,
                                                                            and
                                                 Nursing,       and                   Vocational
Dependent Variable: Having a Program                                      Medical
                                                 Nursing      Medical                Nursing, and
                                                                           Admin
                                                Admin, and    Assisting                Nursing
                                                                          Services
                                                 Research     Services                Assistants
                                                    (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)
2010* Uninsurance 2013                             -0.11      0.46**      -0.35***       0.43
                                                  (0.18)       (0.21)       (0.11)      (0.41)
2011* Uninsurance 2013                              0.03      0.29***        -0.11       0.32
                                                  (0.10)       (0.06)       (0.13)      (0.37)
2012* Uninsurance 2013                             -0.00        -0.04        -0.05       0.16
                                                  (0.02)       (0.07)       (0.11)      (0.21)
2014* Uninsurance 2013                             -0.09         0.09     -0.46***       0.02
                                                  (0.07)       (0.11)       (0.12)      (0.08)
2015* Uninsurance 2013                              0.03        -0.29        -0.25       0.06
                                                  (0.12)       (0.23)       (0.23)      (0.10)
2016* Uninsurance 2013                             -0.30        -0.27        -0.23       0.05
                                                  (0.20)       (0.21)       (0.21)      (0.16)
2017* Uninsurance 2013                            -0.33*        -0.31        -0.12       0.06
                                                  (0.17)       (0.23)       (0.26)      (0.17)
2010*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013           -0.10        -0.65       0.81**      -0.78
                                                  (0.22)       (0.46)       (0.35)      (0.51)
2011*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013           -0.10       -0.65*       1.01**      -0.53
                                                  (0.11)       (0.35)       (0.45)      (0.45)
2012*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013           -0.04        -0.14         0.25       0.44
                                                  (0.05)       (0.37)       (0.19)      (0.40)
2014*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013            0.25         0.05      0.89***       0.15
                                                  (0.16)       (0.29)       (0.26)      (0.46)
2015*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013           -0.17         0.05        0.72*       0.01
                                                  (0.27)       (0.46)       (0.41)      (0.48)
2016*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013            0.17        -0.02         0.42       0.09
                                                  (0.31)       (0.44)       (0.32)      (0.49)
2017*Medicaid Expansion*Uninsurance 2013            0.19        -0.13         0.53      -0.66
                                                  (0.29)       (0.47)       (0.46)      (1.12)
Economic Conditions                                Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
County Fixed Effects                               Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
State -Year Fixed Effects                          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes


                                           80
 Baseline Mean                                           0.78           0.73         0.76         0.71
 Joint Significance F- Test                              0.68           7.53         3.09         3.67
 P Value                                                 0.66             0          0.01         0.01
 # Obs.                                                15,744          15,744      15,744        15,744
Sources: Integrated Post-secondary Education Data System (IPEDS) 2010-17. Health un-
insurance rate is from SAHIE (2013). Note: Each cell reports coefficients of indicated
variables. (1) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.38. (2) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.08.
(3) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.07. (4) includes graduates in CIPCODE 51.39. Top 4
professions account for 65% of total health care workforce. Sample excludes early expansion
states (CA, CT, MN, NJ, WA), late expansion states (NH, PA, IN, AK, MT, LA), and counties
with populations less than 10,000. Expansion equals 1 if state expanded Medicaid in Jan. 2014.
Post equals 1 if in 2014 or after. Economic conditions include unemployment rate (source:
Bureau of Labor Statistics), median household income, and poverty rate (source: Small Area
Income and Poverty Estimates-SAPIE) at the county level. Baseline year is 2013. Joint
significance F test for coefficients of pre-2014 interactions jointly equal 0. All regressions are
weighted by population count in 2010 (source: Census Bureau). Heteroskedasticity-robust state-
clustered standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                 81
