                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE COST OF A CARBON-FREE ELECTRICITY SYSTEM IN THE U.S.

                                           Geoffrey Heal

                                       Working Paper 26084
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26084


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                              July 2019, Revised July 2019




I thank Brian Prest of RFF for pointing out an error in an earlier version. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Geoffrey Heal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Cost of a Carbon-Free Electricity System in the U.S.
Geoffrey Heal
NBER Working Paper No. 26084
July 2019, Revised July 2019
JEL No. Q0,Q01,Q50

                                           ABSTRACT

I calculate the cost of replacing all power stations in the U.S. using coal and gas by wind and
solar power stations by 2050, leaving electric power generation in the U.S. carbon free. Allowing
for the savings in the cost of fossil fuel arising from the replacement of fossil fuel plants this is
roughly $55 billion annually. Allowing in addition for the fact that most fossil plants in the U.S.
are already old and would have to be replaced before 2050 even if we were not to go fossil free,
this annual cost is reduced to $23 billion.


Geoffrey Heal
Graduate School of Business
516 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
gmh1@columbia.edu
1     Introduction

In 2017 I published a paper estimating the investment required to make all

electric power generation in the US carbon-free by 2050 (Heal 2017). I gave a

wide range of estimates, the best case being $1.28 trillion and the worst being

$3.97 trillion. In the short time since that paper was published, costs have

fallen faster than I anticipated, both for renewable energy sources such as wind

and solar photovoltaic, and also for energy storage devices such as lithium ion

batteries. I am therefore redoing my earlier calculations with the best current

cost estimates. Over the three decades between now and mid century, costs

will of course change again, so that the numbers here are still only suggestive

estimates. With one exception, I am taking U.S. Energy Information Agency

current costs, as of mid 2019, and projecting these forward. As costs have

tended to fall rather than rise, I expect that this will produced an overestimate

of the cost of a carbon-free power system, but any estimate of the size of the

error is guesswork.

    My conclusion is that the likely net investment required to go carbon-free is

now as little as $0.74 trillion. I no longer think it is useful to give a worst case

scenario, as the drop in costs and increases in efficiency over the last decade

now seems obviously irreversible, and it is clear that prices will only move one

way. This figure of $0.74 trillion includes offsets from fuel savings as we no

longer need to buy coal or gas, and also includes capital cost offsets reflecting

the fact that most coal plants in the US have to be replaced well before 2050

as they are already near the ends of their useful lives. The cost of replacing

them should therefore not be charged to the conversion to non-carbon energy

sources. Each of these offsets is of the order of one trillion dollars, so they have

big impacts on the final numbers. Although the cost of replacing old coal plants

should not be regarded as a cost of conversion to carbon-free energy sources, it


                                         2
is nevertheless a real cost that has to be paid, and if we include it in the total

then the cost increases from $0.74 trillion to $1.75 trillion. But the bulk of this

is replacing very old power plants that are unsafe and obsolete, and need to be

replaced whether we convert to clean energy or not. My earlier estimates also

included both of these offsets, so the cost including both offsets has fallen from

$1.28 trillion to $0.74 trillion. This low number reflects the fact that renewable

power from wind and solar PV plants is now less expensive than power from gas,

coal or nuclear plants, as documented for example by Lazards' studies of the

levelized cost of electricity from alternative sources (Lazard 2018). If it were not

for the intermittency of renewables, we would save money by converting to clean

power. As it is, we need to invest in storage to manage the intermittency and

this leaves us with a small net cost to converting the power sector to non-carbon

energy sources.



2    Methodology

The method that I use for these calculations is the same as in the earlier paper,

and is entirely straightforward. I calculate the amount of wind and solar PV

nameplate capacity that would be needed to produce all the mWh of electricity

currently produced by coal and gas plants,1 and then calculate the cost of this

capacity. I then make an estimate of the amount of storage capacity needed

to deal with the intermittency of the renewable sources. Together with an

allowance for improving the grid, this gives the total gross cost of the transition

to to renewables. Against this I set the offsets mentioned in section 1: the

savings in fossil fuel costs that result from replacing coal and gas by wind and

solar, and also the allowance for the fact that all coal-fired power stations and
    1 Coal and gas produce 66% of total annual mWh, and total annual mWh are about 4

billion.




                                         3
many gas-fired ones would anyway have to be replaced before 2050, so that the

cost of replacing them is not properly attributable to the energy transition. I

assume that the savings in fossil fuel costs grow linearly from now to 2050, and

that fossil fuel plants are replaced at a constant rate.

   The most debatable assumption in this process is the assumption about how

much storage would be needed to cope with the intermittency of the renew-

able capacity that we install during the transition. Unfortunately there is no

firm formula for calculating the storage needed to manage the integration of

renewables into the grid. The number depends on the extent to which demand

can be managed by appropriate incentive programs, the number of dispatch-

able power plants, and the covariances between the outputs of the renewable

energy plants in use: clearly large negative covariances will reduce the need for

storage. I assume that we need sufficient storage capacity to hold the output

that all renewable plants produce over a period of two days. There are stud-

ies that suggest that this is an appropriate amount, and indeed is perhaps too

large. For a review of the issues this raises and references to the literature see

(Heal 2016). A recent paper by Shaner et al (2018) studies the possibility of

meeting US power demand purely from renewable energy from an engineering

perspective and looks at the trade-off between storage and "overbuilding," i.e.

constructing more renewable capacity than is strictly needed to meet demand,

so as to take advantage of spatial diversification. They assume all demand

is met from renewable energy or storage, whereas here I am merely replacing

output from existing fossil fuel plants by renewables, keeping in place existing

hydro, geothermal and nuclear capacities. So about 66% of the annual output of

mega-watt hours is coming from renewables and storage. Shaner et al cite sev-

eral earlier engineering studies of the possibility of meeting US demand purely

from renewables: these generally conclude that by choosing locations to exploit



                                        4
low or negative covariances is it easily possible to meet 80% of demand from

renewables without storage, and that meeting the last 20% purely from renew-

ables is very expensive, with the last 2% being especially so.2 I am avoiding

this problem by assuming existing non-fossil supplies to remain in place.

    The other assumption that I am making is that there is no seasonality to

patterns of demand and supply: I can just work with annual totals. This is

a simplification, and from some preliminary calculations seems to be one that

does no great violence to the total costs involved.

    The key facts and assumptions that underlie the calculations that follow are

the following:

    1. The U.S. produces about 4 billion mWh of electric power each year

    2. 66% of this comes from coal and gas

    3. I assume that we replace the 66% of 4 bn mWh from coal and gas by wind

      and solar in equal amounts

    4. I assume that we need enough storage capacity to hold two days of the

      output of renewable energy

    5. I assume that we need to increase the milage of high voltage grid lines by

      25%

    6. Total electricity production remains constant from now to 2050.



3     Data

The following table lists all the key parameters used in the calculations, and

their values.
   2 Note that to use low or negative covariances of output at renewable power stations to

reduce storage needs, it is necessary to construct extra capacity, known as "overbuilding."




                                            5
                              Parameter                       Value

                        Cost of wind capacity               $1,600/kW

                         Wind capacity factor                   0.42

                      Cost of solar PV capacity               $1.9/W

                       Solar PV capacity factor                 0.26

                             Cost of storage                 $75/kWh

                      Cost of high voltage lines         $2,000,000/mile

                       Miles of HV lines needed               50,000

                         Cost of coal capacity              $3,000/kW

                               Cost of coal                   $50/ton

                         Cost of gas capacity               $1,000/kW

                               Cost of gas                  $3/mmbtu

    With the exception of the cost of storage, all of these represent current

values as given by the Energy Information Agency or an equivalent source.3 It

is reasonable to expect equipment costs to fall and capacity factors to rise over

the next three decades, so that these figures are probably overestimates of the
                              4
costs we will encounter.          The one case where I have not taken current costs

is the cost of storage, which today is in the region of $175/kWh, but is widely

expected to be at or below $100/kWh by the end of 2020, and to continue falling

after that. So looking forward as far as 2050, a cost of $75/kWh does not seem

unreasonably optimistic. The declines in the cost of storage are likely to be

more significant than those in the costs of wind and solar power, and so seem

to merit anticipation.
   3 The figure for the cost of solar capacity is the EIA figure: industry sources that I talk

with suggest that it is out-of-date and far too high. Many sources cite actual costs of close to
$1/W.
   4 https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/assumptions/pdf/table_8.2.pdf                         and
https://www.energy.gov/eere/wind/downloads/2017-wind-technologies-market-report,
presentation, slide 38,




                                               6
4      Results

All calculations are available in an Excel spreadsheet on my web site.5 The

following table shows the various elements of the calculations:

                                 Category                 Cost $ trillions

                              Capacity costs                     $1.68

                               Storage costs                     $1.08

                                 Grid costs                       $0.1

                                Fuel savings                     -$1.12

                      Capacity replacement offsets               -$1.01

                        Total fuel offsets only                  $1.75

                            Total all offsets                    $0.74

                          Annual rate all offsets                $0.023

                      Annual rate fuel offsets only              $0.055

     These figures show that the annual incremental cost of transitioning to fossil-

fuel-free electricity generation system, if the total investment is spread over the

period from 2019 to 2050, is $23 billion. This is about half of what the US

currently invests in the energy sector. This incremental cost estimate does not

include the cost of replacing fossil fuel power plants that come to the ends of

their lives, as these would have to be replaced, and these costs incurred, even

if there were no transition to carbon-free electricity. Hence the costs of these

replacements are not properly attributable to decarbonization. However these

costs do have to be incurred, as the power plants will need to be replaced, and

if we included these costs the total annual investment rises to $55 billion. This

difference emphasizes the fact that many fossil fuel plants will need replacement

in the period from now to 2050. The total of $55 billion a year is roughly equal
    5 https://geoffreyheal.com/publications/publications-on-climate-change/




                                              7
to current energy infrastructure investment levels. But it must be emphasized

that the increase from $23 billion to $55 billion has nothing to do with the cost

of the transition to clean energy: it reflects the fact that we have a lot of very

old power stations that badly need to be replaced. It is important to distinguish

the cost of failing to keep our infrastructure up-to-date from the costs of the

energy transition.6

    Some of the cost figures I have used are almost surely too high. For example,

I took the cost of utility-scale solar PV from the EIA as $1.9/W, whereas in the

industry a figure of $1/W is widely assumed.7

    The Solar Energy Industry Association's annual review for 2018 gives the

average cost of utility-scale solar PV tracking installations as just over $1/W.

Using this figure reduces the total costs to $0.22 trillion and $1.23 trillion for

the cases including and excluding the capital cost offsets, with corresponding

annual costs of $2.2 billion and $102 billion.



References

[1] Geoffrey Heal. Notes of the economics of energy storage. Working Paper

    22752, NBER, https://www.nber.org/papers/w22752, October 2016.

[2] Geoffrey Heal. What would it take to reduce us greenhouse gas emissions 80

    Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 11(2):319­335, July 2017.
  6A    similar issue arises with the U.S.'s nuclear power stations, which provide about 20%
of the megawatt hours generated annually in the U.S. All but two or three will also be well
beyond their usable lives by 2050, and will have to be replaced. I am implicitly assuming
here that they are replaced by non-fossil, non-renewable power (nuclear, hydro, geothermal,
etc.), as replacing them by renewables would probably increase the need for storage and or
grid enhancements.
   7 See      for    example       https://news.energysage.com/solar-farms-start-one/    and
https://www.seia.org/research-resources/solar-market-insight-report-2018-year-review figure
2.4.




                                             8
[3] Shaner M.R. Davis S. J. Lewis N. S. Caldeira K. Geophysical constraints

   on the reliability of solar and wind power in the united states. Energy and

   Environmenal Science, 11(914), 2018.

[4] Lazards. Levelized cost of electricity v 12, November 2018.




                                       9
