                MEDICAID AND MORTALITY:
NEW EVIDENCE FROM LINKED SURVEY AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA
                       Sarah Miller
                     Norman Johnson
                     Laura R. Wherry
                  WORKING PAPER 26081
                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                       MEDICAID AND MORTALITY:
       NEW EVIDENCE FROM LINKED SURVEY AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA

                                          Sarah Miller
                                        Norman Johnson
                                        Laura R. Wherry

                                       Working Paper 26081
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26081

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 2019, Revised November 2020

First version: July 2019. This version: November 24, 2020. This paper is released to inform
interested parties of research and to encourage discussion. The views expressed in this manuscript
are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or
the National Bureau of Economic Research, and any views expressed on statistical,
methodological, technical, or operational issues are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the U.S. Census Bureau. The Census Bureau's Disclosure Review Board and Disclosure
Avoidance Officers have reviewed the statistical output for unauthorized disclosure of
confidential information and have approved the disclosure avoidance practices applied to
its release. This research was performed at a Federal Statistical Research Data Center under
FSRDC Project Number 1743 (CBDRB- FY20-P1743-R8696, CBDRB-FY20-P1743-R8671,
CBDRB-FY20-P1743-R8754). The DRB release numbers for results using the Mortality
Disparities in American Communities data are: CBDRB-FY19-310 and CBDRB-FY19-400.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the help of J. Clint Carter and John Sullivan in accessing
restricted-use Census data. The authors would also like to thank Andrew Goodman-Bacon,
Jon Gruber, Alex Hollingsworth, Lawrence Katz, Helen Levy, Kosali Simon, Ben Sommers,
and four anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. The authors also thank conference
and seminar participants at the American Society of Health Economics, Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Imperial College, Midwest Health
Economics Conference, NBER Summer Institute Health Care, NYU Wagner, Princeton
University, UC Riverside, and the University of Chicago. Wherry benefited from facilities
and resources provided by the California Center for Population Research at UCLA, which
receives core support (R24-HD041022) from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sarah Miller, Norman Johnson, and Laura R. Wherry. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Medicaid and Mortality: New Evidence from Linked Survey and Administrative Data
Sarah Miller, Norman Johnson, and Laura R. Wherry
NBER Working Paper No. 26081
July 2019, Revised November 2020
JEL No. I1,I13

                                         ABSTRACT

We use large-scale federal survey data linked to administrative death records to investigate the
relationship between Medicaid enrollment and mortality. Our analysis compares changes in
mortality for near-elderly adults in states with and without Affordable Care Act Medicaid
expansions. We identify adults most likely to benefit using survey information on socioeconomic
and citizenship status, and public program participation. We find that prior to the ACA
expansions, mortality rates across expansion and non-expansion states trended similarly, but
beginning in the first year of the policy, states that opted to expand experienced significant
reductions in mortality relative to non- expanders. Individuals in expansion states experienced a
0.132 percentage point decline in annual mortality, a 9.4 percent reduction over the sample mean,
as a result of the Medicaid expansions. The effect is driven by a reduction in disease-related
deaths and grows over time. A variety of alternative specifications, methods of inference, placebo
tests, and sample definitions confirm our main result.

Sarah Miller                                    Laura R. Wherry
Ross School of Business                         Wagner Graduate School of Public Service
University of Michigan                          New York University
701 Tappan Street                               295 Lafayette Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                             New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                        and NBER
mille@umich.edu                                 laura.wherry@nyu.edu

Norman Johnson
U.S. Bureau of the Census
norman.j.johnson@census.gov
        Low-income individuals in the U.S. experience dramatically worse health than those with high
incomes. For example, the annual mortality rate for nearly-elderly adults in families earning less than
138 percent of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL) is 1.7 percent, more than 4 times higher than the
0.4 percent rate experienced by higher-income individuals of the same age.1 This low-income group
also experiences higher risks of dying from diabetes (by 787%), cardiovascular disease (552%), and
respiratory disease (813%) in a given year relative to those in higher income families, despite the
existence of effective medical treatment and management for these types of chronic conditions. These
higher rates of death translate to dramatic differences in life expectancy across income groups. Chetty
et al. (2016) find that men at the bottom of the income distribution live on average nearly 15 years
less, and women over 10 years less, than those at the top of the income distribution conditional on
surviving to age 40. While data from nearly all countries show a positive correlation between income
and health, this correlation is stronger in the U.S. than other high income countries (Semyonov et al.,
2013).
        One policy that could play an important role in reducing these disparities is the Medicaid eligibility
expansion of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The ACA is the largest expansion of health insurance
coverage in the U.S. since the creation of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965. Over 20 million people have
gained coverage since the ACA (Martinez et al., 2018), the majority of whom are low-income adults
receiving coverage through the Medicaid program (Frean et al., 2017). Other research has shown that
this expansion in coverage improved access to effective medical care that beneficiaries otherwise would
not receive, including mortality-reducing prescription drugs (Ghosh et al., 2019),2 earlier detection and
treatment of treatable cancers (e.g. Eguia et al., 2018; Sabik et al., 2018; Soni et al., 2018), and hospital
and emergency department visits for conditions that require immediate care (Duggan et al., 2019).3
However, despite the size and scope of this policy, its impact on the health of those who benefited
remains uncertain.
        A major challenge to understanding how the ACA affects health is the limited availability of
large-scale data that links individual-level information on eligibility for expanded coverage to objective
measures of health. Analyses of survey data can use information on individual characteristics to examine
    1
       Authors' calculations using death rates from 2008 to 2013 derived from the publicly-available National Health In-
terview Survey Linked Mortality File (National Center for Health Statistics, 2019) for adults ages 55 to 64 with family
incomes below 138% FPL and those with family incomes 400% FPL or greater. We chose these two income cutoffs since
adults with family income below 138% FPL qualify for Medicaid in states that expanded their programs to include low-
income adults under the Affordable Care Act, the policy of study in this paper; also, adults with incomes below 400%
FPL qualify for subsidies for private insurance coverage.
     2
       Ghosh et al. (2019) find a substantial increase in prescription drug utilization under the ACA Medicaid expansions,
including medications for the management of diabetes, treatments for HIV and Hepatitis C, and drug therapies for car-
diovascular disease. These particular types of prescription drugs are among those demonstrated to reduce mortality.
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of randomized, controlled trials find significant decreases in all-cause and cardio-
vascular mortality for adults who receive statins (Chou et al., 2016) and decreased all-cause mortality for Type 2 diabetics
receiving glucose-lowering drugs (Zheng et al., 2018). In addition, systematic reviews of observational studies indicate
decreased mortality among HIV-infected adults initiating anti-retroviral therapy (Chou et al., 2005), as well as indirect
evidence of decreased mortality linked to cured infection under antiviral treatment for Hepatitis C (Moyer, 2013).
     3
       In addition to increasing the provision of these types of ostensibly high value services, Medicaid also increases the use
of a variety of other types of medical care such as routine screening for chronic illnesses, outpatient physician visits, use
of prescription drugs that aid in smoking cessation, and dental care, which also have the potential to improve health over
the longer term. See, for example, Finkelstein et al. (2012); Nasseh and Vujicic (2017); Semyonov et al. (2013). Gruber
and Sommers (2019) provide a summary of the evidence to date on the impact of the ACA expansions on health care
utilization.



                                                               1
eligible adults, but such data are typically limited to self-reported health measures, which may not
correlate with actual changes in health. Studies using these measures have offered inconsistent findings,
with some indicating that the ACA expansions improved self-reported health, while others found no
effect or even negative impacts of the ACA expansions on self-reported health (e.g. Cawley et al., 2018;
Courtemanche et al., 2018b; Miller and Wherry, 2017; Sommers et al., 2017). Meanwhile, analyses
with objective measures of health, such as mortality, measure changes in aggregated, population-level
statistics compiled from administrative data (e.g. Borgschulte and Vogler, 2020; Chen, 2019; Khatana
et al., 2019; Swaminathan et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2020). These data sources do not have the information
needed to determine individual eligibility and directly examine the targeted beneficiaries of the coverage
expansions. A concern is that, without information on these relevant individual-level characteristics,
these studies are underpowered to reliably detect mortality effects of the ACA (Allen and Sommers,
2019), and may in fact vastly overstate magnitudes (Black et al., 2019).
    In this paper, we provide new evidence of the impact of Medicaid on health by using administrative
Medicaid enrollment and mortality data linked to large-scale, individual survey records. We use this
novel dataset to examine the impact of the sizeable Medicaid eligibility expansion that occurred in some
states under the ACA. In 2014, the ACA expanded eligibility for the Medicaid program to include all
adults in families with incomes under 138 percent of the FPL. Previously only pregnant women, adults
with disabilities, and very low income parents tended to qualify for Medicaid coverage. Although
intended to apply to all states, a 2012 Supreme Court decision made the Medicaid eligibility expansion
optional. As a result, only 29 states and the District of Columbia expanded coverage in 2014, with 7
additional states electing to expand over the next several years. Despite non-universal adoption, the
ACA Medicaid expansions still represent a historic expansion in insurance coverage. Approximately
13.6 million adults gained Medicaid coverage under the ACA (Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access
Commission, 2018); for comparison, Medicare enrolled about 19 million elderly beneficiaries after its
creation in 1965 (Bureau of the Census, 1969). We take advantage of variation in state adoption of this
large expansion in coverage to compare changes in mortality among individuals in expansion states and
non-expansion states.
    In contrast to prior research that relies on death certificate data with limited information on indi-
vidual characteristics, our data include detailed survey measures collected from the 2008 to 2013 years
of the American Community Survey (ACS). This large-scale national survey contains approximately
4 million respondents in each year and allows us to observe information on specific characteristics
that determine Medicaid eligibility including income, citizenship status, and the receipt of other social
assistance. With this information, we are able to identify individuals targeted by the ACA Medicaid
eligibility expansions and, in this way, overcome the inherent limitations present in existing studies that
rely only on aggregate death records. We focus on those in this group who were between the ages of 55
and 64 in 2014, who are at greater risk of mortality, although we also present results for all non-elderly
adults and other age groups. We follow individuals in our sample over time to examine changes in
coverage by Medicaid, by linking respondents to administrative records on Medicaid enrollment, and
document sizeable changes in annual and cumulative Medicaid coverage in the Medicaid expansion
states. Next, we examine whether there is an associated change in mortality by linking the sample to
the Census Numident file which contains administrative records on the date of death for all individuals


                                                    2
with Social Security Numbers (SSNs) who die in the United States. The Census Numident file allows
us to observe mortality rates for our sample through 2017, four years after the initial ACA Medicaid
eligibility expansions. We further examine changes in mortality by the underlying cause of death using
data from the Mortality Disparities in American Communities (MDAC) project, which links the 2008
year of the ACS to death certificate records using the National Death Index.
     Our analysis shows that the ACA Medicaid expansions reduced mortality among this targeted
group. Prior to the expansions, individuals in our sample residing in expansion and non-expansion
states had very similar trends in both Medicaid coverage and mortality. At the time of the expansion,
the trajectories of these two groups diverged significantly, with expansion state residents seeing increases
in Medicaid coverage and decreases in annual mortality rates. In the first year following the coverage
expansion, the probability of mortality declined by about 0.089 percentage points, or a 6.4 percent
reduction over the sample mean. The estimated impact of the expansions increases over time, suggesting
that exposure to Medicaid results in increasing health improvements. By the fourth year, the expansion
reduced annual mortality rates by 0.208 percentage points among expansion state residents. In our
supplemental analysis using the MDAC data, we find evidence that healthcare amenable and internal
(disease-related) causes of death were reduced by the expansions, but no evidence that deaths due to
external causes, such as car accidents, fell. We show these estimates are robust to a large number of
alternative specifications. We also conduct several placebo tests to assess the validity of our analysis
including examining the impact of the expansions on those age 65 or older in 2014 who did not gain
Medicaid eligibility; examining the effect on individuals in higher income families who were less likely to
be affected; and, conducting the analysis in the pre-ACA period before we would expect to see relative
changes in mortality across state groups. We find no relative change in coverage or mortality across
expansion and non-expansion states among the elderly or in the pre-ACA period, settings in which no
Medicaid expansion occurred. Among those in higher income families, we find small but statistically
significant increases in Medicaid coverage as well as small decreases in mortality, consistent with a
causal impact of Medicaid on mortality.
     Our analysis provides new evidence that expanded Medicaid coverage reduces mortality rates
among low-income adults. If we assume that similarly sized mortality reductions would have oc-
curred in the non-expansion states, our estimates suggest that approximately 15,600 deaths could have
been averted if the ACA expansions were adopted nationwide as originally intended by the ACA.
This highlights an ongoing cost to non-adoption that is relevant to both state policymakers and their
constituents.

1     Background
Many studies have shown that Medicaid coverage increases access to and use of health care and reduces
financial burden for low-income adults,4 but evidence on its health effects proves more difficult to
document and is less conclusive. Studies that do examine health often rely on self-reported health
measures from survey data. The evidence from these studies spans from estimated large or modest
   4
     See, e.g., Abramowitz, 2018; Allen et al., 2017; Baicker et al., 2013; Brevoort et al., 2019; Buchmueller et al., 2016;
Caswell and Waidmann, 2017; Courtemanche et al., 2017; Finkelstein et al., 2012; Gallagher et al., 2019; Ghosh et al.,
2019; Hu et al., 2018; McMorrow et al., 2017; Miller and Wherry, 2017, 2019; Simon et al., 2017; Sommers et al., 2015,
2017.



                                                             3
improvements in reported health associated with Medicaid expansion (Cawley et al., 2018; Lee and
Porell, 2018; Simon et al., 2017; Sommers et al., 2016, 2017), to no effects (Courtemanche et al.,
2018a,b; Miller and Wherry, 2019; Sommers et al., 2015; Wherry and Miller, 2016) or even small but
marginally significant negative effects (Miller and Wherry, 2017).5
        One concern with self-reported health data is that it may not accurately measure changes in
physical health. In the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment (OHIE), low-income adults selected by a
lottery to apply for Medicaid coverage reported near immediate improvements in their health compared
to the control group, despite experiencing no significant differences yet in their health care utilization
(Finkelstein et al., 2012).6 The researchers concluded that the change in reported health may at least
partly capture a general sense of improved well-being, or "winning" effects resulting from individuals'
lottery selection. There is also the risk that changes in self-reported health may reflect increasing
awareness of health problems or interactions with the health care system, rather than actual changes
in physical health. One example would be increased contact with health providers leading to new
information about a previously undiagnosed illness and, as a consequence, a worsened self-perception
of health. This could bias downwards estimates of the effect of public health insurance on health.7
Finally, in general, the reliability of self-reported health measures for U.S. adults and their association
with objective health measures are documented to be worse among lower socioeconomic status groups
(Dowd and Zajacova, 2007, 2010; Zajacova and Dowd, 2011).
        In addition to offering the first experimental evidence on the effects of expanded Medicaid, the
Oregon Health Insurance Experiment (OHIE) covered new ground by collecting data on clinical health
measures among its participants. The researchers did not observe significant effects on any of the
collected measures (blood pressure, cholesterol, and blood sugar levels). Using administrative data,
they also found no evidence that Medicaid coverage led to a reduction in mortality during the 16 months
following coverage gain. Their estimate suggested a 16 percent reduction in mortality associated with
acquiring Medicaid, but with a large confidence interval that could not rule out sizeable changes in
either direction.8
        As the data become available, researchers are beginning to evaluate the mortality effects of the
    5
      Note that neither the time period of study nor the data sources used seem to explain these inconsistencies. In
a series of papers studying Medicaid expansions in two states (AR and KY), Sommers et al. (2015, 2016, 2017) find
evidence of significant health improvements emerging only in the second year of expansion. However, in a national study,
Courtemanche et al. (2018a,b) find no evidence of improvements in self-reported health due to Medicaid expansion during
any of the first three years of implementation. Using the same data source as these authors, Simon et al. (2017) and
Cawley et al. (2018) find evidence of sizable health improvements over the same period. Finally, Miller and Wherry (2019)
trace out the effects of Medicaid expansion during each of the first four years of implementation, using a different data
source, and find no evidence of improvements in self-reported health. The discussion here focuses on studies of overall
changes in self-reported health but a more comprehensive review of the health effects of the ACA Medicaid expansions
may be found in Soni et al. (2020), including evidence for low-income parents (McMorrow et al., 2017), adults with chronic
health conditions (Winkelman and Chang, 2018), women of reproductive age (Margerison et al., 2019), and the safety net
population (Graves et al., 2020).
    6
      The researchers found an improvement in self-reported health for the treatment group during their initial survey,
which was conducted, on average, about one month after gaining coverage, that was about two-thirds of the size of their
main effect estimated using survey data collected more than a year later.
    7
      This bias could also operate in the opposite direction if increased interaction with providers improves one's perception
of health. See Currie and Gruber (1995) for more discussion.
    8
      Another relevant randomized social experiment provided Medicare to newly entitled Social Security Disability Insur-
ance (SSDI) beneficiaries (as opposed to them being subject to a 2-year waiting period for coverage). The evaluation of
this experiment found no reductions in mortality up to 3 years later but the sample sizes were too small to be able to
detect effects (Weathers and Stegman, 2012).


                                                              4
ACA Medicaid expansions.9 A small number of recent studies use population-level mortality data
to estimate changes in adult mortality in expansion states compared to non-expansion states. The
studies examining the effects of the ACA Medicaid expansions using this approach reach very different
conclusions, either unable to detect mortality effects (Black et al., 2019) or estimating varying sized
reductions in adult mortality: 3.6 percent among adults ages 20-64 (Borgschulte and Vogler, 2020) and
1.2 percent among adults ages 55-64 (Chen, 2019). Yan et al. (2020) find no reduction in all-cause
mortality among adults ages 20-64, but a 2.7 percent decrease in health care amenable mortality.10
Khatana et al. (2019) focus on changes in cardiovascular disease-related mortality among adults ages
45-64 and document a 2.9 percent reduction over the baseline mortality rate. Finally, Swaminathan
et al. (2018) find an 8.5 percent decrease in one-year mortality for patients with end stage renal disease
(ESRD) initiating dialysis associated with the ACA Medicaid expansions.11
       There is also recent evidence that health insurance coverage (inclusive of Medicaid) can affect
mortality. Goldin et al. (2020) provide new experimental evidence documenting such mortality effects
by studying an IRS program that sent informational letters about health insurance enrollment to
a randomly-selected sample of taxpayers who were subject to the ACA mandate penalty for being
uninsured. The letters both significantly increased enrollment in insurance (both private exchange
coverage and Medicaid) and reduced mortality among those between the ages of 45 and 64 and uninsured
at the time of the intervention. The results from this experiment suggest that one additional month of
insurance coverage lowered the two year mortality rate of recipients by about 0.18 percentage points,
or over 10 percent. The authors found no effects of the letter on mortality for those under age 45.
       While the evidence to date suggests that it is likely that there are mortality effects of the ACA
Medicaid expansion, it remains unclear for whom and of what magnitude. It is likely that the primary
impediment to fully understanding the impact of Medicaid on mortality has been data availability. All
of the studies using aggregated data rely on changes in survival for the Medicaid eligible to translate into
overall mortality effects observable at the population level. Data from death certificate records contain
very little socioeconomic information on the decedent; in particular, they contain no information on
the decedent's income, other characteristics that might affect Medicaid eligibility, or whether he or she
previously had health insurance coverage. Without data that links information on individual Medicaid
eligibility to mortality, researchers must rely on differences in exposure over larger population groups
­ for example, residents of certain states or counties ­ which contain many individuals who are not
directly affected by Medicaid policy.12 This decreases the power to detect changes in mortality of a
   9
      A separate but related literature has examined the relationship between public health insurance and child mortality
using variation in exposure tied to the introduction of Medicaid and later expansions in public coverage under Medicaid and
the Children's Health Insurance Program. For the most part, these studies have found significant declines in mortality
associated with expanded coverage for infants and children both in the short-term (e.g. Currie and Gruber, 1996a,b;
Goodman-Bacon, 2018; Howell et al., 2010) and long-term (Brown et al., 2018; Goodman-Bacon, 2016; Wherry and
Meyer, 2016).
   10
      Research on pre-ACA expansions in Medicaid that also relies on aggregated data finds larger effects on adult mortality.
Sommers et al. (2012) and Sommers (2017) find a 6 percent reduction in nonelderly adult mortality in pre-ACA Medicaid
expansions in New York, Maine, and Arizona measured over a five-year period. Another analysis of expanded coverage
under Massachusetts's 2006 health reform finds a significant 2.9 percent reduction in all-cause mortality over four years
of follow-up Sommers et al. (2014).
   11
      While it is the case that ESRD patients are eligible for Medicare, coverage only begins in the fourth month after
initiating dialysis. The authors provide evidence that the expansions increased insurance coverage among individuals
initiating dialysis, and increased the receipt of pre-dialysis nephrologhy care.
   12
      Variation in exposure to the policy based on state of residence, as well as local geographic characteristics (such as


                                                             5
plausible magnitude, leading some researchers to conclude that "it will be extremely challenging for a
study [on the ACA Medicaid expansions] to reliably detect effects of insurance coverage on mortality
unless these data can be linked at the individual level to large-sample panel data" (Black et al., 2019).
     The absence of conclusive evidence on the magnitude of the health effects of Medicaid is a major
omission given the aim of this public program to improve access to and use of efficacious health care.
In this paper, we aim to contribute to this knowledge base by providing new evidence on the mortality
effects of Medicaid. We build on the accumulation of evidence from prior studies but offer three impor-
tant advantages. First, we use individual characteristics to study mortality among the Medicaid-eligible
population, rather than use analyses that rely on population-level data and may be underpowered to
detect effects. This may be particularly salient in the case of the ACA Medicaid expansions, when in-
surance coverage is estimated to have increased by as little as 1 percentage point among all nonelderly
adults (Black et al., 2019). Second, using administrative Medicaid enrollment information, we confirm
a large change in coverage for our study population. The longitudinal enrollment data improves on
the more commonly used survey measures of Medicaid coverage, which can be subject to substantial
misreporting (Boudreaux et al., 2013), and also allow us to examine the total amount of coverage
accumulated by residents of expansion states over the entire sample period. Documenting changes in
accumulated coverage is important because studies suggest that health insurance coverage can have
longer term effects that extend beyond just the coverage period (e.g. Boudreaux et al., 2016; Brown
et al., 2018; Currie et al., 2008; Goodman-Bacon, 2016; Thompson, 2017; Wherry and Meyer, 2016;
Wherry et al., 2017). Third, we estimate effects for this Medicaid-eligible population using much larger
sample sizes than were used in the only experimental evaluation of Medicaid coverage, the Oregon
Health Insurance Experiment. This larger sample is particularly important when examining mortality
as an outcome since it is rare. These advantages overcome the existing limitations in both experimental
and non-experimental studies of Medicaid, allowing us to further advance the evidence on the program's
mortality effects.

2     Data and Outcomes
To conduct our analysis, we link individuals across three different data sources. First, we use restricted
data from the 2008 to 2013 waves of the American Community Survey, which has a sample size ap-
proximately 50 percent larger than the public-use version, to identify our population of interest. We
select respondents who, based on their pre-ACA characteristics, were likely to benefit from the ACA
Medicaid expansions. We include only individuals who either are in families with income at or under
138 percent of the FPL or who have less than a high school degree.13 Since we only have information
on income captured at one point in time, the latter criterion is used to identify individuals who are of
low socioeconomic status but might not meet the income cutoff at the time of the ACS interview.14 We
baseline uninsurance or poverty rates at the county level) are sources that have been used. In addition, some researchers
have used information on the decedent's educational attainment as a proxy for individual income, although this information
is reported by the next of kin and subject to substantial measurement error (see e.g., Rostron et al., 2010; Sorlie and
Johnson, 1996).
    13
       We define family income using the Census family definition of all related individuals living in the same household.
Results are very similar if we follow the more restrictive definition of a family unit proposed by State Health Access Data
Assistance Center (2012) for studies of health insurance coverage.
    14
       Results are similar if we include only those with less than a high school degree, or only those with incomes under 138
percent of the FPL, rather than defining the sample using the union of these two criteria; see later discussion in Section


                                                             6
exclude non-citizens, many of whom are not eligible for Medicaid, and those receiving Supplemental
Security Income (SSI), who are likely to be Medicaid eligible in the absence of the expansions.15 We
restrict our primary analysis to individuals who were ages 55 to 64 in 2014. This higher age group
has relatively high mortality rates, and is also consistent with the sample criteria used in Black et al.
(2019). We present results for all non-elderly adults, and for a variety of different age subgroups, in a
supplementary analysis. Finally, we exclude residents of 4 states and DC that expanded Medicaid to
low-income adults prior to 2014.16 There are approximately 566,000 respondents who meet our sample
criteria.17
          Descriptive statistics for the sample by state Medicaid expansion status are reported in Table A1.
The average age of the respondents in the two groups is similar. However, individuals in expansion
states are slightly better off with higher average income (147% of the FPL vs. 140%) and educational
attainment (45.3% with less than high school education vs. 46.8%), as well as lower baseline rates of
uninsurance (32.6% vs. 37.3%), than individuals in non-expansion states. In addition, individuals in
expansion states are more likely to be white or Hispanic, while a higher share of those in non-expansion
states are Black.
          Second, we link these data to the Census Numident file. The Census Numident file is derived from
the Social Security Administration (SSA) Numerical Identification file, which includes information on
date and county of birth and date of death (if it has occurred) for individuals with a Social Security
Number (SSN).18 These data have been used in, e.g., Brown et al. (2018); Chetty et al. (2011, 2016);
Dobbie and Song (2015); Sullivan and von Wachter (2009), and other research relying on death in-
formation from tax records. Total deaths reported in the SSA file by age and year closely track the
numbers reported by the National Center for Health Statistics (Chetty et al., 2016). The Census Bu-
reau updates its Numident file each year with new information from the SSA Numerical Identification
file. It formats the data so that there is a single record per individual, reflecting the most accurate
and up-to-date information at that point in time. We use data from the Census Numident for deaths
occurring in 2017 and earlier.
          The Census Numident and ACS data are linked via the Census Bureau's Personal Identification
Validation System (PVS). This system assigns individuals in each dataset a protected identification key
(PIK), an anonymized identifier that allows Census to track individuals across datasets. Approximately
90 percent of all ACS respondents are successfully assigned a PIK using available information on name,
address, and date of birth, with a slightly higher match rates for citizens (92 percent) (Bond et al.,
2014). The assignment of a PIK allows respondents in the ACS to be matched to the Census Numident
file. PIKS for the Census Numident file are assigned using social security numbers (SSNs) and date
6.
     15
      SSI recipients are automatically eligible for Medicaid coverage in most states.
     16
      DE, MA, NY, and VT all expanded coverage to individuals with incomes reaching the poverty line or greater prior
to the ACA; DC received approval to implement its ACA Medicaid expansion early with enrollment starting in 2011.
   17
      Note that Census disclosure rules prohibit the disclosure of exact sample sizes and require rounding. All sample sizes
for these data are therefore rounded according to disclosure rules.
   18
      In addition to this death information from the SSA, the Census Bureau also has information on date of death from
the National Death Index (NDI) for some individuals and years, which it incorporates into its date of death measure
when available. The NDI collects detailed information on deaths from state vital statistics offices. Respondents to the
2008 ACS were linked to the NDI for the years 2008-2015, as part of the Mortality Disparities in American Communities
project.



                                                             7
of birth (Mulrow et al., 2011). Since our analysis is restricted to older citizens, and since nearly all
American citizens have SSNs assigned by the time they reach adulthood (see Bernstein et al., 2018),
we expect to have nearly full coverage of deaths in the Numident file.
       Once these data are linked, we observe the vital status of each individual during the year they
respond to the ACS and each subsequent year. For example, we observe the vital status of an individual
who responds to the 2008 ACS during each year from 2008 through 2017; for an individual who responds
to the 2013 ACS, we observe his or her vital status from 2013 through 2017. We construct our outcome
measure to represent mortality during each calendar year. If the individual is alive in a given year, the
outcome variable takes a value of 0; if that individual died in that year it takes a value of 1. Once
an individual has died, he or she is removed from the sample for subsequent years. In this way, we
measure changes in the annual probability of death during a given year among individuals who were
alive at the beginning of that year. The annual mortality rate is about 1.4 percent for our sample on
average across all years, and approximately 1.3 percent among respondents in expansion states during
the year just prior to expansion.19
       Third, we further link our sample of ACS respondents to administrative records on Medicaid
enrollment from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). We use the same PVS methods
as were applied to the mortality data to link these newly available records to our sample of ACS
respondents. About 93 percent of Medicaid enrollment records successfully receive a PIK assignment
using SSN and date of birth information (Fernandez et al., 2015). CMS data on enrollment allows us
to observe Medicaid enrollment longitudinally for our sample and to document how the probability of
enrollment, and total cumulative exposure to Medicaid, changed in the expansion states relative to the
non-expansion states. We use data from 2008 through 2016, the most recent data available. In our
analyses of cumulative enrollment, we impute the number of days enrolled in 2017 using enrollment
information from 2016, state of residence, age, gender, and race. To construct this imputation, we
use information on transitions into and out of Medicaid observed in the previous year. See Appendix
Section C for more information.20 When examining the probability of being enrolled any time during
a calendar year, we simply omit 2017 and use data on enrollment through 2016.
       While our data uniquely offer the opportunity to link mortality and economic variables at the
individual level, there are also several important limitations. First, we observe the economic charac-
teristics of individuals (income and educational attainment, receipt of social services, and citizenship
status) at the time they respond to the ACS in the pre-period, between 2008 and 2013. These are
time-varying characteristics, however, and may not accurately reflect economic characteristics at the
time of the Medicaid expansions for some members of our sample. For example, an individual in a
low-income family in 2008 may be in a higher-income family by 2014, at the time the expansions oc-
curred. Similarly, individuals may migrate to different states between the time they responded to the
  19
     These annual averages are calculated excluding mortality rates for individuals during their year of ACS interview.
  20
     There are a number of other minor data issues surrounding the CMS enrollment data. First, data on Louisiana's
Medicaid enrollment is missing in 2015, so Louisiana residents have missing values for that year in our analyses. Results
are similar if we exclude Louisiana entirely. Second, we do not observe the number of days enrolled for the fourth quarter
of 2015 for a number of states, and impute the number of days enrolled using enrollment information from Q3 2015 and
Q1 2016. Third, we do not observe Q4 2016 enrollment for Arkansas' Medicaid program, and assume it is the same as Q3
2016 enrollment. Our first stage results are not sensitive to variations on these assumptions. See Appendix Section C for
further details.



                                                            8
ACS and the time the expansions occurred, resulting in our misclassification of whether that individual
was exposed to the eligibility expansion.21 In general, we expect that this type of misclassification will
bias our estimates towards zero. In addition, the CMS administrative enrollment information allows us
to accurately examine and characterize the amount of exposure to the policy for our analytic sample
during the post period for the years the data are available.
         A second limitation is that our data do not include information on the cause of death. The death
information in the Census Numident is derived primarily from the Social Security Administration death
records, which contain only date of death. We therefore supplement our main analysis with data from
the 2008 year of the ACS, which was linked to death certificate records from 2008 to 2015 as part of
the Mortality Disparities in American Communities (MDAC) project. While this drastically reduces
both the sample size and follow-up period, it does allow us to conduct exploratory analyses of changes
in mortality based on the underlying cause of death as reported on the death certificate.

3        Empirical Strategy
Our empirical strategy looks at changes in annual mortality in the expansion states relative to the non-
expansion states before and after the implementation of the ACA Medicaid expansions. We estimate
this using an event-study model that allows us to assess the evolution of relative outcomes while
controlling for fixed differences across states and national trends over time. We estimate:

                                               3
                Diedisjt = Expansions ×              y I (t - ts = y ) + t + s + j +  I(j = t) +           isjt .         (1)
                                             y =-6
                                             y =-1


As described earlier, our data is constructed at the individual (i) by year (t) level. Each individual
responds to the ACS during a survey wave (j ) and reports their state of residence (s). The dependent
variable Diedisjt denotes death during each year t among individuals who were alive at the beginning of
year t. We only observe mortality over a partial year during the year of the individual's ACS interview
(j ), since that individual had to be alive in order to respond to the survey. To account for this, we
include an indicator variable that year t is the year that the individual responded to the ACS (i.e.,
that j = t).22 In this equation, s denotes state fixed effects and j denotes fixed effects associated
with each survey wave. t denotes calendar year fixed effects, which will account for general trends in
mortality for all individuals in our sample, including their gradual aging over time.23
         The variable Expansions equals 1 if individual i was living in a state that opted to expand Medicaid
eligibility between 2014 and 2017, and zero otherwise. Indicator variables I (t - ts = y ) measure the
time relative to the implementation year, ts , of the expansion in each state, and are zero in all periods
for non-expansion states.24 While most states expanded in the beginning of 2014, some states expanded
    21
      Note, however, that individual migration decisions do not appear to be correlated with state Medicaid expansion
(Goodman, 2017).
   22
      Note that we do not have information on the date of the ACS interview. If we drop the observations for which we
observe less than a full year of mortality, our results are unchanged.
   23
      Results are also virtually identical in a model that includes controls for gender, race, and single year of age. We show
this later in Section 5.3.
   24
      We group together y  -6 into a single indicator variable interacted with expansion status since we only observe
y < -6 for late expander states.



                                                              9
later in the year or in subsequent years. If a state expanded on or after July 1 of a given year, we code
it as having expanded in the subsequent year.25 The omitted category is y = -1, the year prior to the
expansion. Therefore, each estimate of y provides the change in outcomes in expansion states relative
to non-expansion states during year y , as measured from the year immediately prior to expansion.
If mortality rates for expansion and non-expansion states were trending similarly prior to the ACA,
we expect that estimated coefficients associated with event times y = -6 to y = -2 will be small
and not statistically significant. We estimate equation (1) with a linear probability model and report
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors that are clustered at the state level.26 All analyses use ACS
survey weights.
         In addition to the event study analyses, we also present difference-in-differences (DD) estimates as
a summary of the effect across all post-expansion years. These are estimated using the same equation
except that the event study indicators are replaced with a single variable denoting an expansion state
during the post period (Expansions × P ostt ). This indicator turns on starting in the year of expansion
for each state.
         Because we have a fixed sample that ages in each period, mortality rates increase over time (i.e.,
our sample is oldest in the last year, 2017). In this way, our analysis tracks the mortality trajectory
for a fixed cohort defined as adults ages 55 to 64 in 2014 and is representative of the outcomes over
time for this group. Since mortality rates are higher during the post-period for our sample due to
aging, regardless of exposure to Medicaid, comparing our estimates of the effects of the ACA Medicaid
expansions to the mortality rate in the pre-ACA period as a counterfactual is incorrect. Instead, we
estimate a "counterfactual" rate for those living in expansion states that depends on average mortality
rates observed during the post period. We calculate this rate as the sum of the average annual mortality
rate in the expansion states in the post-expansion period and the reduced form mortality difference-in-
differences estimate. This rate tells us what the mortality rate would have been in the treated states
in our sample if their mortality rates had followed the same trajectory we observe in the control states.
By constructing the counterfactual rate in this manner, we are able to take into account both the aging
of the sample and the mortality reduction of expanded Medicaid coverage during the post-period, see
discussion in (Goodman-Bacon, 2016).

4        Results
4.1        Medicaid Eligibility, Medicaid Enrollment, and Insurance Coverage
We first estimate the impact of the ACA Medicaid expansions on Medicaid eligibility and coverage
for individuals in our sample. We show that, using a variety of data sources and approaches, respon-
dents residing in the expansion states experienced significant increases in Medicaid eligibility, Medicaid
    25
      In our analyses, states that expanded Medicaid in 2014 are AR, AZ, CA, CO, CT, HI, IL, IA, KY, MD, MI, MN,
NJ, NM, NV, ND, OH, OR, RI, WA, and WV. Michigan implemented their expansion in April 2014 with the remainder
of states expanding in January 2014. States that we considered to have 2015 expansions are NH (implemented August
15, 2014), PA (January 1, 2015), and IN (February 1, 2015). We consider AK (September 1, 2015) and MT (January 1,
2016) to be 2016 expansion states and LA (July 1, 2016) to be a 2017 expansion state.
   26
      In Appendix Table A2, we examine the sensitivity of our results to using both a standard logistic regression and
a Cox proportional-hazards model. The difference-in-differences estimates from these nonlinear models are modestly
smaller in magnitude than the linear probability model, but continue to show large and statistically significant reductions
in mortality as a result of the ACA Medicaid expansions.



                                                            10
enrollment, and health insurance coverage relative to those in the non-expansion states. The effects
we document among our disadvantaged sample are substantially larger than those estimated in the
population overall (e.g. Black et al., 2019), indicating that the individual level characteristics we used
to define our sample are successful in identifying those most likely to be affected by the eligibility
expansions.
    First, we examine how eligibility for Medicaid changed in expansion relative to non-expansion
states. Individuals eligible for Medicaid are "conditionally covered" by the program, in the sense
that they may choose to remain uninsured and enroll only when they become ill. This concept of
conditional coverage was first discussed by Cutler and Gruber (1996) in their study of historic Medicaid
expansions for pregnant women and children; it may be even more relevant in our context, however,
given another change under the ACA designed to make it easier for the uninsured to gain immediate
access to Medicaid-funded services. For the first time, the federal government required states to allow
presumptive eligibility under their Medicaid programs. Specifically, the ACA granted hospitals the
ability to make presumptive eligibility determinations for Medicaid for certain groups covered in their
state, including the non-elderly ACA expansion population (Caucci, 2014).27 This means that if patients
appear to have incomes low enough to qualify for Medicaid, hospitals may grant temporary Medicaid
enrollment. Recipients of this temporary enrollment status may immediately receive health services
and providers are guaranteed reimbursement for those services. In addition to presumptive eligibility,
federal law directs states to provide retroactive coverage for new enrollees by covering medical bills
incurred up to 3 months prior to their application date if they met the eligibility criteria during that
time.28 By not requiring an individual to first enroll in Medicaid prior to receiving Medicaid-funded
care, these policies reinforce the notion that all eligible individuals are effectively covered by the program
even if not actually enrolled.
    We estimate Medicaid eligibility for our sample using information on state eligibility rules (see
Appendix Section B for additional information) and characteristics of respondents in the 2008 to 2017
waves of the ACS who were ages 55 to 64 in 2014, and otherwise meet the same sample definition as used
in our main analyses. Note that we are unable to use individual panel data for this analysis since we
only observe respondent characteristics for our linked ACS-mortality sample during their year of ACS
interview. While repeated cross-sectional data for this cohort does not exactly mirror the individual
panel data used to study mortality, it allows us to provide an estimate of the changes in eligibility likely
similar to those experienced by our mortality sample. In addition, we rely on the same data to study
changes in overall insurance coverage over time, which is not captured in the longitudinal Medicaid
enrollment data from CMS.
    Next, we use the longitudinal administrative data on Medicaid enrollment to examine changes in
Medicaid coverage in each year, and in the total number of years of Medicaid coverage experienced.29
We use three different dependent variables to measure coverage changes. The first is equal to 1 if the
individual is enrolled in Medicaid during year t and 0 otherwise, capturing changes in coverage in each
   27
      Previously presumptive eligibility programs were optional for states and limited to pregnant women and children.
States also had discretion over what types of providers could grant presumptive eligibility for these groups.
   28
      A handful of states (AR, IA, IN, NH) had federal waivers to waive retroactive coverage for the expansion population,
or other existing Medicaid eligibility groups, during our study period (Musumeci and Rudowitz, 2017).
   29
      In this analysis, we use Medicaid enrollment data for all individuals starting with the year of their ACS interview.
However, since we have complete enrollment information for each year, we exclude the  I(j = t) term from equation (1).


                                                           11
year. The second variable equals the number of days enrolled by the individual in each year, including
zero days for those who do not enroll. Third, we examine the total days during which the individual
was enrolled up to and including year t, divided by 365; i.e., the total accumulated number of years
of Medicaid enrollment. This third version acknowledges that health insurance coverage may have
beneficial health effects that extend even after the period of coverage is over and that health benefits
may accumulate over time.30
       Finally, we also document how overall insurance coverage evolved following the expansion. In
contrast to Medicaid enrollment, we do not have administrative data on insurance coverage. Instead,
we use a repeated cross-section of respondents from the 2008 to 2017 waves of the ACS to measure
point-in-time insurance coverage for individuals who meet our sample criteria, as we did to determine
changes in eligibility.31 We also explore the impact of the expansion on insurance coverage using two
alternative data sources. First, we examine changes in contemporaneous insurance coverage using
the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), which is considered to have the most valid coverage
estimates nationally (Lynch et al., 2011). In contrast to the ACS, the NHIS uses state-specific names
for Medicaid/CHIP in its coverage questions; it also includes a verification question for the uninsured.
Second, we use the panel Health and Retirement Study (HRS) to examine cumulative changes in
insurance coverage. We use restricted versions of both datasets that include state identifiers and
construct analytic samples using the same sample criteria as our main sample.
       The results are presented in Figure 1 and in the first five columns of Table 1. We find a large
increase in Medicaid eligibility associated with the ACA Medicaid expansions with gains of between
49 and 51 percentage points during each post-expansion year, as compared to the year just prior to
expansion. Consistent with many other studies of this policy,32 we find significant increases in Medicaid
coverage and decreases in uninsurance associated with the decision to expand Medicaid eligibility. We
find the probability an individual is enrolled in Medicaid during the year increases by 12.8 percentage
points, and that on average, individuals in expansion states experience 43 additional Medicaid enrolled
days per year relative to those in non-expansion states (with those who do not enroll coded as having
0 enrolled days). We aggregate the number of days enrolled in each year to examine the cumulative
number of Medicaid enrolled years. Cumulative Medicaid enrollment experienced by our sample also
increases significantly, with respondents in Medicaid expansion states experiencing 0.38 additional years
of Medicaid relative to those in non-expansion states on average, or about 0.67 additional years by the
end of our sample period.
       Using data from the ACS, we find that self-reported uninsurance decreases by 4.4 percentage points,
on average, following the expansions. The estimates for years 1 and 2 are larger than those for year
3, which likely reflects the increasing share of the sample that is aging into Medicare over the study
period. Note that we find somewhat larger impacts of the Medicaid expansions on coverage using the
  30
      See, e.g., Boudreaux et al. (2016); Brown et al. (2018); Currie et al. (2008); Goodman-Bacon (2016); Thompson
(2017); Wherry and Meyer (2016); Wherry et al. (2017) for evidence of such long-term effects.
   31
      To assess comparability with our estimates based on administrative data, we also provide estimates of how self-
reported Medicaid enrollment changed using the same data, although it is important to note that there is a well-known
under-report of Medicaid enrollment in survey data (Boudreaux et al., 2015). See Appendix Figure A1 and Appendix
Table A3.
   32
      E.g., Buchmueller et al. (2016); Cawley et al. (2018); Courtemanche et al. (2017); Miller and Wherry (2017, 2019);
Sommers et al. (2015).



                                                          12
NHIS, with decreases ranging from 4.9 to 9.5 percentage points across the post-expansion years, and
an average decline in the post-expansion period of 5.8 percentage points (see Appendix Figure A1 and
Appendix Table A3).
      Finally, it is important to note that the insurance coverage changes documented in the ACS and
NHIS only provide information on coverage changes in any given year. However, just as the ACA
Medicaid expansions affected the accumulation of Medicaid coverage over time, they also affected the
accumulation of insurance coverage. We do not have longitudinal administrative data on the total
number of years of insurance coverage as we do with Medicaid enrollment. However, we are able to
shed light on cumulative insurance coverage using data from the HRS.33 Our sample in the HRS is
much smaller than the ACS-mortality panel (N=1,359 vs. 566,000) but allows us to provide at least
some suggestive evidence regarding cumulative insurance coverage. We find that respondents living
in expansion states report having accumulated 0.39 additional years of continuous insurance coverage
in the post-expansion period relative to respondents in the non-expansion states. This estimate is
imprecise and only significant at the 10 percent level, albeit of a similar magnitude to the cumulative
change in Medicaid coverage that we document in both the HRS (see Appendix Table A3 and Appendix
Figure A1) and the administrative CMS data.
      Taken together, our first stage analysis indicates that there were large and significant impacts
of the ACA Medicaid expansions on eligibility, Medicaid enrollment, and insurance coverage for our
target sample. In addition, individuals accumulated more years of exposure to Medicaid and insurance
coverage as a result of these expansions.

4.2     Mortality
The previous section established that the Medicaid expansions had a meaningful impact on eligibility,
enrollment, and coverage for our sample. We now examine the impact of this expansion on mortality.
Our estimates of equation (1) are presented in Figure 2 and in the sixth column of Table 1. Prior
to the ACA expansion, mortality rates trended similar across the two groups: pre-expansion event
study coefficients are close to zero and not statistically significant. Starting in the first year of the
expansion (year 0), we observe mortality rates decrease significantly among respondents in expansion
states relative to non-expansion states. The coefficient estimated in the first year of expansion (year 0)
indicates that the probability of annual mortality declined by 0.089 percentage points. In years 1 and 2,
we find reductions in the probability of a little over 0.1 percentage points and, in year 3, a reduction of
0.208 percentage points. All estimates are statistically significant, and our confidence intervals include
meaningfully-sized effects.34
      The immediate impact of the Medicaid expansion on mortality mirrors several analyses that find
   33
      Waves of the HRS occur every other year, and the survey asks respondents about their current insurance status
and their insurance status since the last wave. We use respondents to the 2008 through 2018 HRS waves to determine
the total number of years of continuous insurance coverage. For respondents that join the HRS after 2008, we measure
the cumulative amount of coverage they report starting with the first year of data available. We include fixed effects for
the year the respondent joins the HRS in our analyses. In addition, since the HRS does not ask about the exact dates
of coverage, we use questions about whether there were spells of uninsurance since the last wave to determine whether
coverage was continuous across waves. Because the post-period in the HRS is one year longer than in our other analyses,
we scale the estimates to represent a similar length of time. See Appendix Section D for further details on the HRS
analysis.
   34
      For example, in year 0, we are able to rule out reductions in mortality smaller in magnitude than 0.018 percentage
points; in year 1, 0.032 percentage points; in year 2, 0.021 percentage points and in year 3, 0.046 percentage points.


                                                           13
sizable changes in health care utilization during the first year of the expansions. For example, Garth-
waite et al. (2017) find large changes in hospital ED usage; Wherry and Miller (2016) find increases in
hospitalizations, physician visits, and diagnoses of chronic illnesses; Ghosh et al. (2019) find increases
in the use of prescription drugs; and, Sommers et al. (2015) find improvements in access to medication
and personal physicians all emerging within the first year of the Medicaid expansions.
        In addition, we find evidence that the mortality effects of the expansions are growing over time.
As discussed earlier, mortality is increasing over time for our panel as they reach older ages. However,
when we examine the coefficient estimates as compared to a counterfactual mortality rate for each event
time, we find that the proportionate change in mortality is increasing in each year, from an estimated
7.0 percent reduction in year 0 to a 11.9 percent reduction in year 3.35
        The top panel of Table 1 shows the difference-in-differences estimate that pools all post-expansion
years together. Using this model, we estimate an average reduction in annual mortality of 0.132
percentage points. This represents a reduction in mortality of about 9.4 percent relative to the sample
mean, or 8.1 percent relative to our estimated counterfactual mortality rate during the post period of
1.63 percent.36
        We conduct additional analyses to identify the changes in death rates by the underlying cause of
death using the MDAC. These analyses rely on a much smaller sample and shorter follow-up period, and
so we consider this analysis to be exploratory in nature. We examine deaths due to non-disease related
(i.e. "external") and disease-related (i.e. "internal") causes separately. We also examine a subset of
deaths caused by internal factors that are considered to be "health care amenable" (Nolte and McKee,
2003), which have been studied in the existing literature (e.g. Sommers et al., 2014; Sommers, 2017).
        These results are presented in Table 2. We observe similar patterns for internal mortality and
health care amenable mortality as we do in our main results, with relative decreases beginning in
the first year after the expansions occur. The event study coefficients are not statistically significant
for health care amenable mortality, and are significant at the p < 0.10 level for deaths from internal
causes; however, we find a highly significant reduction in deaths related to internal causes under the
difference-in-differences model. In contrast, mortality from external causes, which may be less affected
by insurance coverage, does not appear to decrease after the expansions. The point estimates on the
event study indicators are not statistically significant and the difference-in-differences estimate is only
significant at the 10 percent level. The estimate is positive in sign, although we note that there is a
slight upward pre-trend in these deaths in expansion states relative to non-expansion states.
        We further probe cause of death by conducting an analysis using the ICD code groupings by body
system. This exercise is meant to be exploratory with the hope that it will provide guidance for future
work should better data become available. The results are reported in Appendix Table A4. For most
   35
       As described earlier, we estimate a counterfactual mortality rate that takes into account both that our panel is aging
over time and the mortality reduction of expanded Medicaid coverage during the post-period. For each event time, it
is equal to the sum of the post-expansion mortality rate in expansion states in that period and the corresponding event
study coefficient estimating the mortality reduction effect of Medicaid for that period. The counterfactual rates are 1.28
percent in year 0, 1.51 percent in year 1, 1.60 percent in year 2, and 1.75 percent in year 3. We are then able to express
our reduced form effects as a 7.0 percent reduction in year 0, 7.9 percent reduction in year 1, 8.2 percent reduction in
year 2, and 11.9 percent reduction in year 3.
    36
       The counterfactual mortality rate is calculated as the average annual mortality rate observed in the in expansion
states in the post-expansion period (1.494 percent) plus the reduced form mortality difference-in-differences estimate
(0.1320pp).



                                                             14
diseases, we observe negative coefficients; the largest negative point estimates are observed for deaths
related to neoplasms (cancer), endocrine and metabolic diseases (primarily diabetes), cardiovascular
and circulatory system diseases, and respiratory diseases. Two of these (cardiovascular/circulatory and
endocrine/metabolic) are marginally significant at the 10 percent level. The point estimates suggest
that cardiovascular disease might account for approximately 38 percent of the overall reduction in
internal mortality, with endocrine and metabolic diseases accounting for another 18 percent. Changes
in mortality for these two body groupings are consistent with recent evidence documenting a decrease
in metabolic syndrome related conditions (obesity, high blood pressure, diabetes) and complications
arising from these conditions among near-elderly adults under the Medicaid expansions (McInerney
et al., 2020). We also see a small negative but statistically significant impact on diseases related to the
skin and subcutaneous tissue, for which diabetes is an important risk factor (Ki and Rotstein, 2008).

5     Alternative Specifications and Robustness Checks
5.1     Staggered Treatment Timing with Heterogeneous Treatment and Dynamic
        Treatment Effects
Recent research demonstrates that variation in treatment effects across different "treatment cohorts,"
defined by their treatment timing, can make event study estimates difficult to interpret. In our context,
we have four different treatment cohorts with 21 states expanding Medicaid in 2014, 3 states expanding
in 2015, 2 states in 2016, and 1 state in 2017. Sun and Abraham (2020) show that, if each of these cohorts
have different profiles of time-varying treatment effects, the event study estimates can be contaminated
by treatment effects from other periods. This is a potential concern both for the interpretation of the
event study estimates and the validity of any test for differential pre-trends between expansion and
non-expansion states.
      To further explore the sensitivity of our event study estimates to heterogeneous treatment effects,
we undertake two additional analyses. First, we re-run the event study analysis and limit the sample
to states that expanded in 2014 (which comprise 82 percent of expansion state residents in our study
sample) and states that did not expand during the study period. These results are reported in panel
(a) of Appendix Figure A2, with our main results plotted in grey for comparison purposes. Limiting
our analysis to this set of states, and thereby focusing on the primary treatment cohort, leads to very
similar results. We continue to find no evidence of differential pre-trends and diverging mortality trends
after Medicaid expansion, although the estimate in the first year of expansion is only significant at the
10 percent level. Our difference-in-differences estimate is also similar when limiting the sample to 2014
expanders (row 2, Appendix Figure A3, with our baseline difference-in-differences estimate in the top
row and the size of the point estimate indicated by the dotted line).
      Second, we implement the alternative estimation method for estimating dynamic treatment effects
proposed in Sun and Abraham (2020), which is robust to variation in treatment effects across cohorts.
We estimate event study coefficients separately for each expansion timing cohort and aggregate these
coefficients using the fraction of the treated sample in each group for the relevant period as weights.
We report these results in panel (b) of Appendix Figure A2.37 The results using this method are very
   37
      We constructed the estimates and standard errors following the methods outlined in Sun and Abraham (2020) with
the aid of their replication code.


                                                        15
similar to our main results and we continue to find no evidence of differential pre-trends. We conclude
from this analysis that our results are not overly sensitive to any differences in treatment profiles across
cohorts.
      In related work, Goodman-Bacon (2019) demonstrates that staggered treatment timing combined
with the presence of time-varying treatment effects can lead to biased DD estimates. This can occur
when earlier treatment cohorts function as controls for later treatment cohorts while on a differential
path due to their earlier treatment. We do not expect this to be a major concern in our context given
that we have so few late adopter states and a relatively short post period. However, to determine the
potential influence of comparisons of states with different treatment times, we implement the Goodman-
Bacon (2019) decomposition that examines the role of each 2x2 DD comparison in the two-way fixed
effects DD estimate.38 We find that only 11 percent of the DD estimate is derived from comparisons of
states with different treatment times. The DD estimate that excludes this source of variation, relying
solely on comparisons of treated and untreated units, is very similar, although slightly larger than our
main DD estimate (see Appendix Table A5).

5.2     Further Investigating Differential Pre-Trends
Next, we consider the potential impact of differential linear pre-trends in expansion and non-expansions
states. While we do not find any evidence of differential pre-trends in the event study, we explore how
well-powered this test is in our context. To do this, we first determine the size of a linear pre-trend we
are powered to detect following the procedure described in Roth (2019). Our analysis suggests that we
could detect a fairly small negative linear trend of a magnitude of 0.03235 percentage points or greater
(in absolute terms) in our event study model (i.e. a pre-trend of such size is likely to generate at least
one statistically significant pre-period event study coefficient).39 If a trend of a size of up to -0.03235
percentage points is indeed present (although not detectable to us), we calculate that it would generate,
by year 3 following the expansion, a bias of at most -0.08873 percentage points.40 We estimate an effect
in year 3 that is more than 2.3x larger, of -0.2082 percentage points. Under this "worse case scenario"
that the largest non-detectable pre-trend is present, the true effect in year 3 might be only -0.11933
percentage points, which still represents a substantial (8.5 percent) reduction in mortality relative to
the sample mean.
      Next, we explicitly allow for differential linear trends in the model. We do this in three different
ways. In the first, we estimate an alternative version of the model that allows for differential pre-trends
in expansion and non-expansion states by replacing the pre-expansion event study coefficients with a
linear trend in event time for expansion states, as in, e.g. Dobkin et al. (2018) and Gross et al. (2020).
   38
      We implement this decomposition following the methods outlined in Goodman-Bacon (2019) and based on the code
in Goodman-Bacon et al. (2019).
   39
      We estimate that we can detect a negative linear trend of this size or greater with 80 percent power. With 50 percent
power, we can detect a negative linear trend of 0.01774 percentage points or greater (in absolute terms). These rejection
probabilities are calculated under the scenario that the research design is rejected if any of the pre-period event study
coefficients is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
   40
      We calculate the bias following the formula presented in Roth (2019), which takes into account the additional bias
introduced by passing a pre-test.




                                                            16
Specifically, we estimate

                                                                        3
                Diedisjt = Expansions × (t -    ts)   + Expansions ×          y I (t - ts = y)       (2)
                                                                       y =0

                            + t + s + j +  I(j = t) +   isjt


where Expansions × (t - ts ) is a linear trend in event time for expansion states. Including this term
allows us to measure how mortality evolved in expansion states after policy implementation while taking
into account any pre-existing differential trend across expansion and non-expansion states.
    The estimates of this specification are reported in Appendix Table A6. We find very similar post-
expansion coefficients after allowing for and modeling a pre-existing trend. In addition, the estimated
trend is not statistically significant and extremely small (only -0.004 percentage points), indicating
that expansion and non-expansion states were trending very similarly prior to the ACA and diverged
only after the implementation of the Medicaid expansion. Note that this estimated trend is less than
1/8th the size of the "worst case scenario" trend that was potentially undetectable in the event study
framework, as discussed above.
    In our second approach, we estimate a version of the model that includes state-specific linear
pre-trends. We estimate these trends using observations from the pre-period only (2008 to 2013)
and generate the predicted values for all observations. We then subtract the predicted value from
our outcome variable and estimate our regression equation using this transformed outcome variable,
such that our model measures changes from the pre-policy trend. This approach follows the two-
step procedure proposed by Goodman-Bacon (2019) for estimating pre-trends. The result from this
approach is presented in the third row of Appendix Figure A3 and is similar to our main model
(estimated reported in row 1).
    In the third approach, we estimate a model that controls for local trends in mortality among
counties with different demographic and economic characteristics. We do this by interacting the 2013
county-level unemployment rate, median income, poverty rate, share Black, share Hispanic, and share
female population with linear year trends. Including these trends does not appreciably affect our
estimate, as seen in the fourth row of Appendix Figure A3.
    Finally, we also consider the presence of non-linear differential pre-trends. We use the methods
outlined in Rambachan and Roth (2019) and the R package HonestDiD (Rambachan and Roth, 2020)
to examine the sensitivity of our estimates to non-linear differences in trends. For year 3 following the
expansion, we estimate that the "breakdown" value of the degree of non-linearity (i.e. change in the
differential slope from period to period) at which we can no longer reject the null hypothesis is 0.0035
percentage points. This corresponds with allowing for a change in the differential slope from period to
period of nearly the same magnitude as the linear pre-trend we estimate in our data; i.e., in a worst
case, allowing a cumulative differential slope between period -1 and 0 to be 2x the size of the estimated
linear pre-trend, 3x between periods 0 and 1, 4x between periods 1 and 2, etc. While we are unable
to rule this out, it seems unlikely based on the observed changes in the differential slope during the
pre-period event times, which did not accumulate in one direction or the other. This suggests to us
that our results are reasonably robust to unrelated deviations in the two groups relative to what we


                                                   17
might expect based on the pre-expansion data.

5.3      Confounding Factors and Threats to Validity
Even if outcomes were evolving similarly for the two groups of states prior to expansion, the assumptions
of our model would be violated if they experienced differential economic or policy shocks around the
time of the expansion that drove changes in health outcomes. We explore this by introducing different
sets of covariates and examining the impact of their inclusion on our estimates. The difference-in-
differences estimates are presented graphically in Appendix Figure A3. We also include event study
versions for these alternative specifications with our original estimates depicted in grey for comparison
(see Appendix Figure A4).
       We first assess whether including controls for changes in economic factors meaningfully affects our
results. In the fifth row of Appendix Figure A3, we control for predicted changes in labor demand
at the county level. We predict county-level labor demand for each industry using the 2008 industry
employment share at the county level and applying the national growth in employment in that industry
in each year (as in Bartik, 1991). We then aggregate this predicted labor demand in each industry
up to the county-level to produce predicted total labor demand for each county by year relative to
the 2008 base year. Our estimate is essentially unchanged with the inclusion of this variable. Row 6
includes time-varying controls for county-level economic characteristics (unemployment rate, poverty
rate, median household income). Our estimate remains unchanged with the inclusion of these variables.
       One might also be concerned that differential exposure to the opioid crisis could be an important
confounding factor. Analysis of the MDAC data shows that the change in mortality we observe is
driven by a decrease in deaths due to internal, disease-related causes, which do not include drug
overdoses. However, we further explore this possibility by directly controlling for state policies that
have been tied to opioid overdose rates in the sixth row of Appendix Figure A3. This model includes
the following controls: indicators for prescription drug monitoring programs (PDMP), mandatory
PDMPs that require physicians to access patients' prescription histories, state regulations for pain
clinics, legalization of medical marijuana, open legal marijuana dispensaries, and interactions between
an indicator that the state had a triplicate prescription program and year fixed effects.41 The inclusion
of these opioid policy controls does not have a large effect on our estimated impact of the Medicaid
expansions on mortality. Since we know from existing research these policies can have important effects
on opioid misuse (see, e.g. Alpert et al., 2019; Bachhuber et al., 2014; Buchmueller and Carey, 2018;
Powell et al., 2018), the fact that the inclusion of these controls does not drastically change our estimate
of the impact of the Medicaid expansion on mortality is reassuring.
       In row 7 of Appendix Figure A3, we include a control for trade shocks that have been linked to
mortality (Autor et al., 2019; Pierce and Schott, 2020), and specifically to the rise in "deaths of despair"
(e.g. drug and alcohol poisoning and suicide) over this time period (Case and Deaton, 2015, 2017).
Specifically, we allow for counties with different exposure to trade from China (i.e., the "China Shock"
described in Autor et al., 2013, 2019) to have different time trends by interacting the commuting-zone
level exposure to Chinese imports per worker from 2000 to 2014 from Autor et al. (2013) with year
fixed effects. Note that these measures are not available for Alaska and Hawaii, so we drop these two
  41
     We draw heavily on Alpert et al. (2019) to identify these opioid related policies, following the sources and coding
outlined in their paper. See Appendix Section E for additional details.


                                                          18
states when estimating this specification. The inclusion of this control variable does not impact our
mortality estimate.
        Finally, in row 8, we control for the demographic composition of our sample by adding individual
covariates for race, age, and gender to our model. Once again the results are largely unchanged by
the inclusion of these covariates. We then estimate a model (in row 9) that includes all of the controls
described above. We continue to find a negative and statistically significant impact of the ACA Medicaid
expansions on mortality rates in our sample, and cannot reject that the effect estimated in this model
is significantly different than our baseline result.
        One separate concern is that a small subset of our sample ages into Medicare during the 2015-2017
years in the post-period. If the Medicare program differs systematically across states in a manner that is
correlated with Medicaid expansion, we might inadvertently be picking up differential mortality effects
under the Medicare program. To rule out this concern, we re-estimate our model for the subgroup who
are the ages of 55-61 in 2014, who do not qualify for Medicare during the post period. The results from
this analysis may be found in Appendix Table A7; the estimates are very similar to those for our main
sample.42

5.4       Placebo Tests
To further assess the validity of our empirical approach, we conduct several "placebo" tests. In these
tests, we investigate whether we observe effects of the Medicaid expansions in populations that were
unaffected or less affected by the policy change.
        Our first placebo test shifts the analysis sample back in time to the pre-ACA period. This test
can assess whether any elements of our sample construction, such as drawing the ACS sample only in
the pre-expansion period, might lead to spurious results. We construct the data in the same fashion
as our main analysis, but use mortality data from 2004 to 2013 for ACS respondents in the 2004 to
2009 survey years (rather than mortality data from 2008 to 2017 for the 2008 to 2013 survey years).
We construct a variable indicating that a state expanded that corresponds to Expansions in equation
(1), but estimate our model as if the first expansions occurred in 2010 rather than 2014, with states
expanding t years after 2014 treated as if they expanded in 2010+t. The results of this placebo test
using the pre-ACA period is presented in the first row of Figure 3.43 As expected, we find no effects
on Medicaid coverage or mortality in expansion states during this placebo pre-ACA period.
        Next, we expand on this analysis by randomly assigning Medicaid expansion status to the same
number of states and years as occurred under the ACA Medicaid expansions, rather than estimating
placebo effects for the actual expansion states. As with the previous exercise, we conduct this placebo
test using pre-ACA data, prior to when the actual expansions occurred. We repeat this exercise
10,000 times and compile the coefficient estimates and t-statistics from the difference-in-differences
model. The results are presented in Appendix Figure A5, with the vertical lines indicating the 5th
and 95th percentiles of this "placebo" distribution. This exercise allows us to further investigate the
   42
      We find a significant reduction in mortality in this group that is only slightly smaller in levels than the overall result
documented; the reduction in mortality when compared to the counterfactual mortality rate in this sample is very similar.
For those ages 55-61, mortality rates fell by 7.7 percent relative to their counterfactual mortality rate, similar to the 8.1
percent reduction we estimate in our main sample.
   43
      Since the ACS only began collecting data on health insurance in 2008, the analysis for Medicaid coverage is limited
to the 2008-2013 years.



                                                              19
likelihood that we might encounter similarly sized mortality effects by chance. Our estimates for the
ACA Medicaid expansions fall well below the 5th percentiles of the distributions of placebo coefficient
estimates and t-statistics, further increasing our confidence that we are estimating a true policy effect.
       We next examine whether we observed similar mortality effects for two population groups that
were less likely to be affected by the policy. The first test uses individuals who were age 65 and older
at the time of the expansions. These individuals have near universal coverage through the Medicare
program and should not be directly affected by the coverage expansions.44 We re-estimate equation (1)
for this sample and the results are presented in the second panel of Figure 3. As predicted, we observe
no effect of the Medicaid expansions on Medicaid coverage for this group.45 We also see no effect of
the expansions on mortality rates for this group.
       We also examine individuals ages 55 to 64 in families earning 400% FPL or greater at the time
of the ACS interview. This group should be less affected than our main sample of low income or low
education respondents. However, they may still gain Medicaid coverage under the expansions due to
changes in income over time, or if their income is reported with error. As seen in the third row of
Figure 3, we do find small but statistically significant increases in Medicaid enrollment associated with
the expansions among this group. We also see correspondingly small but, for some years, statistically
significant reductions in mortality for this group. These changes are consistent with a causal effect of
expanded Medicaid coverage on mortality. One interesting note is those reporting higher incomes in
the survey, but who later enroll in Medicaid, exhibit very high average mortality compared to those
who do not enroll in Medicaid. This indicates that those in the high income group who do enroll in
Medicaid are highly selected (e.g. having experienced a serious health event that resulted in income
loss).46
       Finally, we formally test for a differential effect in our main sample relative to the age 65+ and
400% FPL+ placebo groups by estimating a "triple difference" model. To estimate this model, we
include respondents in each placebo group in our sample as well as an indicator that the respondent is
in the main sample, rather than the placebo group. We fully interact this "main sample" indicator with
the state and year fixed effects, and include state by year fixed effects in the model. The coefficients on
the three way interaction between MainSample i , Expansion s , and the event year indicators captures
the difference in the change in mortality in the main sample in expansion states relative to the placebo
sample, as compared to that same difference in the non-expansion states. The advantage of this
specification is that it controls for all state-year changes during the time of expansion that impacted
both the treatment and placebo groups similarly.
       We plot these triple difference event study coefficients in Appendix Figure A6. As illustrated by this
figure, we see little evidence of differential pre-expansion trends in either mortality or Medicaid coverage
within the year across both models. After the expansion, we observe significant increases in Medicaid
coverage and reductions in mortality rates, although the increase in coverage is somewhat smaller in
  44
      Prior work has documented some spillover effects on the health care utilization of this population under pre-ACA
state Medicaid expansions, but analyses of the ACA Medicaid expansions have found no evidence of such spillovers and
are able to rule out very small effects (Carey et al., 2018).
   45
      Results are similar if we also restrict the elderly to be in low-income families.
   46
      If we scale the average mortality effect by the corresponding estimate for the change in any Medicaid coverage, the
decrease for the high-income group is larger in size than for our main sample. We believe this reflects a larger role of
adverse selection for the higher-income group.



                                                           20
the triple difference model that uses the higher income group. The triple difference estimates, reported
in the bottom two rows of Figure A3, are slightly smaller than our main results but remain statistically
significant. The smaller size of the estimates suggests that there may be some treatment effect (as
suggested in Figure 3 for those in high income households) or modest spillover effects occurring in the
placebo groups.47 It could also be the case that this analysis better controls for state-year changes that
are unrelated to the Medicaid expansions. However, it is important to note that the confidence interval
for these triple difference estimates includes our main estimate, and that the triple difference estimates
are still consistent with a large causal impact of the ACA expansions on mortality.

5.5        Alternative Methods for Conducting Inference
Next we examine the sensitivity of our results to alternative approaches for conducting inference. In our
main analyses, we cluster our standard errors at the intervention (state) level. However, there is some
noticeable spatial clustering in the states expanding and not expanding Medicaid. Many of the states
expanding Medicaid are located in the west or northeast areas of the country, while non-expansion
states are mainly located in the midwest and southern parts of the U.S. This spatial clustering may
be a concern for the analysis if any of these groups of states experienced common shocks that are not
accounted for with standard errors clustered by state.
         To assess the sensitivity of our results to the assumption that all states have independent shocks,
we performed a couple of additional analyses designed to allow for spatial correlation in error terms
across states. First, we clustered our standard errors by Census division. The nine Census divisions are
groupings of states in different geographic areas, which are correlated with Medicaid expansion status.
Due to the small number of Census divisions, we also present the results when we implement this using
a Wild cluster bootstrap procedure. The results from this analysis may be found in Appendix Table
A8. We continue to find a significant reduction in mortality associated with the Medicaid expansions,
with conventional clustered errors implying a p-value of 0.026 and the wild cluster bootstrap procedure
producing a p-value of 0.051.
         The second approach was to implement a model that accounts for spatial correlation between errors
using the method proposed by Conley (1999). Specifically, we assume that the error for individuals in
each county is correlated with those for all individuals in counties that are located within a radius of
500 kilometers. We assume a distance linear decay in the correlation structure, as well as a temporal
decay. We compute heteroskedastic and autocorrelation consistent standard errors.48 The results are
reported in Appendix Table A8. As seen from this table, the standard errors are very similar to those
in our main model.

6        Additional Analyses
We also conduct several additional analyses on different samples and subgroups to further understand
the impact of the Medicaid expansions. First, we examine changes in mortality for all nonelderly adults
and other age subgroups. Our main analysis is limited to individuals ages 55 to 64 at the time of the
    47
       Although there is little evidence the expansions affected use of care among the elderly who were already insured (Carey
et al., 2018), it did appear to reduce hospital closures (Lindrooth et al., 2018) and decrease the fraction of the elderly
living with uninsured relatives (Borgschulte and Vogler, 2020), suggesting that such spillover effects may be plausible.
    48
       We use the acreg Stata package developed by Colella et al. (2019) to estimate this model. Due to its computational
intensity, we first aggregate the data to the county level prior to running the estimation.


                                                             21
Medicaid expansions, a group with higher mortality rates that has been the focus of other work on this
topic (e.g. Black et al., 2019). In the first row of Appendix Table A9, we also estimate the impact of
Medicaid expansion on mortality for individuals who meet our sample inclusion criteria but are ages 19
to 64 in 2014. We find a significant increase in enrollment in any Medicaid coverage of 12.7 percentage
points. The mortality estimate is not statistically significant but suggests a 3.9 percent decrease relative
to the counterfactual rate. We next estimate the effects for other subgroups in this age range (ages
19-29, 30-39, 40-49, and 50-54). We find significant increases in Medicaid enrollment for all groups,
but less evidence of corresponding mortality changes. The largest decrease in mortality is observed at
ages 50-54 but is not statistically significant. We are unable, however, to rule out meaningful declines
in mortality for any age group.
    Next, we further probe heterogeneity by age within our main age group age interest, adults age 55
to 64 years old in 2014, and at older ages. In Figure A7 we report the percent reduction in mortality
associated with the Medicaid expansions in 3-year age bins. We construct this by dividing the reduced
form difference-in-differences estimate by the counterfactual mortality rate for each age group. We see
that the largest mortality reductions occur at the oldest age groups, with those age 59-61 and 62-64
both experiencing statistically significant reductions in mortality. Reductions in mortality are smaller
and not statistically significant for those at younger ages (53-55 and 56-58) and for those age 65 and
older in 2014, who would have been Medicare eligible.
    We next examine the effects of the expansions on different subgroups of our main analysis sample
defined by race and ethnicity, gender, marital status, or other characteristics. The results of these
analyses are reported in Appendix Table A10. We find evidence of larger mortality effects for white,
non-Hispanic adults when compared to other racial and ethnic groups. We also find larger effects for
the males in the sample. These differences are present despite sometimes smaller first stage estimates
for these two groups, although their estimated mortality risk is higher (as seen by a comparison of their
counterfactual mortality rates). In addition, the confidence intervals on the mortality estimates do
not rule out meaningful declines in mortality for any subgroup. We did not find evidence of mortality
differences by marital status. And, when we narrow the socioeconomic criteria to either less than a
high school degree or less than 138 percent of the FPL, we find overall very similar first stage and
mortality estimates for the two groups.
    Finally, an additional analysis limits the main sample to approximately a 30 percent subset who
reported being uninsured at the time of the survey. As this group is younger on average,49 the coun-
terfactual mortality rate is slightly lower than in the overall sample, at 1.46 percent per year (vs. 1.63
percent in the sample overall). The point estimates indicate somewhat larger decreases in mortality
for this group of 0.150 percentage points (or 10.3 percent of the counterfactual rate) compared to the
reduction in the main sample of 0.132 percentage points (or 8.1 percent of the counterfactual rate).
The fact that those who were uninsured prior to the ACA experienced larger mortality improvements
as a result of the policy is in line with our expectations. Indeed, it is somewhat surprising that the
differential in the reduction in mortality between those who were uninsured at the time of the ACS
and the overall population of low-income older adults is not even larger, particularly because they
   49
      We estimate that the average age of uninsured respondents in our sample is 59.0 in 2014, compared to an average of
59.4 years for insured respondents. This difference is statistically significant with a p-value of 0.0000.



                                                          22
experienced larger gains in Medicaid enrollment;50 however, this may be due to the lower mortality
rate in this group.

7        Interpreting the Estimates and Comparisons to Past Work
7.1        Scaling the Mortality Effects by Coverage Changes
Our results show consistent evidence of a decrease in all-cause mortality among low socioeconomic
status, older adults under the ACA Medicaid expansions. In the difference-in-differences model, we
estimate an average decrease in annual mortality of 0.132 percentage points during the four-year post
period (top panel of Table 1). We can combine this estimate with the first stage estimates to provide
information on the treatment effect of Medicaid coverage on the group that actually enrolled. For such
a scaling to be interpretable as the treatment effect, we must assume that the Medicaid expansions
only affected individuals who enrolled in Medicaid. This assumption may be violated if the Medicaid
expansions improved access to care more broadly, for example by reducing hospital closures, or improved
the health of non-enrollees through other means such as increasing available resources to families that
had some uninsured and some insured members prior to the expansion.
         Our analysis of administrative Medicaid enrollment records indicates that our sample accumulated
0.375 additional years of Medicaid enrollment, on average, as a result of the ACA expansions (see Section
4.1). Combining this estimate with the 0.132 percentage point reduction in mortality implies that one
                                                                                                   0.132
year of Medicaid enrollment decreases mortality by about 0.35 percentage points (=                 0.375 ).   We also find
that the probability of enrollment in Medicaid in any given year increased by 12.8 percentage points
as a result of the ACA expansions. Assuming that mortality responds only to coverage in a given year,
rather than the total amount of coverage experienced, this estimate suggests that contemporaneous
                                                                                      0.132
enrollment in Medicaid reduces mortality by 1.03 percentage points (=                 0.128 ).
         To better understand the magnitude of these changes, we would ideally know the mortality rate for
sample members who enrolled in Medicaid as a result of the expansions (i.e., the "compliers," see Imbens
and Angrist, 1994) in the absence of the policy. As discussed earlier, we estimate a counterfactual
mortality rate of approximately 1.63 for all sample members in the expansion states. However, we expect
that the counterfactual mortality rate among the compliers is likely much higher if, for example, those in
worse health are more likely to enroll in Medicaid. The literature indicates that such adverse selection
does occur (e.g. Kenney et al., 2012; Marton and Yelowitz, 2015); this may also be exacerbated by
policies designed to provide immediate coverage to those in need, as discussed earlier (i.e. presumptive
eligibility and retroactive coverage). As further evidence of this, a recent study by Garthwaite et al.
(2019) finds that individuals moving from uninsured to Medicaid status in ACA Medicaid expansion
states had higher than average hospital and ED visits during the pre-ACA period.
         We estimate an upper bound for this counterfactual rate for the compliers using observed mortality
for actual enrollees in our sample. We estimate annual mortality for enrollees in the expansion states
during the post-period at 2.0 percent. We consider this an upper bound because the CMS enrollment
    50
     Note that we are unable to estimate the change in Medicaid eligibility or contemporaneous insurance coverage for this
subgroup as we did for the other subgroups, due to the lack of information on historical insurance coverage in the ACS.
However, we have explored changes in contemporaneous and cumulative insurance coverage for a similar panel in the HRS
(see Appendix Table A11). Due to the small sample size, the estimates are imprecisely estimated but do suggest changes
in both contemporaneous and cumulative insurance coverage that are larger in size than those for our main sample.


                                                           23
data does not identify the eligibility pathway for coverage and some of these individuals likely qualified
for coverage even if there were no eligibility expansions (e.g. if they became disabled);51 we expect that
this group likely have worse health than those who are induced to enroll by the policy change. We then
take into account the mortality reduction resulting from the gain in Medicaid coverage. Our analysis
suggests that a year of Medicaid coverage is associated with a reduction in annual mortality of 0.35
percentage points. On average, those who were not enrolled in Medicaid prior to the ACA, but did
enroll in expansion states after the ACA, remain enrolled for about 2.7 years over our sample period.
If compliers experience 2.7 additional years of coverage due to the expansions, their counterfactual
mortality rate would therefore be 2.95 percent (2.0 + 2.7 × 0.35).
        Given these calculations, we may therefore expect the average annual mortality rate among the
compliers to fall somewhere in the 1.63 to 2.95 percent range. Combined with our estimated treatment
effect of a 0.35 percentage point reduction in mortality associated with 1 year of accumulated Medicaid
enrollment, this indicates that one year of Medicaid coverage reduces individual mortality by between
11.9 and 21.5 percent. Meanwhile, our estimate of the treatment effect for contemporaneous Medicaid
enrollment (1.03pp) indicates a resulting reduction in individual mortality of between 34.9 and 63
percent.
        If we expect that the mortality effects of Medicaid are solely driven by changes in access to care for
individuals who would otherwise be uninsured, we may prefer to scale our reduced form estimates by
the change in net insurance coverage, rather than the change in Medicaid coverage. This calculation
implicitly assumes that there is no difference between private insurance coverage and Medicaid that
would meaningfully impact mortality risk. If coverage only affects mortality during the year in which the
respondent is enrolled (i.e., no longer term effects), the change in contemporaneous insurance coverage
(a 4.4 percentage point increase in overall insurance, see Table 1) implies much larger treatment effects,
ranging from 127 to 184 percent reductions in individual mortality. These large estimate sizes suggest
that this scaling may miss important effects for those who enrolled in Medicaid as a result of the
expansions but would have otherwise enrolled in exchange or employer based coverage. For example,
there may be significant financial differences in the cost of coverage or medical care that affect health
care utilization decisions and household finances, both of which may affect mortality risk.52 There
may also be differences in the types of services covered. Unlike most private insurers, Medicaid covers
many long-term home- and community-based services and supports (Rudowitz et al., 2019), which
may be important for individuals with complex health needs and high mortality risk. Alternatively,
this calculation may miss other spillover effects among Medicaid non-recipients, or the presence of
cumulative effects of insurance coverage that are not captured in contemporaneous coverage measures.53
Finally, it is important to note that the confidence interval of this estimated effect includes much smaller
reductions in mortality.
   51
      Note that those who were disabled prior to the ACA should be excluded as our sample criteria excludes those
reporting SSI receipt.
   52
      Medicaid is typically free for beneficiaries with no or minimal cost-sharing for service receipt. In contrast, private
insurance coverage typically requires an annual premium, as well as additional cost-sharing. A recent study estimates that,
under the ACA Medicaid expansions, new Medicaid enrollees ages 50 to 64 saved approximately $3,100 in out-of-pocket
expenditures each year (McInerney et al., 2020).
   53
      When we consider cumulative exposure to insurance coverage using estimates from our HRS sample, the implied
treatment effects indicate that each year enrolled in any coverage reduces mortality by between 14 and 21 percent.
However, these estimates are fairly imprecise.


                                                            24
7.2       Further Interpretation
In addition to comparing the observed change in mortality to the changes in insurance status in our
population, it is also useful to assess the plausibility of our results by comparing them to the documented
increases in medical care utilization under the ACA expansions. Beyond providing a benchmark for
the expected magnitude of any change in mortality, such a synthesis may also provide insights into the
most important mechanisms driving the mortality reduction, particularly when considered in light of
the analysis of mortality by cause (Table A4).
        First, a plausible mechanism underlying our mortality effects is the increased use and access to
prescription drugs. Ghosh et al. (2019) find that Medicaid expansions increase the number of prescrip-
tion drugs taken by about 9 additional prescriptions per year per new enrollee. Some of the types of
drugs that see large increases in usage, such as medications for the management of diabetes, treatments
for HIV and Hepatitis C, and drug therapies for cardiovascular disease, are associated with sizeable
decreases in mortality in the medical literature.54 The increase in prescriptions to treat these diseases
often mirrors the reductions in mortality we find by disease type, in particular the large (albeit impre-
cise) reductions in cardiovascular disease and diabetes documented in Table A4. Therefore, if even a
small fraction of the new prescriptions associated with the Medicaid expansion are effective at reducing
the probability of mortality, they may account for a sizeable portion of the overall decline in mortality
we observe.55
        Similarly, Soni et al. (2018) find early cancer detection increased by 15.4 diagnoses per 100,000 pa-
tients in 2014 as a result of the ACA Medicaid expansions using a reduced form difference-in-differences
model. They also find an increase of 23.3 diagnoses per 100,000 for adults ages 55-64, although this
subgroup analysis is imprecisely estimated. This translates into approximately 150 new diagnoses per
100,000 adults who are income eligible for Medicaid.56 Importantly, the authors find that the increase
in early-stage diagnoses was concentrated among cancers amenable to screening. Because earlier can-
cer diagnosis is highly predictive of better survival (McPhail et al., 2015), some portion of these early
diagnoses may have also averted deaths during our study period, contributing to the 132 fewer deaths
per 100,000 we observe annually for our sample.
        Researchers have also documented changes in hospital and emergency department care associated
with the ACA. Wen et al. (2019) finds that hospitalizations for ambulatory-care sensitive conditions
such as diabetes decreased by about 54 visits per 100,000 residents in expansion states relative to
non-expansion states. Meanwhile, Duggan et al. (2019) find that the expansions were associated with
increased rates of hospitalization and ED visits overall (not specifically for ambulatory care sensitive
conditions). Among those age 64, they find that hospitalizations increased by 8 stays per 1,000 indi-
   54
      For example, a recent review of clinical trial evidence finds that patients randomized to receive statins have all-cause
mortality rates that are 14 percent lower than the untreated group (Chou et al., 2016).
   55
      It is also worth noting that recent papers studying the introduction of prescription drug coverage under the Medicare
Part D program also find evidence of mortality declines. Huh and Reif (2017) focus on those age 66 and find that
insurance coverage for prescription drugs reduces mortality in this group by about 0.16 percentage points annually (about
9.6 percent). Dunn and Shapiro (2019) find slightly larger effects in an analysis that incorporates individuals with older
ages. For both papers, reductions in mortality are driven by a decline in deaths due to cardiovascular disease. Using
data for a subset of Medicare beneficiaries, Kaestner et al. (2017) find no significant effect on mortality but do document
reductions in hospitalization admissions for heart disease, respiratory disease, and diabetes under the program.
   56
      Using the ACS, we estimate that 15.5 percent of adults ages 55-64 in expansion states during the post-expansion
period had incomes less than or equal to 138 percent of the federal poverty line.



                                                             25
viduals and ED visits increased by 14 visits per 1,000 individuals. This implies about 5,161 additional
hospitalizations and 9,032 ED visits for every 100,000 income eligible individuals.57 If even a small
fraction of these hospital or ED visits averted mortality, they could also explain a sizeable fraction of
the 132 fewer deaths per 100,000 we estimate in our study.58
      Finally, Medicaid also increases the use of a variety of other types of medical care such as routine
screening for chronic illnesses, outpatient physician visits, use of prescription drugs that aid in smoking
cessation, and dental care which also have the potential to improve health over the longer term.59
While the mortality impacts of such utilization are uncertain, it is plausible that such care could have
beneficial health effects.
      To summarize, the ACA Medicaid expansions increased access to and use of care along several
dimensions. While it is difficult to pinpoint exactly which element of the medical care received by
Medicaid beneficiaries is the most important in improving health, it is clear that the magnitude of the
increase in utilization resulting from the Medicaid expansion is consistent with the mortality effect we
document.

7.3     Comparisons to Previous Estimates
In this section, we compare the treatment effects that we estimate to those published in the literature.
In order to take into account differences in coverage changes and population mortality rates across
the different study settings, we compare the proportional average treatment effects for new Medicaid
enrollees or for the newly insured.
      First, we use the public-use replication kit for the OHIE to examine the effect of Medicaid coverage
on participants who were ages 55-64 at the time of the experiment to derive estimates comparable to
those presented here (reported in Appendix Table A12). Among this age group, ever receiving Medicaid
reduced the probability of mortality over a 16 month period by 1.65 percentage points, or a decline of
71.7 percent relative to the control mean; this estimate is not statistically significant (associated with
a p-value of 0.128).60 This estimated proportional treatment effect is very similar to the estimate in
our analysis (i.e. 63 percent) described in the last section, which uses the counterfactual mortality rate
for the sample without any adjustment for adverse selection. We also use the administrative data from
the OHIE replication kit to estimate the impact of each year of Medicaid enrollment on mortality. We
find that one year of Medicaid enrollment is associated with a 61.2% reduction in mortality over the
sample period. This is substantially larger than our estimated 22% reduction in individual mortality
associated with one year of Medicaid coverage, although this difference may in part reflect the fact that
we observe cumulative Medicaid enrollment over a longer period (4 years in our study vs 16 months in
OHIE).
      We can also use OHIE data to estimate the effect of insurance coverage, rather than Medicaid
   57
      As in the previous paragraph, we scale by the fraction of near elderly adults who are in households under 138% of
the FPL, as measured in the ACS, to arrive at these rates.
   58
      There is also evidence of increases in other specific types of hospital care that may play an important role in reducing
mortality, including cancer-related surgeries (Eguia et al., 2018), cardiac surgeries (Charles et al., 2017), and surgeries
considered minimally invasive (Eguia et al., 2020).
   59
      See, for example, Finkelstein et al. (2012); Nasseh and Vujicic (2017); Semyonov et al. (2013).
   60
      We can also scale this effect by 12/16th to arrive an annual effect of Medicaid on mortality of 1.24 percentage points.
This is comparable, but larger, than the 1.03 percentage point treatment effect of contemporaneous Medicaid enrollment
estimated in our analysis.



                                                             26
coverage, on mortality. We do this by examining the subsample of participants who responded to the
OHIE survey and provided information on their insurance status at an initial survey (completed an
average of 1 month after coverage approval) or a survey approximately one year later (an average of 13
months after coverage approval, see Finkelstein et al., 2012).61 Mirroring our own results, this exercise
results in considerably larger estimates of the effect of insurance coverage. Using the gain in coverage
measured in the initial survey, we find a decrease in mortality of 326 percent (p=0.071) when compared
to the control group mean. Using the 12-month measure, we find a 335 percent mortality reduction
(p=0.153).62 These are both larger than our estimate of the impact of new insurance coverage under
the ACA Medicaid expansions, although the confidence intervals overlap with our estimate.
       The large size of these estimates suggests three things. First, there is likely additional adverse
selection in who actually enrolled in Medicaid and experienced insurance status changes. Only 30
percent of individuals selected by the lottery successfully enrolled in the program, either because they
did not submit the appropriate paperwork or no longer met the income eligibility criteria. In addition,
compliers tended to be older, in worse health, and in lower socioeconomic status than the overall
study population (Finkelstein et al., 2012). This indicates that the control mean is likely not the right
comparison. Second, the large size of the treatment effect might also indicate that the benefits of
Medicaid do not operate only through insurance status changes (i.e. Medicaid may reduce mortality
even if the counterfactual is enrolling in private insurance). Third, scaling by self-reported insurance
coverage at a given point in time may understate the impact of gaining Medicaid eligibility through the
lottery, either because it fails to capture previous exposure to the program or because the self-reported
measure is subject to measurement error.
       Recent work by Goldin et al. (2020) also provides experimental evidence on the impact of health
insurance on mortality. Taking advantage of changes in insurance status generated by randomly as-
signed informational letters, the authors find that each additional month of health insurance coverage
reduced mortality in their sample of 45 to 64 year olds by 0.166 percentage points over a two-year
period, or 11.9 percent compared to their estimated complier baseline mortality rate. This implies 12
months of coverage results in a reduction in mortality over the two-year period of over 140 percent,
which is much larger than our implied effects of cumulative insurance coverage using estimates from
the HRS. However, the authors note that the effect may be non-linear in length of coverage, in which
case such scaling could be an overestimate of the effect of a full year of coverage.
       In addition to these two experiments, there are also several quasi-experimental analyses that exam-
ine the effects of insurance coverage expansions on non-elderly adult mortality. To facilitate comparisons
across these studies, we estimate the implied mortality effects for individuals either gaining Medicaid
or insurance coverage as proportionate changes over a counterfactual mortality rate. Studies often vary
in how they treat measurement error in survey reports of Medicaid enrollment and in the assumed
  61
      It may be preferable to scale mortality changes by the total number of months of insurance coverage experienced by
the treated group, rather than insurance at the time of the survey. Information on cumulative insurance coverage over
the 16-month period is not available, however, so we report both of the available measures for point-in-time coverage.
Also, it is important to note that while the gains in insurance coverage are measured at these two points in time (either
immediately after the lottery or 12 months later), we are scaling mortality over the entire 16-month period covered by
the OHIE administrative data.
   62
      Note that baseline mortality for the control group is lower among survey respondents since participants had to be
alive in order to respond to the survey.



                                                           27
counterfactual mortality rate; we therefore apply a consistent set of adjustments across these studies.
We also present 95 percent confidence intervals for these estimates. Further details on the approach
used to construct these re-scaled estimates and their confidence intervals may be found in Appendix
Section F.
         The resulting estimates are reported in Appendix Table A13. It is clear from this table that our
estimates are in the ballpark of those from existing work examining the mortality effects of Medicaid
or insurance expansions for low-income adults. Sommers (2017) examines changes in mortality among
20 to 64 year-olds following pre-ACA Medicaid expansions in Arizona, Maine, and New York. Using
a difference-in-differences design, he finds a mortality reduction of 64.5 percent among individuals
gaining insurance coverage. Similarly, taking advantage of county-level variation in the impact of
the Massachusetts health reform of 2006, Sommers et al. (2014) find that insurance coverage reduces
mortality by 27.3 percent among 20 to 64 year olds. Using mortality records aggregated to the county
level, Borgschulte and Vogler (2020) find adults age 20 to 64 experienced a 47.3 percent reduction in
mortality under the ACA Medicaid expansions. In our analysis, we find that new insurance coverage
reduces mortality by 50 percent among those in our sample age 19 to 64 (although this effect was not
statistically significant), in line with the estimates from these other studies. Chen (2019), however,
finds a much smaller and statistically insignificant effect on the order of 9 percent for adults ages 25-64
under his analysis of the ACA Medicaid expansions.63
         Fewer papers include estimates for the age group that we study.64 Black et al. (2019) and Chen
(2019) find smaller implied mortality effects of individual insurance coverage, when compared to our
study. Although, the estimate in Black et al. (2019) is imprecisely estimated with a large confidence
interval inclusive of our estimate.
         To summarize, the existing experimental literature on the effect of health insurance on mortality
shows very large effects, suggesting that reductions in mortality associated with insurance are double
or even triple the average mortality rate of the control group. Such large effects may be due to adverse
selection, i.e. that those who sign up for health insurance are particularly vulnerable and would have
experienced high mortality rates in the absence of insurance. Evidence from the quasi-experimental
literature tends to find smaller, but still substantial (9-65 percent), reductions in mortality associated
with coverage. Our estimates are smaller than those documented in the experimental literature but
somewhat larger than those reported in quasi-experimental studies.

8        Conclusion
Low-income adults in the United States experience dramatically worse health and reduced longevity
as compared to their higher income counterparts. The ACA expansion of Medicaid eligibility to poor
and near-poor adults represents a historic first effort to improve access to high-quality medical care for
this population. Robust evidence that Medicaid increases the use of effective medical care indicates
that the ACA expansion could play a crucial role in reducing income disparities in health among U.S.
    63
      Swaminathan et al. (2018) find that the Medicaid expansions generated large reductions in mortality among patients
with end-stage renal disease; however, given the high health risk of that population, it is unclear whether those estimates
are directly comparable to those discussed here. We include the estimates in Appendix Table A13, however.
   64
      While some studies present subgroup analyses by age, they do not include the corresponding first stage estimates
needed to estimate the implied individual treatment effect.



                                                            28
adults. However, the magnitude of any health improvements experienced by beneficiaries remains
largely uncertain, in part due to the limited amount of data available that contains information on
both socioeconomic status and objective measures of health.
       In this paper, we evaluate these expansions by leveraging data linkages across large-scale federal
survey and administrative data. These data linkages allow us to overcome several empirical challenges
that previous research in this area encountered, including the lack of information about individual-
level characteristics that determine Medicaid eligibility and the systematic mis-reporting of Medicaid
enrollment that occurs in survey data. Using these data, we show that the ACA Medicaid expansions
substantially reduced mortality rates among those who stood to benefit the most.
       Our estimated change in mortality for our sample translates into sizeable gains in terms of the
number of lives saved under Medicaid expansion. Since there are about 3.7 million individuals who
meet our sample criteria living in expansion states,65 our results indicate that approximately 4,800 fewer
deaths occurred per year among this population due to Medicaid expansion, or roughly 19,200 fewer
deaths over the first four years alone. This calculation relies on the assumption used throughout the
paper; namely, that in the absence of the ACA expansions, mortality in expansion and non-expansion
states would have trended similarly.
       Our estimates also reveal some information about the potential cost of state decisions not to expand
Medicaid. These calculations necessarily rely on the assumption that the effects of Medicaid expansion
in the non-expansion states would be similar to those observed in the expansion states. The change
in mortality in non-expansion states if they were to adopt the expansion could be larger (e.g., if the
beneficiaries in the non-expansion states have worse baseline access to effective health care) or smaller
(e.g., if the health system has less capacity to treat the newly insured in non-expansion states). Given
these caveats, we estimate that, as there are approximately 3 million individuals meeting this sample
criteria in non-expansion states, failure to expand in these states resulted in 15,600 additional deaths
over this four year period that could have been avoided if the states had elected to expand coverage.




  65
       Authors' calculation using the public-use ACS.


                                                        29
References
Abramowitz, J. (2018, May). The Effect of ACA State Medicaid Expansions on Medical Out-of-Pocket
 Expenditures. Medical Care Research and Review , 1­27.

Allen, H. and B. D. Sommers (2019, October). Medicaid Expansion and Health: Assessing the Evidence
  After 5 Years. JAMA 322 (13), 1253­1254. Publisher: American Medical Association.

Allen, H., A. Swanson, J. Wang, and T. Gross (2017, October). Early Medicaid Expansion Associated
  With Reduced Payday Borrowing In California. Health Affairs 36 (10), 1769­1776.

Alpert, A., W. Evans, E. M. Lieber, and D. Powell (2019, November). Origins of the Opioid Crisis and
  Its Enduring Impacts. Technical Report w26500, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
  MA.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. Hanson (2019, September). When Work Disappears: Manufacturing Decline
 and the Falling Marriage Market Value of Young Men. American Economic Review: Insights 1 (2),
 161­178.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013, October). The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
 Effects of Import Competition in the United States. American Economic Review 103 (6), 2121­2168.

Bachhuber, M. A., B. Saloner, C. O. Cunningham, and C. L. Barry (2014, October). Medical Cannabis
  Laws and Opioid Analgesic Overdose Mortality in the United States, 1999-2010. JAMA Internal
  Medicine 174 (10), 1668­1673. Publisher: American Medical Association.

Baicker, K., S. L. Taubman, H. L. Allen, M. Bernstein, J. H. Gruber, J. P. Newhouse, E. C. Schneider,
  B. J. Wright, A. M. Zaslavsky, and A. N. Finkelstein (2013). The Oregon Experiment -- Effects of
  Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes. New England Journal of Medicine 368 (18), 1713­1722.

Bartik, T. (1991, January). Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
  Upjohn Press .

Bernstein, S., R. Diamond, T. McQuade, and B. Pousada (2018, November). The Contribution of
  High-Skilled Immigrants to Innovation in the United States. Working Paper, Stanford University.

Black, B., A. Hollingsworth, L. Nunes, and K. Simon (2019, February). The Effect of Health Insurance
  on Mortality: Power Analysis and What We Can Learn from the Affordable Care Act Coverage
  Expansions. Technical Report w25568, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Bond, B., J. D. Brown, A. Luque, and A. O'Hara (2014, April). The Nature of the Bias When Studying
  Only Linkable Person Records: Evidence from the American Community Survey. Technical Report
  Working Paper #2014-08, Center for Administrative Records Research & Applications, U.S. Census
  Bureau.

Borgschulte, M. and J. Vogler (2020, May). Did the ACA Medicaid Expansion Save Lives? Journal of
  Health Economics , 102333.

Boudreaux, M., K. T. Call, J. Turner, B. Fried, and B. O'Hara (2013). Accuracy of Medicaid reporting
  in the ACS: Preliminary results from linked data. pp. 14.

Boudreaux, M. H., K. T. Call, J. Turner, B. Fried, and B. O'Hara (2015, December). Measurement
  Error in Public Health Insurance Reporting in the American Community Survey: Evidence from
  Record Linkage. Health Services Research 50 (6), 1973­1995.



                                                 30
Boudreaux, M. H., E. Golberstein, and D. D. McAlpine (2016, January). The Long-Term Impacts
  of Medicaid Exposure in Early Childhood: Evidence from the Program's Origin. Journal of Health
  Economics 45, 161­175.

Brevoort, K., D. Grodzicki, M. B. Hackmann, and S. Koulayev (2019, March). The Credit Consequences
  of Unpaid Medical Bills. Working Paper, UCLA.

Brown, D. W., A. E. Kowalski, and I. Z. Lurie (2018). Long-Term Impacts of Childhood Medicaid
  Expansions on Outcomes in Adulthood. Review of Economic Studies (Forthcoming).

Buchmueller, T. C. and C. Carey (2018, February). The Effect of Prescription Drug Monitoring
  Programs on Opioid Utilization in Medicare. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10 (1),
  77­112.

Buchmueller, T. C., Z. M. Levinson, H. G. Levy, and B. L. Wolfe (2016, August). Effect of the
  Affordable Care Act on Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Insurance Coverage. American
  Journal of Public Health 106 (8), 1416­1421.

Bureau of the Census (1969, April). Estimates of the Population of States, by Age 1965 to 1987.
  Current Population Reports Series P-25, No. 420, U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, DC.

Carey, C., S. Miller, and L. Wherry (2018, October). The Impact of Insurance Expansions on the
  Already Insured: The Affordable Care Act and Medicare. Technical Report w25153, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Case, A. and A. Deaton (2015, December). Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among white non-
  Hispanic Americans in the 21st century. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (49),
  15078­15083.

Case, A. and A. Deaton (2017). Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century. Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity 2017 (1), 397­476.

Caswell, K. J. and T. A. Waidmann (2017, September). The Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions
  and Personal Finance. Medical Care Research and Review , 1­34.

Caucci, L. (2014, August). Hospital Presumptive Eligibility. Brief, Office for State, Tribal, Local and
  Territorial Support, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Cawley, J., A. Soni, and K. Simon (2018, September). Third Year of Survey Data Shows Continuing
  Benefits of Medicaid Expansions for Low-Income Childless Adults in the U.S. Journal of General
  Internal Medicine 33 (9), 1495­1497.

Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2016, September). MAGI 2.0: Building MAGI Knowledge,
  Part 2: Income Counting.

Charles, E. J., L. E. Johnston, M. A. Herbert, J. H. Mehaffey, K. W. Yount, D. S. Likosky, P. F.
  Theurer, C. E. Fonner, J. B. Rich, A. M. Speir, G. Ailawadi, R. L. Prager, and I. L. Kron (2017,
  October). Impact of Medicaid Expansion on Cardiac Surgery Volume and Outcomes. The Annals of
  Thoracic Surgery 104 (4), 1251­1258.

Chen, J. (2019, August). Does Medicaid Save Lives? SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3432701, Social Science
  Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, D. W. Schanzenbach, and D. Yagan (2011, November).
  How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project Star. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4), 1593­1660.

                                                  31
Chetty, R., M. Stepner, S. Abraham, S. Lin, B. Scuderi, N. Turner, A. Bergeron, and D. Cutler (2016,
  April). The Association Between Income and Life Expectancy in the United States, 2001-2014.
  JAMA 315 (16), 1750.

Chou, R., T. Dana, I. Blazina, M. Daeges, C. Bougatsos, S. Grusing, and T. L. Jeanne (2016, Novem-
  ber). Statin Use for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults: A Systematic Review
  for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Evidence Synthesis No. 139 AHRQ Publication No.
  14-05206-EF-2, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville, MD.

Chou, R., T. Dana, I. Blazina, M. Daeges, and T. L. Jeanne (2016, November). Statins for Prevention
  of Cardiovascular Disease in Adults: Evidence Report and Systematic Review for the US Preventive
  Services Task Force. JAMA 316 (19), 2008­2024.

Chou, R., L. H. Huffman, R. Fu, A. K. Smits, P. T. Korthuis, and US Preventive Services Task Force
  (2005, July). Screening for HIV: A Review of the Evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task
  Force. Annals of Internal Medicine 143 (1), 55­73.

Colella, F., R. Lalive, S. O. Sakalli, and M. Thoenig (2019). Inference with Arbitrary Clustering. pp.
  34.

Conley, T. G. (1999, September). GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence. Journal of
  Econometrics 92 (1), 1­45.

Courtemanche, C., J. Marton, B. Ukert, A. Yelowitz, and D. Zapata (2017, January). Early Impacts of
  the Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage in Medicaid Expansion and Non-Expansion
  States: Impacts of the Affordable Care Act. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36 (1),
  178­210.

Courtemanche, C., J. Marton, B. Ukert, A. Yelowitz, and D. Zapata (2018a, January). Early Effects of
  the Affordable Care Act on Health Care Access, Risky Health Behaviors, and Self-Assessed Health:
  Early Effects of the Affordable Care Act. Southern Economic Journal 84 (3), 660­691.

Courtemanche, C., J. Marton, B. Ukert, A. Yelowitz, and D. Zapata (2018b, January). Effects of the
  Affordable Care Act on Health Care Access and Self-Assessed Health After 3 Years. INQUIRY: The
  Journal of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing 55, 1­10.

Currie, J., S. Decker, and W. Lin (2008). Has Public Health Insurance for Older Children Reduced
  Disparities in Access to Care and Health Outcomes? Journal of Health Economics 27, 1567­1581.

Currie, J. and J. Gruber (1995, March). Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical care, and
  Child Health. Working Paper 5052, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Currie, J. and J. Gruber (1996a, May). Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and
  Child Health. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2), 431­466.

Currie, J. and J. Gruber (1996b). Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the
  Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women. Journal of Political Economy , 1263­1296.

Cutler, D. M. and J. Gruber (1996, May). Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insurance. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2), 391­430.

Dobbie, W. and J. Song (2015, March). Debt Relief and Debtor Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of
 Consumer Bankruptcy Protection. American Economic Review 105 (3), 1272­1311.

Dobkin, C., A. Finkelstein, R. Kluender, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2018, February). The Economic
 Consequences of Hospital Admissions. American Economic Review 108 (2), 308­352.

                                                 32
Dowd, J. B. and A. Zajacova (2007, December). Does the Predictive Power of Self-Rated Health
  for Subsequent Mortality Risk Vary By Socioeconomic Status in the US? International Journal of
  Epidemiology 36 (6), 1214­1221.

Dowd, J. B. and A. Zajacova (2010, October). Does Self-Rated Health Mean the Same Thing Across
  Socioeconomic Groups? Evidence From Biomarker Data. Annals of Epidemiology 20 (10), 743­749.

Duggan, M., A. Gupta, and E. Jackson (2019, January). The Impact of the Affordable Care Act:
 Evidence from California's Hospital Sector. Working Paper 25488, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Dunn, A. and A. H. Shapiro (2019, January). Does Medicare Part D Save Lives? American Journal
 of Health Economics 5 (1), 126­164.

Eguia, E., M. S. Baker, B. Chand, P. J. Sweigert, and P. C. Kuo (2020, January). The impact of the
  affordable care act (ACA) Medicaid Expansion on access to minimally invasive surgical care. The
  American Journal of Surgery 219 (1), 15­20.

Eguia, E., A. N. Cobb, A. N. Kothari, A. Molefe, M. Afshar, G. V. Aranha, and P. C. Kuo (2018,
  October). Impact of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) Medicaid Expansion on Cancer Admissions and
  Surgeries. Annals of Surgery 268 (4), 584­590.

Fernandez, L. E., S. Rastogi, S. R. Ennis, and J. M. Noon (2015, April). Evaluating Race and Hispanic
  Origin Responses of Medicaid Participants Using Census Data. CARRA Working Paper Series Work-
  ing Paper #2015-01.

Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J. P. Newhouse, H. Allen, and
  K. Baicker (2012, July). The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the first year.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics Advance Access.

Frean, M., J. Gruber, and B. D. Sommers (2017, May). Premium subsidies, the mandate, and Medicaid
  expansion: Coverage effects of the Affordable Care Act. Journal of Health Economics 53, 72­86.

Gallagher, E., R. Gopalan, M. Grinstein-Weiss, and J. Sabat (2019, March). Medicaid and Household
 Savings Behavior: New Evidence from Tax Refunds. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3052026, Social
 Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Garthwaite, C., J. Graves, T. Gross, Z. Karaca, V. Marone, and M. Notowidigdo (2019). All Medicaid
 Expansions Are Not Created Equal: The Geography and Targeting of the Affordable Care Act.
 BPEA Conference Drafts, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Cambridge, MA.

Garthwaite, C., T. Gross, M. Notowidigdo, and J. A. Graves (2017, February). Insurance Expansion
 and Hospital Emergency Department Access: Evidence From the Affordable Care Act. Annals of
 Internal Medicine 166 (3), 172.

Ghosh, A., K. Simon, and B. D. Sommers (2019, January). The Effect of Health Insurance on Prescrip-
 tion Drug Use Among Low-Income Adults:Evidence from Recent Medicaid Expansions. Journal of
 Health Economics 63, 64­80.

Goldin, J., I. Z. Lurie, and J. McCubbin (2020, September). Health Insurance and Mortality: Experi-
 mental Evidence from Taxpayer Outreach. The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

Goodman, L. (2017). The Effect of the Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansion on Migration. Journal
 of Policy Analysis and Management 36 (1), 211­238.


                                                 33
Goodman-Bacon, A. (2016, December). The Long-Run Effects of Childhood Insurance Coverage:
 Medicaid Implementation, Adult Health, and Labor Market Outcomes. Technical Report w22899,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Goodman-Bacon, A. (2018, February). Public Insurance and Mortality: Evidence from Medicaid
 Implementation. Journal of Political Economy 126 (1), 216­262.

Goodman-Bacon, A. (2019, July). Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment Timing. Work-
 ing Paper, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.

Goodman-Bacon, A., T. Goldring, and A. Nichols (2019, September). bacondecomp: Stata module
 for decomposing difference-in-differences estimation with variation in treatment timing. Statistical
 Software Components S458676, Boston College Department of Economics .

Graves, J. A., L. A. Hatfield, W. Blot, N. L. Keating, and J. M. McWilliams (2020, January). Medicaid
  Expansion Slowed Rates Of Health Decline For Low-Income Adults In Southern States. Health
  Affairs 39 (1), 67­76. Publisher: Health Affairs.

Gross, T., M. J. Notowidigdo, and J. Wang (2020, April). The Marginal Propensity to Consume over
  the Business Cycle. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12 (2), 351­384.

Gruber, J. and B. D. Sommers (2019). The Affordable Care Act's Effects on Patients, Providers, and
  the Economy: What We've Learned so Far. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 0 (0), 1­25.

Heberlein, M., T. Brooks, J. Guyer, S. Artiga, and J. Stephens (2011, January). Holding Steady,
  Looking Ahead: Annual Findings of a 50-State Survey of Eligibility Rules, Enrollment and Re-
  newal Procedures, and Cost Sharing Practices in Medicaid and CHIP, 2010-2011. Technical report,
  The Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation,
  Washington, DC.

Horwitz, J., C. Davis, L. McClelland, R. Fordon, and E. Meara (2018, August). The Problem of Data
  Quality in Analyses of Opioid Regulation: The Case of Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs.
  Technical Report w24947, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Howell, E., S. Decker, S. Hogan, A. Yemane, and J. Foster (2010, December). Declining Child Mor-
  tality and Continuing Racial Disparities in the Era of the Medicaid and SCHIP Insurance Coverage
  Expansions. American Journal of Public Health 100 (12), 2500­2506.

Hu, L., R. Kaestner, B. Mazumder, S. Miller, and A. Wong (2018, February). The Effect of the Patient
 Protection and Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions on Financial Wellbeing. Journal of Public
 Economics (Forthcoming).

Huh, J. and J. Reif (2017, May). Did Medicare Part D Reduce Mortality? Journal of Health Eco-
 nomics 53, 17­37.

Imbens, G. W. and J. D. Angrist (1994). Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment
  Effects. Econometrica 62 (2), 467­475.

Indiana Legislative Services Agency (2011, July). The Healthy Indiana Plan and Health Coverage of
  Childless Adults Across the States. Technical report, Health Finance Committee, Indiana Legislative
  Services Agency, Indianapolis, IN.

Kaestner, R., C. Schiman, and G. C. Alexander (2017, October). Effects of Prescription Drug In-
 surance on Hospitalization and Mortality: Evidence from Medicare Part D. Journal of Risk and
 Insurance (Forthcoming).

                                                 34
Kaiser Family Foundation (2019a). Medicaid Income Eligibility Limits for Other Non-Disabled Adults,
 2011-2019.

Kaiser Family Foundation (2019b). Medicaid Income Eligibility Limits for Parents, 2002-2019.

Kenney, G. M., V. Lynch, J. Haley, and M. Huntress (2012, August). Variation in Medicaid Eligibility
  and Participation among Adults: Implications for the Affordable Care Act. INQUIRY: The Journal
 of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing 49 (3), 231­253.

Khatana, S. A. M., A. Bhatla, A. S. Nathan, J. Giri, C. Shen, D. S. Kazi, R. W. Yeh, and P. W.
 Groeneveld (2019, June). Association of Medicaid Expansion With Cardiovascular Mortality. JAMA
 Cardiology .

Ki, V. and C. Rotstein (2008, March). Bacterial skin and soft tissue infections in adults: A review
  of their epidemiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment and site of care. The Canadian Journal of
  Infectious Diseases & Medical Microbiology 19 (2), 173­184.

Lee, H. and F. W. Porell (2018, October). The Effect of the Affordable Care Act Medicaid Ex-
  pansion on Disparities in Access to Care and Health Status. Medical Care Research and Review ,
  107755871880870.

Lindrooth, R. C., M. C. Perraillon, R. Y. Hardy, and G. J. Tung (2018, January). Understanding The
  Relationship Between Medicaid Expansions And Hospital Closures. Health Affairs 37 (1), 111­120.
  Publisher: Health Affairs.

Lynch, V., G. M. Kenney, J. Haley, and D. M. Resnick (2011). Improving the Validity of the Medicaid-
  CHIP Estimates on the ACS. Technical report, Urban Institute, Washington, DC.

Margerison, C. E., C. L. MacCallum, J. Chen, Y. Zamani-Hank, and R. Kaestner (2019, November).
 Impacts of Medicaid Expansion on Health Among Women of Reproductive Age. American Journal
 of Preventive Medicine 0 (0).

Martinez, M. E., E. P. Zammitti, and R. A. Cohen (2018, November). Health Insurance Coverage: Early
 Release of Estimates From the National Health Interview Survey, January ­ June 2018. Technical
 report, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
 National Center for Health Statistics.

Marton, J. and A. Yelowitz (2015). Health insurance generosity and conditional coverage: Evidence
 from medicaid managed care in Kentucky. Southern Economic Journal 82 (2), 535­555.

McInerney, M., R. Winecoff, P. Ayyagari, K. Simon, and M. K. Bundorf (2020, January). ACA Medicaid
 Expansion Associated With Increased Medicaid Participation and Improved Health Among Near-
 Elderly: Evidence From the Health and Retirement Study. INQUIRY: The Journal of Health Care
 Organization, Provision, and Financing 57, 0046958020935229. Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc.

McMorrow, S., J. A. Gates, S. K. Long, and G. M. Kenney (2017, May). Medicaid Expansion Increased
 Coverage, Improved Affordability, And Reduced Psychological Distress For Low-Income Parents.
 Health Affairs 36 (5), 808­818.

McPhail, S., S. Johnson, D. Greenberg, M. Peake, and B. Rous (2015, March). Stage at diagnosis and
 early mortality from cancer in England. British Journal of Cancer 112 (Suppl 1), S108­S115.

Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission (2018). Medicaid Enrollment Changes Following
 the ACA.


                                                 35
Meyer, J. A., R. R. Bovbjerg, B. A. Ormond, and G. M. Lagomarsino (2010, December). Expanding
 Health Coverage in the District of Columbia: D.C.'s shift from providing services to subsidizing
 individuals and its continuing challenges in promoting health, 1999-2009. Technical report, Brookings
 Institution, Washington, DC.

Miller, S. and L. R. Wherry (2017, March). Health and Access to Care during the First 2 Years of the
 ACA Medicaid Expansions. New England Journal of Medicine 376 (10), 947­956.

Miller, S. and L. R. Wherry (2019, May). Four Years Later: Insurance Coverage and Access to Care
 Continue to Diverge Between ACA Medicaid Expansion and Non-Expansion States. AEA Papers
 and Proceedings .

Moyer, V. A. (2013). Screening for Hepatitis C Virus Infection in Adults: U.S. Preventive Services
 Task Force Recommendation Statement. Annals of Internal Medicine 159, 349­357.

Mulrow, E., A. Mushtaq, S. Pramanik, and A. Fontes (2011, March). Assessment of the U.S. Census
 Bureau's Person Identification Validation System. Final Report to the U.S. Census Bureau, NORC
 at the University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Musumeci, M. and R. Rudowitz (2017, November). Medicaid Retroactive Coverage Waivers: Implica-
 tions for Beneficiaries, Providers, and States. Issue Brief, The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation,
 Washington, DC.

Nasseh, K. and M. Vujicic (2017). The Impact of the Affordable Care Act's Medicaid Expansion on
  Dental Care Use Through 2016. Journal of Public Health Dentistry 77 (4), 290­294.

National Center for Health Statistics (2019, February). Office of Analysis and Epidemiology, Public-use
  Linked Mortality File, 2015. Technical report, Hyattsville, MD.

National Conference of State Legislatures (2009, August). Using Medicaid Dollars to Cover the Unin-
  sured: States Use of Medicaid Dollars to Cover the Uninsured.

NGA Center for Best Practices (2010, January). Maternal and Child Health Statistics, FY 2008. Issue
 Brief, National Governors Association, Washington, DC.

Nolte, E. and M. McKee (2003, November). Measuring the Health of Nations: Analysis of Mortality
  Amenable to Health Care. BMJ : British Medical Journal 327 (7424), 1129.

Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2020, March). Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from US
  Counties. American Economic Review: Insights 2 (1), 47­64.

Powell, D., R. L. Pacula, and M. Jacobson (2018, March). Do medical marijuana laws reduce addictions
  and deaths related to pain killers? Journal of Health Economics 58, 29­42.

Rambachan, A. and J. Roth (2019, December). An Honest Approach to Parallel Trends. Havard
  University Working Paper .

Rambachan, A. and J. Roth (2020). HonestDiD.

Rostron, B. L., J. L. Boies, and E. Arias (2010). Education reporting and classification on death
  certificates in the United States. Number no. (PHS) 2010-1351 in DHHS publication. Hyattsville,
  Md. : Washington, DC: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
  Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics ; For sale by the U.S. G.P.O., Supt. of Docs.

Roth, J. (2019, July). Pre-test with Caution: Event-study Estimates After Testing for Parallel Trends.
  Harvard University Working Paper .

                                                  36
Rudowitz, R., R. Garfield, and E. Hinton (2019, March). 10 Things to Know about Medicaid: Setting
 the Facts Straight. Library Catalog: www.kff.org.

Ruggles, S., S. Flood, R. Goeken, J. Grover, E. Meyer, J. Pacas, and M. Sobek (2019). IPUMS USA:
 Version 9.0 [dataset]. Technical report, IPUMS, Minneapolis, MN.

Sabik, L. M., W. W. Tarazi, S. Hochhalter, B. Dahman, and C. J. Bradley (2018). Medicaid Expansions
  and Cervical Cancer Screening for Low-Income Women. Health Services Research 53 (S1), 2870­2891.

Semyonov, M., N. Lewin-Epstein, and D. Maskileyson (2013, March). Where Wealth Matters More for
  Health: The Wealth­Health Gradient in 16 Countries. Social Science & Medicine 81, 10­17.

Simon, K., A. Soni, and J. Cawley (2017, March). The Impact of Health Insurance on Preventive
  Care and Health Behaviors: Evidence from the First Two Years of the ACA Medicaid Expansions.
  Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36 (2), 390­417.

Sommers, B. D. (2017, July). State Medicaid Expansions and Mortality, Revisited: A Cost-Benefit
  Analysis. American Journal of Health Economics 3 (3), 392­421.

Sommers, B. D., K. Baicker, and A. M. Epstein (2012, July). Mortality and Access to Care among
  Adults after State Medicaid Expansions. New England Journal of Medicine , 120726114943009.

Sommers, B. D., R. J. Blendon, E. J. Orav, and A. M. Epstein (2016, October). Changes in Utilization
  and Health Among Low-Income Adults After Medicaid Expansion or Expanded Private Insurance.
  JAMA Internal Medicine 176 (10), 1501.

Sommers, B. D., M. Z. Gunja, K. Finegold, and T. Musco (2015, July). Changes in Self-reported
  Insurance Coverage, Access to Care, and Health Under the Affordable Care Act. JAMA 314 (4), 366.

Sommers, B. D., S. K. Long, and K. Baicker (2014). Changes in Mortality After Massachusetts Health
  Care Reform. Annals of Internal Medicine 160, 585­593.

Sommers, B. D., B. Maylone, R. J. Blendon, E. J. Orav, and A. M. Epstein (2017, June). Three-
  Year Impacts Of The Affordable Care Act: Improved Medical Care And Health Among Low-Income
  Adults. Health Affairs 36 (6), 1119­1128.

Soni, A., K. Simon, J. Cawley, and L. Sabik (2018, February). Effect of Medicaid Expansions of 2014
  on Overall and Early-Stage Cancer Diagnoses. American Journal of Public Health 108 (2), 216­218.

Soni, A., L. R. Wherry, and K. I. Simon (2020, March). How Have ACA Insurance Expansions Affected
  Health Outcomes? Findings From The Literature: A literature review of the Affordable Care Act's
  effects on health outcomes for non-elderly adults. Health Affairs 39 (3), 371­378.

Sorlie, P. D. and N. J. Johnson (1996). Validity of Education Information on the Death Certificate.
  Epidemiology 7 (4), 437­439. Publisher: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

State Health Access Data Assistance Center (2012, March). Defining "Family" for Studies of Health
  Insurance Coverage. Technical Report Issue Brief #27, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.

Sullivan, D. and T. von Wachter (2009, August). Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using
  Administrative Data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (3), 1265­1306.

Sun, L. and S. Abraham (2020, August). Estimating Dynamic Treatment Effects in Event Studies
  With Heterogeneous Treatment Effects. MIT Working Paper .



                                                37
Swaminathan, S., B. D. Sommers, R. Thorsness, R. Mehrotra, Y. Lee, and A. N. Trivedi (2018, Decem-
  ber). Association of Medicaid Expansion With 1-Year Mortality Among Patients With End-Stage
  Renal Disease. JAMA 320 (21), 2242­2250.

Thompson, O. (2017, January). The Long-Term Health Impacts of Medicaid and CHIP. Journal of
 Health Economics 51, 26­40.

Weathers, R. R. and M. Stegman (2012, December). The Effect of Expanding Access to Health Insur-
 ance on the Health and Mortality of Social Security Disability Insurance Beneficiaries. Journal of
 Health Economics 31 (6), 863­875.

Wen, H., K. J. Johnston, L. Allen, and T. M. Waters (2019, November). Medicaid Expansion Associated
 With Reductions In Preventable Hospitalizations. Health Affairs 38 (11), 1845­1849. Publisher:
 Health Affairs.

Wherry, L. R. and B. D. Meyer (2016, August). Saving Teens: Using a Policy Discontinuity to Estimate
 the Effects of Medicaid Eligibility. Journal of Human Resources 51 (3), 556­588.

Wherry, L. R. and S. Miller (2016, June). Early Coverage, Access, Utilization, and Health Effects
 Associated With the Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansions: A Quasi-experimental Study. Annals
 of Internal Medicine 164 (12), 795.

Wherry, L. R., S. Miller, R. Kaestner, and B. D. Meyer (2017, April). Childhood Medicaid Coverage
 and Later-Life Health Care Utilization. The Review of Economics and Statistics 100 (2), 287­302.

Winkelman, T. N. and V. W. Chang (2018, March). Medicaid Expansion, Mental Health, and Access
 to Care among Childless Adults with and without Chronic Conditions. Journal of General Internal
 Medicine 33 (3), 376­383.

Yan, B. W., F. A. Sloan, W. J. Boscardin, F. Guo, and R. A. Dudley (2020, May). The Opioid
  Epidemic Blunted the Mortality Benefit of Medicaid Expansion. Medical Care Research and Review ,
  107755872091962.

Zajacova, A. and J. B. Dowd (2011, October). Reliability of Self-rated Health in US Adults. American
  Journal of Epidemiology 174 (8), 977­983.

Zheng, S. L., A. J. Roddick, R. Aghar-Jaffar, M. J. Shun-Shin, D. Francis, N. Oliver, and K. Meeran
  (2018, April). Association Between Use of Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 Inhibitors, Glucagon-
  like Peptide 1 Agonists, and Dipeptidyl Peptidase 4 Inhibitors With All-Cause Mortality in Patients
  With Type 2 Diabetes: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA 319 (15), 1580­1591.




                                                 38
              Figure 1: Effect of the ACA Medicaid Expansions on Eligibility and Coverage



                                  0.5
                                                                                                 q        q




                                                                                                                                           0.15
                                                                                                      q        q


                                                                                                                                                                                                      q   q
                                  0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                  q




                                                                                                                                           0.10
                    Coefficient




                                                                                                                         Coefficient
                                  0.3




                                                                                                                                           0.05
                                  0.2




                                                                                                                                           0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                  0.1




                                                                                                                                                                q       q        q    q
                                                                                                                                                       q




                                                                                                                                           -0.05
                                  0.0




                                        q    q   q    q    q                 q




                                        -6       -4        -2                                    0        2                                            -6               -4            -2          0       2

                                                          Event Time                                                                                                                 Event Time


                                    (a) Medicaid Eligibility (ACS)                                                                         (b) Any Medicaid Enrollment in
                                                                                                                                                    Year (CMS)




                                                                                                                                           0.8
                                  60




                                                                                                                                                                                                              q




                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                      q
                    Coefficient




                                                                                                                         Coefficient

                                                                                                          q                                                                                               q
                                  40




                                                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                  20




                                                                                                                                           0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                           0.0




                                             q                               q                                                                                                              q
                                  0




                                                 q                                                                                                                               q    q
                                        q             q    q                                                                                                    q       q
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                           -0.2




                                        -6       -4        -2                                    0        2                                            -6               -4            -2          0       2

                                                          Event Time                                                                                                                 Event Time


                        (c) # Days Medicaid Enrollment in                                                                              (d) Cumulative Years of Medicaid
                                   Year (CMS)                                                                                                 Exposure (CMS)
                                                                             0.02
                                                                             0.00




                                                                                                               q    q
                                                                                                      q                                q
                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                Coefficent

                                                                             -0.06 -0.04 -0.02




                                                                                                                                                   q                         q


                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                            q




                                                                                                 -6       -4        -2                             0                2

                                                                                                                   Event Time


                                                                                                      (e) Uninsured (ACS)



Note: These figures report coefficients from the estimation of equation (1) for the outcomes of Medicaid eligibility,
Medicaid coverage, and uninsurance from the 2008-2017 American Community Survey (ACS) and 2008-2016 Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Service (CMS) administrative enrollment data. Note that scales differ across the five figures. The
coefficients represent the change in outcomes for expansion states relative to non-expansion states in the six years before
and four years after expansion, as compared to the year immediately prior to the expansion. The sample is defined as
U.S. citizens ages 55-64 in 2014 who are not SSI recipients and who have either less than a high school degree or family
income below 138% FPL. See Section 4.1 for additional details on the analysis and Appendix Section B for information
on the Medicaid eligibility determination.




                                                                                                                    39
                  Figure 2: Effect of the ACA Medicaid Expansions on Annual Mortality
                                      0.002




                                                    q
                                      0.000




                                                        q         q
                        Coefficient




                                                                        q
                                               q             q

                                                                              q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                      q
                                      -0.002




                                                                                          q
                                      -0.004




                                               -6       -4        -2          0       2

                                                                 Event Time




Note: This figure reports coefficients from the estimation of Equation 1 for annual mortality. The coefficients represent
the change in mortality for expansion states relative to non-expansion states in the six years before and four years after
expansion, as compared to the year immediately prior to the expansion. The sample is defined as U.S. citizens ages
55-64 in 2014 observed in the 2008-2013 American Community Survey who are not SSI recipients and who have either
less than a high school degree or family income below 138% FPL.




                                                                   40
                                                                         Figure 3: Placebo Tests
                                                                               Pre-ACA Years
                   0.04




                                                                                                    0.002
                   0.02




                                                                                                                           q                q   q
     Coefficient




                                                                                      Coefficient
                                                                                                                  q             q




                                                                                                    0.000
                                                q                                                                      q              q
                   0.00




                                           q         q     q                                                 q                                      q
                                      q                          q
                                                                                                                                                        q
                                 q                                   q           q
                                                                           q




                                                                                                    -0.002
                   -0.02




                                                                                                    -0.004
                   -0.04




                                 -6        -4        -2          0         2                                 -6       -4        -2          0       2

                                                    Event Time                                                                 Event Time


                                          (a) Medicaid Coverage                                                       (b) Annual Mortality
                                                                            Age 65+ in 2014


                                                                                                    0.002
                   0.04
                   0.02




                                                                                                                  q        q
                                                                                                    0.000



                                                                                                                       q        q
                                                                                                                                                    q
     Coefficient




                                                                                      Coefficient




                                                                                                                                      q     q
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                             q
                   0.00




                                                                 q   q     q
                                 q    q                    q                                                                                            q
                                           q    q    q
                                                                                                    -0.002
                   -0.04 -0.02




                                                                                                    -0.004




                                 -6        -4        -2          0         2                                 -6       -4        -2          0       2

                                                    Event Time                                                                 Event Time


                                          (c) Medicaid Coverage                                                       (d) Annual Mortality
                                                                          Income 400%FPL +
                                                                                                    0.002
                   0.04




                                                                           q
                   0.02




                                                                     q
                                                                                                    0.000




                                                                 q                                                q    q   q    q
     Coefficient




                                                                                      Coefficient




                                                                                                             q                        q
                                                                                                                                            q   q   q
                                                                                                                                                        q
                   0.00




                                 q    q    q    q    q     q
                                                                                                    -0.002
                   -0.04 -0.02




                                                                                                    -0.004




                                 -6        -4        -2          0         2                                 -6       -4        -2          0       2

                                                    Event Time                                                                 Event Time


                                          (e) Medicaid Coverage                                                       (f) Annual Mortality

Note: Row 1 figures plot coefficients from equation (1) using pre-ACA years of data. Row 2 presents estimates from the
ACA study period for those age 65 and older in 2014 who would not have been affected by the Medicaid expansion due
to their eligibility for the Medicare program. Row 3 presents estimates for individuals in higher income families who
were less likely to gain Medicaid coverage. See text in Section 5.4 for additional information.



                                                                                     41
                        Table 1: Impact of the ACA Expansions on Coverage and Mortality: Difference-in-Differences Estimates

                                 Medicaid          Medicaid        Days of Medicaid   Cumulative Medicaid      Uninsured         Died in Year
                                 Eligibility    Coverage in Year       in Year         Years Experienced
                                     (1)              (2)                 (3)                 (4)                    (5)              (6)

      Difference-in-differences Model:
      Expansion × Post          0.498 (0.026)   0.128 (0.0201)     42.99 (8.892)        0.375 (0.061)       -0.044 (0.010)    -0.00132 (0.00050)

      Event Study Model:
      Year 3                   0.493(0.032)           NA                  NA            0.671 (0.082)       -0.039 (0.012)     -0.00208 (0.00083)
      Year 2                   0.511(0.026)     0.128 (0.028)       43.33 (9.78)        0.472 (0.065)       -0.050 (0.010)     -0.00131 (0.00056)
      Year 1                   0.500(0.025)     0.129 (0.021)      50.79 (12.49)        0.305 (0.047)       -0.053 (0.011)    -0.00119 (0.00044)
      Year 0                   0.510(0.022)     0.115 (0.020)       33.74 (7.27)        0.128 (0.021)       -0.038 (0.006)     -0.00089 (0.00036)




42
      Year -1 (Omitted)              0                 0                   0                    0                   0                    0
      Year -2                  0.010 (0.006)     -0.008 (0.006)      -2.33 (2.05)        -0.018 (0.011)       0.002 (0.006)      0.00015 (0.00047)
      Year -3                  0.009 (0.010)     -0.008 (0.010)      -3.45 (3.75)        -0.029 (0.021)       0.001 (0.006)     -0.00029 (0.00053)
      Year -4                  0.008 (0.010)     -0.006 (0.010)      -0.49 (2.78)        -0.038 (0.030)      -0.007 (0.009)     0.00011 (0.00069)
      Year -5                  0.008 (0.011)     -0.004 (0.013)       0.35 (3.59)         0.053 (0.036)       0.000 (0.009)     0.00091 (0.00069)
      Year -6                  0.006 (0.011)     -0.015 (0.021)      -2.86 (5.58)        0.077 (0.045)       -0.003 (0.015)     -0.00021 (0.00070)

      N (Individuals x Year)      714,673          3,493,000          3,493,000            4,000,000            714,673            4,030,000
      N (Individuals)             714,673           566,000            566,000              566,000             714,673             566,000
     Notes: This table displays the event study coefficient estimates of equation (1). The sample is defined as U.S. citizens ages 55-64 in 2014 who
     do not receive SSI and who have either less than a high school degree or family income below 138% FPL. For models based on restricted-use
     data, sample sizes are rounded following Census disclosure rules. See text for more details. Significance levels: *=10%, **=5%, ***=1%.
        Table 2: Impact of the ACA Expansions on Coverage and Mortality: Cause of Death

                              Deaths from         Deaths from Health         Deaths from
                            Internal Causes      Care Amenable Causes       External Causes
                                  (1)                     (2)                     (3)

 Difference-in-Differences Model:
 Expansion × Post          -0.00235 (0.00675)      -0.00099 (0.00050)      0.00038 (0.00020)

 Event Study Model:
 Year 1                    -0.00221 (0.00126)         -0.00041 (0.00082)    0.00010 (0.00039)
 Year 0                    -0.00209 (0.00108)         -0.00103 (0.00075)    0.00025 (0.00032)
 Year -1 (Omitted)                  0                          0                    0
 Year -2                    -0.00053 (0.00083)        0.00065 (0.00053)    -0.00007 (0.00034)
 Year -3                    0.00088 (0.00104)          0.00014 (0.00072)   -0.00007 (0.00044)
 Year -4                    -0.00044 (0.00112)        -0.00008 (0.00082)   -0.00032 (0.00038)
 Year -5                    0.00075 (0.00095)          0.00047 (0.00074)   -0.00022 (0.00037)
 Year -6                    0.00071 (0.00106)          0.00023 (0.00062)   -0.00060 (0.00035)

 N (Individuals x Year)         683,000                    683,000              683,000
 N (Individuals)                 88,500                    88,500               88,500

Notes: This table displays the event study coefficient estimates of equation (1) using the MDAC.
Sample sizes are rounded following Census disclosure rules. See text for more details. DRB Disclosure
Approval #: CBDRB-FY19-310. Significance levels: *=10%, **=5%, ***=1%.




                                                 43
    Medicaid and Mortality: New Evidence from Linked
             Survey and Administrative Data
                                            Appendix

                      Sarah Miller     Norman Johnson         Laura R. Wherry


A     Additional Results
We present additional figures and tables discussed in the main text in this section in Figures A1-A7
and Tables A1-A13. See the main text for further discussion of these results.

B    First Stage Eligibility Estimates
To estimate the change in Medicaid eligibility associated with the ACA Medicaid expansions, we use
the 2008-2017 ACS downloaded from IPUMS USA (Ruggles et al., 2019) and impute eligibility for our
sample using state eligibility rules for each year. We consider eligibility for low-income parents under
Medicaid Section 1931 criteria in each state, as well as expanded eligibility for parents and childless
adults under waiver programs that offered comparable coverage to the ACA Medicaid expansions. We
do not consider expanded programs that cover a more limited set of services and follow documentation
from the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF) to make this determination.
    Information on state eligibility thresholds for coverage for adults were compiled from the sources
listed in Table A14. The notes column in the table provides a record of any decisions made in applying
the eligibility rules or to reconcile inconsistencies across different sources. KFF documentation on
eligibility thresholds over time, which were used as our primary source, take into account state rules on
earnings disregards when applicable. We defined the family unit for eligibility determination following
the health insurance unit definition prepared by the State Health Access State Assistance Center, see
details in State Health Access Data Assistance Center (2012). Following Medicaid rules for countable
income (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2016), we did not include family income from the
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families or SSI programs in the calculation of total family income.

C    Administrative Data on Medicaid Enrollment
We use longitudinal administrative records on Medicaid enrollment to document the impact of the
ACA expansions on Medicaid coverage from 2008 to 2016. These data were provided to the Census
Bureau by CMS and assigned a PIK at the individual level by Census using the PVS.
    The data CMS collects from states changed over time with the move from the Medicaid Statistical
Information System (MSIS) to the Transformed Medicaid Statistical Information System (T-MSIS).
States provided data to CMS over our period of study in one of three formats. The first format, MSIS,
was the original format used by CMS to collect individual level data from states. Data provided in this
format was based on federal fiscal year (FY) of enrollment. The second format, T-MSIS Analytic File
(TAF), follows the same fiscal year format as the MSIS files. The newest format, T-MSIS, is based on
calendar year (CY).



                                                   44
    All states except AR switched to T-MSIS by 2016. This switch generates a move from fiscal year
to calendar year reporting. Most of these switches occurred in 2016. Twenty-five states provided
2016 enrollment data in the TAF format, in addition to the T-MSIS format, allowing us to observe
enrollment in the fourth quarter of CY 2015, or had switched to T-MSIS prior to 2016, also allowing
us to observe Q4 CY 2015 enrollment information. The states for which we have this information are
AK, FL, KS, ME, MD, MT, NE, NM, ND, WI, AL, AR, CO, CT, DE, DC, GA, NV, NH, NC, RI,
SC, TN, VA, and WA. For all other states, we are unable to see enrollment information for the fourth
quarter of CY 2015, which would be part of FY 2016 but not CY 2016. For these states, we impute
the number of days enrolled in the fourth quarter of CY 2015 as the number of days enrolled in the
third quarter of CY 2015 if the individual is also enrolled at least one day in the first quarter of CY
2016. Our results are similar if we do not condition on Q1 CY 2016 enrollment for the imputation.
    In addition to missing Q4 CY 2015 for several states, we are also missing a small number of
additional state-quarters. Wisconsin switched from MSIS to T-MSIS in CY 2014 and did not provide
equivalent FY 2014 enrollment information; as a result, we do not observe Q4 CY 2014 data for
Wisconsin. We impute enrollment for Wisconsin in Q4 CY 2014 in the way described above. We are
also missing data from Louisiana for all of CY 2015 and Q4 of CY 2014. We impute Q4 of CY 2014 for
Louisiana as being the same as Q3 CY 2014 enrollment and code enrollment in Medicaid as missing for
CY 2015; for measures of cumulative enrollment, Louisiana residents are given missing values for CY
2015 forward. Our results are similar if we instead drop Louisiana entirely from our first stage analysis.
Finally, Arkansas did not provide any T-MSIS data during our sample period. For this state, we only
have data by FY, which ends in Q3 of CY 2016. We impute Q4 CY 2016 data for AR by assuming
individuals had their same enrollment as in Q3 of this same calendar year, similar to our Q4 CY 2014
imputation for Louisiana.
    All versions of the CMS enrollment data provide information on whether the respondent had any
enrollment in that quarter and year, and the number of days he or she was enrolled. We aggregate this
data to the individual by calendar year level, summing the number of days enrolled across different
states for an individual if necessary (e.g., if a respondent is enrolled in Medicaid in Florida for 30
days and in Arkansas for 30 days, we count the total number of days enrolled in that year as 60). To
determine the cumulative years of Medicaid exposure for each individual in year t, we sum the total
number of days of enrollment observed up to and including year t.
    Finally, in order to make the time period over which we observe Medicaid enrollment comparable
to that over which we observe mortality, we impute respondents' enrollment in 2017 based on their
2016 enrollment, their state of residence, age, gender, race, and whether or not they are in our main
targeted sample (i.e. low income or less than high school education, citizens, not receiving SSI and
between 55 and 64 in 2014). We implement this imputation by first estimating the following regression
using observed information on 2015 and 2016 enrollment:



DaysEnrolled2016 i = s + a + r + 1 DaysEnrolled2015Bin i + 2 DaysEnrolled2015Bin i × MainSample i +
                   3 DaysEnrolled2015Bin i × ExpState s + 4 ExpState s × MainSample i +
                   5 ExpState s × MainSample i × DaysEnrolled2015Bin i + 6 F emalei +        i



                                                   45
    where s are state fixed effects, a are age fixed effects, r are race and ethnicity fixed effects
(non-Hispanic Black, non-Hispanic white, Hispanic, non-Hispanic other race), DaysEnrolledBin are
indicator variables for having 0 days enrolled, 1 day to 3 months enrolled, 3 months to 6 months
enrolled, 6 months to 9 months enrolled, and 9 months to 12 months enrolled, MainSample equals
1 if the respondent is in our primary sample composed of those with low income or less than high
school education, citizens, not receiving SSI and between 55 and 64 in 2014, and Female equals one if
the respondent is female and 0 otherwise. Note that the age fixed effects account for any age effects
that may drive Medicaid enrollment (e.g. aging into eligibility for Medicare). We apply the estimated
coefficients from this regression to 2016 values for each of these variables to estimate the predicted
number of days enrolled in 2017 for each individual.

D     Measuring Cumulative Coverage in the Health and Retirement
      Study
Repeated cross-sectional surveys such as the ACS and NHIS only document the fraction of respondents
enrolled in a given year. However, previous research has shown that Medicaid coverage may have
beneficial health effects observed even after the period of enrollment (e.g. Boudreaux et al., 2016;
Brown et al., 2018; Currie et al., 2008; Goodman-Bacon, 2016; Wherry and Meyer, 2016; Wherry et al.,
2017). To examine how cumulative exposure to Medicaid changed following the ACA expansions,
we take advantage of panel data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). This study surveys
respondents every two years, with new respondents added every year as older respondents leave the
sample through attrition or death. We use restricted-use data from the 2008, 2010, 2012, 2014, and
2016 HRS, and the early release version of the 2018 HRS. We apply the same sample criteria as used
throughout the paper to identify US citizens between the ages of 55 and 64 in 2014 who do not receive
SSI and who either are in households earning under 138% of the FPL or who have less than a high
school degree. We define the income and SSI receipt criteria using the first response we observe for
the participant in our sample period. For example, if we first observe a respondent in 2008 and he/she
does not receive SSI and meets all other sample inclusion criteria, we include him/her in the same even
if in 2010 he/she reports receiving SSI. This results in 1,359 unique individuals meeting the sample
eligibility criteria, or 5,573 individual by year observations.
    Our main outcome variable for the analysis is the number of years of insurance coverage we observe
the respondent having in our sample period until year t. At the time of interview, the survey asks the
respondent about their current insurance status and their status since the date of last interview. If
the respondent is currently enrolled in health insurance and experienced no uninsurance spell since
the last survey, we assume the respondent experienced 2 years of coverage over the 2 year period. If
the respondent is currently enrolled in health insurance but did experience a period of uninsurance
since the last survey, we assume the respondent experienced 1 year of continuous coverage over the
2 year period. Finally, if the respondent is currently uninsured, we assume he experienced 0 years
of continuous coverage over this 2 year period. We use these assumptions to arrive at the outcome
variable, number of years with insurance coverage up until, and including, the survey year. In certain
analyses, we also examine the total number of years of Medicaid enrollment, which we define using
similar rules.


                                                     46
         With these outcome variables, we estimate both an "event study" and difference-in-differences
version of the model. These models include individual, state, and time fixed effects.66 We use only
2014 expanders for the event study model and include indicators for 6 years prior, 4 years prior, the
year of, two years after, and four years after the expansion. We omit the observation two years prior
to the expansion, which corresponds to the 2012 wave of the HRS.67 For the difference in differences
model, we include these late expansion states.
         We apply HRS survey weights to all regression models. The 2018 data is the early release version
and does not yet have survey weights available; we instead use the respondent's 2016 weights for this
year. Similarly, we apply the respondent's geographic information from 2016 to the 2018 data, as the
geographic data has not yet been released for the 2018 survey. Finally, in order to make the cumulative
coverage measures cover a comparable time period (i.e. 4 years post-expansion rather than 5 years),
we scale our difference-in-differences estimates by 4/5ths.

E         Sensitivity to Additional Control Variables
In sensitivity analyses, we examine whether our estimates substantially change when we include control
variables related to local economic conditions, employment growth, and factors related to the severity
of the opioid epidemic over our study period.
         To control for local economic conditions, we use the annual average unemployment rate for each
county and year from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. In addition, we control for the China shock using
the measure of exposure to Chinese imports per worker defined at the commuting zone level over the
2000 to 2014 period from Autor et al. (2013) interacted with year fixed effects.
         We also control for pharmaceutical policies that have been tied to opioid-related outcomes. First,
we allow for differential trends in states with and without triplicate programs, pulling information on
which states had programs in place from Alpert et al. (2019). Second, following Alpert et al. (2019),
we include controls for other opioid related policies. We control for the enactment of state prescription
drug monitoring programs (PDMP) using information collected by Horwitz et al. (2018). We also
control for state adoption of mandatory access PDMPs that require physicians to access the patient's
prescription history, as well as adoption of pain clinic regulations. The dates of adoption for both
are taken from the Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System. Finally, we control for state legalization
of medical marijuana and the legalization and operation of dispensaries. Dates of enactment for the
2008-2014 years are from Powell et al. (2018). We found detail on more recent medical marijuana
legalization, including dispensary legalization, from the National Conference of State Legislatures. We
also followed a similar method as that described in Powell et al. (2018) to identify the date of the first
legally operating dispensary for each state. For all policies, we consider them to be in effect in a given
state-year provided that the policy was in place during the first half of that year.
    66
       State fixed effects are identified only off of individuals who move during the sample period since individual fixed
effects are included.
    67
       We exclude late expansion states since there are relatively few observations in these states and the odd event study
indicators would be identified exclusively off of this small sample.




                                                            47
F       Comparisons to Prior Estimates
In this section, we compare the effect sizes from our study to the existing literature. First, we provide
new analysis of the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment (OHIE) data with a focus on the age group
relevant for our study, those age 55 to 64. Second, we compile quasi-experimental estimates of the
impact of Medicaid and insurance coverage on mortality to compare to those documented in the main
text.
    To undertake the OHIE analysis, we downloaded the replication kit from https://www.nber.org/programs-
projects/projects-and-centers/oregon-health-insurance-experiment/oregon-health-insurance-experiment-
data. To match the age of our sample, we define age in 2008 (the year of lottery assignment) as 2008
minus the participant's birth year as recorded in the lottery list data. We then restrict the sample to
those at least age 55 in 2008 (the maximum observed age in 2008 is 63). We estimate both the "reduced
form" effect of being selected by the lottery on mortality, as well as an IV estimate that instruments for
whether the participant was ever enrolled in Oregon Health Plan (OHP) standard using the indicator
that the participant was selected by the lottery. Following Finkelstein et al. (2012), we include fixed
effects for the number of household members entered in the lottery and the lottery draw associated
with the participant's entry. We also conduct a similar rescaling that uses the months enrolled in
OHP standard from the match notification date until September 30, 2009, as derived from the OHP
admin data, divided by 12, to produce a mortality effect per year of enrollment. The first stage for
this analysis indicates that lottery winners in this age group were 25.6 percentage points more likely
to ever enroll in OHP Standard, and that they experienced 3.53 additional months of enrollment on
average, relative to those who were not selected by the lottery. The reduced form and IV estimates are
reported in rows 1 and 2 of Table A12.
    In addition to analyzing the OHP administrative data, we also conduct an analysis of the survey
data collected by the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment research team. We examine both the initial
and 12-month surveys. Results from the 6-month survey were similar, but we did not include those
results due to the small sample sizes. In this analysis, we examine the subsample of participants who
responded to the OHIE survey and provided information on their insurance status at an initial survey
(completed an average of 1 month after coverage approval) or a survey approximately one year later
(an average of 13 months after coverage approval, see Finkelstein et al., 2012). We use the change in
insurance status documented at these two time periods to scale the reduced form change in mortality
we observe among survey respondents who were or were not selected by the lottery to enroll in OHP.
Note that while insurance coverage is measured at these two points in time (either one month after the
lottery or 12 months later), we continue to measure mortality over the entire 16-month period covered
by the OHIE administrative data. We conduct this analysis applying the relevant weights and including
survey wave and survey wave by household size fixed effects, following the original analysis. The first
stage indicates that at the initial survey, lottery winners are 11.3 percentage points more likely to have
any insurance coverage and, at the 12-month survey, are 17.9 percentage points more likely to have any
insurance coverage, relative to survey respondents not selected by the lottery. The reduced form and
IV estimates of these analyses are reported in the bottom two rows of Table A12.
    Next, we compare the effect sizes from our study to those documented in previously published
quasi-experimental analyses. This exercise is inspired by a similar re-scaling of quasi-experimental

                                                   48
estimates undertaken by Goodman-Bacon (2018), which includes mortality effects of Medicaid observed
for infants and children.68 Here, we focus on studies of changes in all-cause mortality under the ACA
Medicaid expansions or similar insurance expansions for low-income adults.
     When comparing our estimates to prior evidence on the mortality effects of Medicaid expansion,
it is helpful to translate the ITT estimates into average treatment effects since there is variation in the
magnitude of the policy changes studied in this literature. Scaling ITT estimates into their implied
individual treatment effects allows us to compare the magnitude of the mortality reduction for the
newly enrolled or insured. Since there are also differences in the baseline mortality of the populations
studied, we also convert existing estimates into proportional effects. This presentation allows for the
effect sizes to be compared more easily across these different policy environments.
     We examine estimates for adults ages 55-64 when available, which is our primary age group of
study, but we also examine estimates for all nonelderly adults. We calculate the implied effects for
both new Medicaid enrollees and the newly insured whenever possible by dividing the ITT effects
reported in each paper by the corresponding changes in Medicaid and insurance status.69 In cases
where the change in Medicaid enrollment is derived from survey data, we apply an adjustment for
under-reporting of Medicaid coverage that we estimate from linked survey and administrative data
on Medicaid coverage through the National Health Interview Survey via the public-use NCHS-CMS
Medicaid Feasibility Files. We calculate a survey undercount of 31.4% and apply this in the calculations
described in this section.70
     As described above, we convert the estimates into proportional mortality effects using the reported
baseline mortality rate. For studies that use aggregate mortality data (rather than data for poor
adults), we apply an adjustment that multiplies the general population mortality estimate by 1.6 to
account for the higher relative risk of death for poor adults. We calculate this adjustment using the
2007 to 2012 NHIS linked mortality files and its corresponding survey weights. It equals the ratio of
the fraction respondents with incomes less than or equal to 138% FPL and of ages 19-64 who die in
the year following the survey and the fraction of respondents ages 19-64 of all income levels who die in
year following the survey.
     These calculations inherently assume that the baseline mortality rate for poor adults is similar to
the baseline mortality rate for individuals newly gaining coverage under the Medicaid expansions (i.e.
the "compliers"). It is likely the to be the case, however, that the mortality rate for these individuals
is higher, given the evidence for the presence of adverse selection in insurance coverage decisions. If
so, the average treatment effect estimates presented here may be too large. We discuss this further in
Section 7 in the text.
   68
      Goodman-Bacon (2018) also includes estimates of adult mortality under the pre-ACA Medicaid expansions in AZ,
ME, and NY presented in Sommers et al. (2012). In our analysis here, however, we focus on newer estimates of the
mortality effects under these expansions in follow-up work by Sommers (2017).
   69
      For this reason, we only include studies that present estimates for first stage effects on Medicaid or insurance coverage,
in addition to reduced form mortality effects.
   70
      This estimate is from an analysis included in an earlier version of this paper for individuals meeting our sample criteria
using data available from the 2008 to 2012 NHIS for respondents linked to administrative data on Medicaid enrollment.
These data are available from the National Center for Health Statistics for NHIS respondents who consent to the linkage.
We found that 15.7 percent of the sample reported being enrolled in Medicaid at the time they completed the survey, 22.9
percent were actually enrolled at some point during the year according to the CMS adminstrative records; this suggests
an undercount based on survey data of approximately 31.4%.



                                                              49
    We follow the parametric bootstrap procedure outlined in Goodman-Bacon (2018) to estimate
confidence intervals for the estimated average TOT effects. For both the ITT mortality and first
stage estimates, we store 10,000 random draws from a normal distribution with the mean equal to the
regression coefficients and the standard deviation equal to its standard error. We then estimate the
implied individual treatment effect for each of these 10,000 replications. To apply the scaling factor
for survey underreporting of Medicaid estimated using the NHIS, we create 10,000 samples with the
number of observations used in its estimation and calculate the share of the draws that are less than
or equal our estimated Medicaid reporting rate. We perform a similar calculation for each of the
components used to construct the ratio of poor to all income mortality rates from the NHIS linked
mortality data. We do not bootstrap for the baseline mortality rate. We follow the modified percentile
method also outlined in Goodman-Bacon (2018) to construct the confidence intervals. We use the 5th
percentile of draws that are below the mean and the 95th percentile of draws that are above the mean
as the lower and upper bounds.
    The resulting estimates are reported in Table A13.




                                                 50
Figure A1: Effects of the ACA Medicaid Expansions on Medicaid and Insurance Coverage: Alternative
Measures




                                                                                                                      0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
                                                                                     q
                                                                                          q
                   0.10




                                                                                              q                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                              q




                                                                                                        Coefficient
     Coefficent

                   0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                   0.00




                                                                                                                                                               q        q
                                 q                                 q                                                                                                         q
                                      q                                                                                                     q
                           q                    q                                                                                                          q
                                           q                                                                                                       q




                                                                                                                      -0.05
                           -6         -4        -2                            0           2                                                 -6          -4              -2           0           2

                                               Event Time                                                                                                          Event Time


                                (a) Medicaid Coverage (ACS)                                                                                      (b) Medicaid Coverage (NHIS)
                   0.05




                                                                                                                      1.0


                                 q
                   0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                      q                            q
     Coefficient




                                                                                                        Coefficient




                                           q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                           q
                   -0.05




                                                                                                                      0.5




                                                                              q           q
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                   -0.10




                                                                                              q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                      0.0




                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                       q
                   -0.15




                           -6         -4        -2                            0           2                                                 -6         -4          -2            0           2       4

                                               Event Time                                                                                                          Event Time


                                     (c) Uninsured (NHIS)                                                                                        (d) Cumulative Medicaid (HRS)
                                                                       1.0
                                                                       0.5




                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                     Coefficient




                                                                                                                                                   q



                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                       0.0




                                                                                                  q

                                                                              q          q
                                                                       -0.5




                                                                              -6         -4       -2                                 0             2           4

                                                                                                  Event Time


                                                                                   (e) Cumulative insurance (HRS)


Notes: These figures report coefficients from the estimation of equation (1) for additional first stage outcomes in the
ACS, NHIS, and HRS. The sample is defined as U.S. citizens ages 55-64 in 2014 who do not receive SSI and who have
either less than a high school degree or household income below 138% FPL. See text in Section 4.1 and Appendix
Section D for additional information.




                                                                                                       51
Figure A2: Effect of the ACA Medicaid Expansions on Annual Mortality: Accounting for Variation in
Treatment Timing
               0.002




                                                                                                                   0.002

                                qq                                                                                               qq
               0.000




                                                                                                                   0.000



                                      q                q                                                                              q             q
 Coefficient




                                                                                                     Coefficient




                            q                     q            qq                                                                                       q   qq
                        q                                  q                                                                qq            q
                                              q                                                                                               qq
                                          q
                                                                    q                                                                                            q
                                                                        q                                                                                            q
                                                                            q                                                                                            q
                                                                                    q                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                             q       q
               -0.002




                                                                                                                   -0.002




                                                                                        q
                                                                                q
                                                                                            q                                                                                            q
                                                                                                q                                                                                            q
               -0.004




                                                                                                                   -0.004




                        -6            -4               -2           0               2                                       -6        -4            -2           0               2

                                                      Event Time                                                                                   Event Time


                                     (a) 2014 expanders only                                                                 (b) Sun and Abraham (2020) method

Notes: Panel (a) plots coefficients from equation (1) for a sample that excludes states that expanded after 2014. Panel
(b) reports the results from using an alternative "interaction-weighted" estimator from Sun and Abraham (2020). For
comparison, event study estimates from our main model are plotted in grey in both figures. See the text in Section 5.1
for more details.




                                                                                                    52
                                         Figure A3: Alternative Specifications

                                                              Coefficient Estimate

                                                 -0.0030   -0.0020           -0.0010     0.0000


                                    Baseline




                                                                         q
                       2014 Expanders Only




                                                                     q
                     Linear State Pre-Trends




                                                                                 q
                     Trends by County Char.




                                                                         q
                   Control for Labor Demand
                                                                         q



                          Economic Controls
                                                                             q




                             Opioid Controls
                                                                                     q




                              Trade Controls
                                                                         q




                      Demographic Controls
                                                                         q




                                 All Controls
                                                                                     q




                          Triple Diff, Age 65+
                                                                                     q




                       Triple Diff, 400%FPL+
                                                                                     q




Notes: This figure plots difference-in-differences estimates for models that include only 2014 expanders, include linear
state pre-trends, include different sets of covariates, or use an additional comparison group (triple difference model). The
dotted line denotes our main estimate, which is also plotted with confidence intervals at the top of the figure for
comparison purposes.




                                                            53
Figure A4: Effect of the ACA Medicaid Expansions on Annual Mortality: Alternative Specifications
(Original Estimates in Grey)

                   0.002




                                                                                                                      0.002
                                   qq                                                                                                  qq
                   0.000




                                                                                                                      0.000
                                           qq               qq                                                                                 qq               qq
     Coefficient




                                                                                                       Coefficient
                                                                    qq                                                                                                  qq
                             qq                    qq                                                                          q                       qq
                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                         qq                                                                                                  qq
                                                                              qq                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                      qq                                                                                                  qq
                   -0.002




                                                                                                                      -0.002
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                              qq                                                                                                  q
                   -0.004




                                                                                                                      -0.004
                            -6             -4               -2           0            2                                        -6              -4               -2           0            2

                                                           Event Time                                                                                          Event Time


                                  (a) Control for Labor Demand                                                        (b) Control for County Economic Variables
                   0.002




                                                                                                                      0.002
                                   q                                                                                                   qq
                                       q
                   0.000




                                                                                                                      0.000


                                           q                q                                                                                  qq               qq
     Coefficient




                                                                                                       Coefficient




                                               q                q   qq                                                                                                  qq
                             qq                    q                                                                           q                       qq
                                                       q
                                                                         qq       q       q                                                                                  qq
                                                                              q                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                      q                                                                                                   qq
                   -0.002




                                                                                                                      -0.002




                                                                                                  q

                                                                                              q                                                                                                   qq
                   -0.004




                                                                                                                      -0.004




                            -6             -4               -2           0            2                                        -6              -4               -2           0            2

                                                           Event Time                                                                                          Event Time


                                   (c) Control for Drug Policy                                                       (d) Control for Exposure to Trade with China
                                                                                                                                   (excl. AK and HI)
                   0.002




                                                                                                                      0.002




                                   qq                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                           q
                   0.000




                                                                                                                      0.000




                                           qq               qq                                                                                 q                q
     Coefficient




                                                                                                       Coefficient




                                                                    qq                                                                             q                q   qq
                             qq                    qq                                                                          q                       q
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                         qq                                                                                                  qq               q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                              qq                                                                                                  q
                                                                                      qq                                                                                                  q
                   -0.002




                                                                                                                      -0.002




                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                                                                                              qq                                                                                                  q
                   -0.004




                                                                                                                      -0.004




                            -6             -4               -2           0            2                                        -6              -4               -2           0            2

                                                           Event Time                                                                                          Event Time


                            (e) Control for Sample Demographics                                                                (f) All Controls (excl. AK and HI)

Notes: These figures plot event study coefficients that add additional county- and state-level covariates. Estimates from
the original model reported in Figure 2 in the main text are plotted in grey. Panel (a) includes a "Bartik instrument"
for predicted change in labor demand, panel (b) adds county-level unemployment rate, poverty rate, and median income.
Panel (c) adds state-level drug policy controls. Panel (d) allows year fixed effects to vary by a measure of exposure to
trade from China. Panel (e) controls for individual characteristics (age, race, gender). Panel (f) includes all of the
controls. Note that AK and HI are excluded from panels (d) and (f) because trade exposure measures are not readily
available for these states.

                                                                                                      54
 Figure A5: Distributions of Coefficient Estimates and T-Statistics from 10,000 Placebo Simulations




                 (a) Coefficient Estimates                                         (b) T-Statistics
Notes: These figures present the distributions of coefficient estimates and t-statistics generated from the 10,000 placebo
simulations using pre-ACA years of linked ACS-mortality data as described in Section 5.4. The 5th and 95th percentiles
are marked with a blue vertical line, while the magnitude of our true estimate is depicted with a red dashed line.




                                                           55
Figure A6: Estimates of Mortality Impact of ACA Medicaid Expansions using Triple Difference Models
                                                 Additional Comparison Group: Ages 65+ in 2014




                                                                                      0.001
               0.15




                                                            q   q
                                                                                                    q
                                                        q
               0.10




                                                                                      0.000
                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                         q
 Coefficient




                                                                        Coefficient
                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                        q
               0.05




                                                                                      -0.001
                                                                                                              q                q
                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                       q   q
               0.00




                                                   q




                                                                                      -0.002
                            q     q    q    q
                       q
               -0.05




                       -6         -4        -2          0       2                              -6       -4         -2          0       2

                                           Event Time                                                             Event Time


                                (a) Any Medicaid in Year                                                     (b) Mortality



                        Additional Comparison Group: Ages 55-64 in 2014 with family income 400% FPL +
               0.15




                                                                                      0.001
               0.10




                                                            q   q
                                                        q                                           q
 Coefficient




                                                                        Coefficient




                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                               q        q
               0.05




                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                      -0.001




                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                       q


                                                                                                                                           q
               0.00




                            q                      q
                                  q    q    q
                       q
                                                                                      -0.003
               -0.05




                       -6         -4        -2          0       2                              -6       -4         -2          0       2

                                           Event Time                                                             Event Time


                                (c) Any Medicaid in Year                                                     (d) Mortality
Notes: These figures plot event study coefficients from the triple difference models described in Section 5.4. The
comparison group is labeled in italics for each set of graphs.




                                                                      56
                   Figure A7: Estimates of Mortality Impact of ACA by 3-Year Age Bin




                                                         Mortality

Notes: These figures plot difference-in-differences coefficients scaled by the "counterfactual" mortality rate from a series
of models that include respondents meeting our sample criteria but of different ages.




                                                            57
             Table A1: Descriptive Statistics of Main Sample by State Expansion Status

                                                    Expansion State     Non-expansion State
            % White                                      70.9                   68.7
            % Black                                      14.9                   24.2
            % Hispanic                                   15.3                   12.2
            % Uninsured                                  32.6                   37.3
            % Medicaid                                   20.5                   16.2
            % Less than High School Education            45.3                  46.8
            Average Age in 2014                          59.3                   59.3
            Average Income relative to FPL               1.47                   1.40
            N                                          231,200                190,448

Notes: This table displays weighted means for residents in expansion and non-expansion states
meeting the sample criteria described in the text. These statistics were calculated using
publicly-available 2008-2013 ACS data rather than the restricted version used in the main analysis.




          Table A2: Difference-in-Differences Estimate: Coefficients from Nonlinear Models

                                               Logistic     Cox Proportional
                                              Regression     Hazard Model

                         Expansion × Post      -0.0440**        -0.0417**
                                                (0.0194)         (0.0192)
                         N                     4,034,000        3,461,000
  Notes: Table displays estimates for coefficients for difference-in-differences model describe in text.
  The cox proportional hazard model drops observations with a death during the year of the ACS
                                               interview.




                                                   58
                         Table A3: Impact of the ACA Expansions on Medicaid and Insurance Coverage: Alternative Measures

                                             Medicaid           Medicaid           Uninsurance      Cumulative years     Cumulative years
                                             Coverage           Coverage             (NHIS)            Medicaid             insurance
                                              (ACS)              (NHIS)                                 (HRS)                 (HRS)
                                                (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                   (5)

      Difference-in-Differences Model:
      Expansion × Post                    0.101 (0.012)      0.136 (0.020)***   -0.058 (0.019)***    0.370 (0.146)***      0.388 (0.207)*

      Event Study Model:
      Year 4                                     --                 --                   --          0.822 (0.263)***      0.577 (0.345)
      Year 3                              0.099 (0.120)      0.161 (0.033)***    -0.089 (0.035)**           --                  --
      Year 2                              0.108 (0.012)      0.145 (0.031)***     -0.051 (0.029)*    0.619 (0.173)***    0.464 (0.215)***
      Year 1                              0.113 (0.010)      0.174 (0.029)***   -0.095 (0.027)***           --                  --
      Year 0                              0.073 (0.008)      0.074 (0.025)***    -0.049 (0.022)**    0.261 (0.083)***      0.175 (0.154)




59
      Year -1 (Omitted)                          0                   0                   0                  --                  --
      Year -2                              -0.009 (0.007)      0.003 (0.021)       -0.022 (0.025)            0                   0
      Year -3                              -0.010 (0.007)      0.006 (0.023)       -0.018 (0.029)           --                  --
      Year -4                              -0.003 (0.008)     -0.016 (0.020)       0.001 (0.035)     -0.0414 (0.0932)     -0.176 (0.126)
      Year -5                              -0.001 (0.009)     -0.024 (0.023)       0.010 (0.039)            --                  --
      Year -6                              -0.006 (0.016)     -0.006 (0.029)       -0.033 (0.029)      0.355 (0.236)      -0.186 (0.255)

      N (Individuals x Year)                  714,673             18,033              18,033               5,573               5,573
      N (Individuals)                         714,673             18,033              18,033               1,359               1,359

     Notes: This table displays the event study coefficient estimates of equation (1) and difference-in-differences estimates for additional first stage
     outcomes in the ACS, NHIS, and HRS. The sample is defined as U.S. citizens ages 55-64 in 2014 who do not receive SSI and who have either
     less than a high school degree or household income below 138% FPL. The difference-in-differences estimates for the HRS have been scaled to
     represent the 2014-2017 post period. See text in Section 4.1 and Appendix Section D for additional information. Significance levels: *=10%,
     **=5%, ***=1%.
                                    Table A4: Impact of the ACA Expansions on Mortality: Impact by ICD Grouping

                             Infectious disease          Neoplasms             Diseases of the blood     Endocrine, nutritional      Mental/behavioral
                                                                             and blood-forming organs    and metabolic diseases
      Expansion × Post    -0.0000671 (0.0001273)    -0.0005512 (0.0004556)     0.0000337 (0.0000345)    -0.0004314 (0.0002277)*     -0.0000465 (0.0001100)
      Mean                       0.004121                   0.02718                  0.0002675                  0.005279                    0.001676
                              Nervous system          Circulatory system            Respiratory                Digestive                 Skin and sub-
                                                      and cardiovascular                                                                cutaneous tissue
      Expansion × Post    -0.0000131 (0.0001162)   -0.0008861 (0.0004804)*    -0.0003801 (0.0002758)     -0.0000046 (0.000243)    -0.00002550 (0.0000119)**




60
      Mean                        0.002392                  0.02504                  0.008223                   0.006589                  0.00008866
                          Musculoskeletal system     Genitourinary system              Other
      Expansion × Post    0.0001148 (0.0000706)     -0.0001297 (0.0001101)    0.0003175 (0.0001910)
      Mean                       0.0004495                 0.002094                   0.07006
     Notes: This table displays the difference-in-differences coefficient estimates using the MDAC. Each entry is the result from a different regression.
     Rates are reported under coefficient estimates. Sample sizes are rounded following Census disclosure rules. DRB Approval Number: CBDRB-
     FY19-400. See text for more details. Significance levels: *=10%, **=5%, ***=1%.
        Table A5: Difference-in-Differences Estimate: Goodman-Bacon (2019) Decomposition

                                                               Coefficient     Total Weight

              Timing group comparisons                         -0.0003136         0.1062
              Never treated vs. timing group comparisons        -0.001454         0.8938
              Within-group variation from covariates              1.473         6.82E-006

Notes: Table displays estimates results from the DD decomposition described in Goodman-Bacon
(2019) implemented with the aid of code in Goodman-Bacon et al. (2019). The decomposition shows
comparisons amongst timing groups, comparisons of timing groups to units never receiving treatment,
and the component due to within-group variation in controls. See additional discussion in Section 5.1.




     Table A6: Expansion State "Time to Expansion" Linear Trend Model, Mortality Outcome

                                               Main          Control for
                                               Model     "Time to Expansion"
                                                (1)                (2)
                            Year 3          -0.00208**        -0.00193**
                                             (0.00083)         (0.00079)
                            Year 2          -0.00131**        -0.00119**
                                             (0.00056)         (0.00051)
                            Year 1         -0.00119***       -0.00112***
                                             (0.00044)         (0.00037)
                            Year 0          -0.00089**        -0.00084**
                                             (0.00036)         (0.00041)
                            Linear trend                        -0.00004
                                                               (0.00013)
                            N               4,034,000          4,034,000


Notes: Table displays estimates for post-expansion event times from equation (1) in column (1).
Column (2) reports the coefficients from a model that replaces the pre-period event study indicators
with a linear trend in event time for the expansion states. See additional discussion in Section 5.2.




                                                   61
                                Table A7: Impact of the ACA Expansions on Coverage and Mortality: Ages 55 to 61 in 2014

                                  Medicaid           Medicaid          Days of Medicaid   Cumulative Medicaid      Uninsured            Died in Year
                                  Eligibility     Coverage in Year         in Year         Years Experienced

      Difference-in-differences Model:
      Expansion × Post          0.472 (0.027)     0.140 (0.0188)       46.75 (8.409)        0.409 (0.061)       -0.059 (0.010)***   -0.001015** (0.00050)

      Event Study Model:
      Year 3                   0.466 (0.033)***           NA                 NA             0.732 (0.076)       -0.061 (0.013)      -0.00199 (0.000806)
      Year 2                   0.482 (0.027)***   0.148 (0.02709)      49.87 (9.273)        0.516 (0.061)       -0.070 (0.011)      -0.000975 (0.000536)
      Year 1                   0.475 (0.026)      0.142 (0.0204)       55.59 (11.97)        0.327 (0.044)       -0.065 (0.010)      -0.00133 (0.000476)
      Year 0                   0.489 (0.023)       0.121 (0.0192)      34.80 (7.003)        0.134 (0.020)       -0.042 (0.007)      -0.000836 (0.000453)
      Year -1 (Omitted)                0                   0                  0                    0                    0                      0




62
      Year -2                    0.012 (0.008)    -0.00963 (0.00741)    -2.479 (2.176)      -0.021 (0.012)        0.002 (0.008)      -0.000402 (0.000506)
      Year -3                    0.010 (0.012)     -0.00749 (0.0118)     -303 (4.080)        -0.035 (0.023)      0.009 (0.008)       -0.000203 (0.000593)
      Year -4                    0.008 (0.010)    -0.000696 (0.0124)    -0.602 (3.167)      -0.067 (0.034)       -0.005 (0.010)       0.000546 (0.000767)
      Year -5                    0.009 (0.012)     -0.00573 (0.0155)   -0.0137 (3.975)      -0.067 (0.039)        0.001 (0.011)       0.000546 (0.000767)
      Year -6                    0.007 (0.012)      -0.0205 (0.0232)    -4.195 (5.986)       -0.095 (0.048)      -0.001 (0.016)      -0.000692 (0.000833)

      N (Individuals x Year)       513,702            2,509,000           2,509,000            2,875,000            513,702               2,899,000
      N (Individuals)              513,702             346,000             346,000              346,000             513,702                346,000

     Notes: This table displays the event study coefficient estimates of equation (1). The sample is defined as U.S. citizens ages 55-61 in 2014 who
     do not receive SSI and who have either less than a high school degree or family income below 138% FPL. For models based on restricted-use
     data, sample sizes are rounded following Census disclosure rules. See text in Section 5.3 for more details. Significance levels: *=10%, **=5%,
     ***=1%.
           Table A8: Difference-in-Differences Estimate: Alternative Methods of Inference

                                Cluster by Census      Cluster by Census   Spatial Correlation
                                     Division               Division            of Errors
                                   (Analytic)             (Bootstrap)        (Conley, 1999)
                                        (1)                    (2)                 (3)

          Expansion × Post          -0.00132**             -0.00132*          -0.00132***
                                    (0.000497)               [0.051]          (0.0004206)
          N                          4,034,000             4,0340,00           4,034,000

Notes: Table displays estimates for coefficients for difference-in-differences model describe in text.
The standard error is reported in parentheses under the coefficient estimate for Columns (1) and (3);
the p-value is reported in square brackets in Column (2). See Section 5.5 for additional discussion.
Significance levels: *=10%, **=5%, ***=1%.




                   Table A9: Impact of the ACA Expansions on Other Age Groups

                Medicaid      Medicaid   Uninsurance                      Mortality
                eligibility   coverage                   Counterfactual rate Change             N
   Age 19-64    0.461***      0.127***    -0.078***           0.00487          -0.00019     23,630,000
                 (0.028)       (0.017)     (0.011)                            (0.00017)
   Age 19-29    0.524***      0.121***    -0.095***           0.00109          0.00007      10,210,000
                 (0.027)       (0.020)     (0.013)                            (0.00005)
   Age 30-39    0.423***      0.133***    -0.084***           0.00262          -0.00005     3,734,000
                 (0.030)       (0.017)     (0.011)                            (0.00017)
   Age 40-49    0.360***      0.135***    -0.082***           0.00462          0.00023      3,038,000
                 (0.036)       (0.017)     (0.012)                            (0.00022)
   Age 50-54    0.394***      0.142***    -0.079***           0.00967          -0.00032     2,125,000
                 (0.030)       (0.016)     (0.011)                            (0.00048)

Notes: Age group defined using respondent's age in 2014. Table displays estimates for coefficients for
the difference-in-differences model described in text. Counterfactual mortality rate calculated as sum
of post-period mean in expansion states and the absolute value of the DD estimate. N refers to
sample size in mortality analyses. See Section 6 for additional discussion. Significance levels: *=10%,
**=5%, ***=1%.




                                                    63
               Table A10: Difference-in-Differences Estimates: Heterogeneity Analysis

                                   Medicaid      Medicaid   Uninsurance              Mortality
                                   eligibility   coverage                 Counterfactual rate     Change
 Race/ethnicity
   White, non-Hispanic             0.543***      0.116***    -0.044***         0.01849           -0.00169***
     N=2,672,000                    (0.023)       (0.014)      (0.010)                            (0.00041)
   Black, non-Hispanic             0.537***      0.111***    -0.050***         0.01805             0.00045
     N=629,000                      (0.018)       (0.020)      (0.015)                            (0.00097)
   Other, non-Hispanic             0.412***      0.185***    -0.045***         0.00953             -0.00047
     N=238,000                      (0.028)       (0.029)      (0.013)                            (0.00149)
   Hispanic                        0.333***      0.174***     -0.035**         0.00892             -0.00072
     N=513,000                      (0.022)       (0.020)      (0.014)                            (0.00044)
 Gender
   Female                          0.526***      0.136***    -0.048***         0.01265             -0.00085
     N=2,085,000                    (0.027)       (0.022)     (0.010)                             (0.00058)
   Male                            0.469***      0.119***    -0.040***         0.02004           -0.00184***
     N=1,948,000                    (0.024)       (0.018)     (0.011)                             (0.00063)
 Marital status
   Married, spouse present         0.373***      0.114***     -0.026**         0.01203            -0.00133*
     N=1,846,000                    (0.023)       (0.021)      (0.012)                            (0.00075)
   Unmarried, spouse not present   0.576***      0.138***    -0.055***         0.01942           -0.00132**
     N=2,188,000                    (0.026)       (0.021)      (0.011)                            (0.00052)
 Other
   Less than high school           0.276***      0.111***     -0.032**         0.01523            -0.00163**
     N=1,897,000                    (0.012)       (0.024)      (0.013)                             (0.00080)
   Less than 138% FPL              0.664***      0.142***    -0.055***         0.01801           -0.00131***
     N=2,670,000                    (0.032)       (0.020)      (0.011)                             (0.00047)
   Uninsured at time of ACS            ­         0.246***         ­            0.01460            -0.00150**
     N=1,280,000                                  (0.026)                                          (0.00066)

Notes: Table displays estimates for coefficients for the difference-in-differences model described in
text. Counterfactual mortality rate calculated as sum of post-period mean in expansion states and the
absolute value of the DD estimate. N refers to sample size in mortality analyses. See Section 6 for
additional discussion. Significance levels: *=10%, **=5%, ***=1%.




                                                     64
                                              Table A11: Difference-in-Differences Estimates: Previously Uninsured

                               Medicaid      Days of    Cumulative years   Uninsured in     Uninsured in         Number years                   Mortality
                               coverage     Medicaid       Medicaid        survey year    survey year or in   continuous insurance   Counterfactual rate  Change
                                in year       in year     experienced                     inter-survey year         coverage                (ACS-Numident)
                                           (ACS-CMS)                                            (HRS)
      Expansion x Post         0.246***      82.43***       0.598***          -0.087           -0.109*               0.453                0.01460       -0.00150**
                                (0.026)       (11.38)        (0.080)         (0.059)           (0.064)              (0.243)                              (0.00066)




65
      N (Individuals x Year)   1,110,000    1,110,000      1,271,000          2,952            2,952                 2,952                              1,280,000

     Notes: Table displays estimates for coefficients for the difference-in-differences model described in text. Counterfactual mortality rate calculated
     as sum of post-period mean in expansion states and the absolute value of the DD estimate. The sample is defined as U.S. citizens ages 55-64 in
     2014 who do not receive SSI and who have either less than a high school degree or family income below 138% FPL, as well as report no insurance
     coverage at the time of the ACS interview or during the pre-ACA period in the HRS. See Section 6 for additional discussion. Significance levels:
     *=10%, **=5%, ***=1%.
Table A12: Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment for Participants Age 55-64 in 2008


   Full Sample (Admin Data):

          Control Group    Reduced Form           2SLS Effect of          P-value     As % of
              Mean                               "Ever Medicaid"                    Control Mean
   Died       0.023              -0.00422            -0.0165               0.128       -71.7%
   N         10,790

   Full Sample (Admin Data):

          Control Group    Reduced Form          2SLS Effect of           P-value     As % of
              Mean                             "# Medicaid Years"                   Control Mean
   Died       0.023              -0.00422           -0.0143                0.128       -61.2%
   N         10,790

   Initial Survey Respondents:

          Control Group    Reduced Form           2SLS Effect of          P-value     As % of
              Mean                          "Insured at Initial Survey"             Control Mean
   Died       0.018          -0.00660*               -0.0587*              0.071      -326.1%
   N          4,835

   12-month Survey Respondents:

          Control Group    Reduced Form           2SLS Effect of          P-value     As % of
              Mean                          "Insured at 12-Mo Survey"               Control Mean
   Died       0.004              -0.00206             -0.0134              0.153      -335.0%
   N          4,458

Notes: This table uses the public-use replication kit of the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment to
estimate the impact of Medicaid on individuals who were between the ages of 55 and 64 at the time of
the experiment. See Appendix Section F for additional details.




                                                66
     Table A13: Quasi-Experimental Estimates for Annual Mortality Effects of Insurance Expansions for Non-Elderly Adults (Deaths per 100,000)

                                               Population                ITT effect on mortality                First stage effects on coverage             Implied mortality effects for newly covered
                                                                          (per 100,000 adults)                    (percentage point change)                        (proportionate change, %)
                                                                   Baseline      Absolute change                Medicaid            Any insurance              Medicaid                 Any insurance
                                                                     rate
      ACA Medicaid expansion
      Miller, Johnson, and Wherry 2020      Adults ages 19-64,        487        -19.0 (-13.9 to 51.9)       11.3 (8.2 to 27.3)     7.8 (5.5 to 10.0)     -34.5 (-101.4 to 24.9)^    -50.0 (-144.1 to 36.0)^
                                           below 138% FPL or                           Table A6                  Table A6               Table A6            Authors' estimation        Authors' estimation
                                            low-ed, citizen, no
                                               SSI receipt
                                            Adults ages 55-64,       1630      -132.0 (-229.4 to -34.6)      12.8 (8.9 to 30.2)     4.4 (2.4 to 6.4)     -63.3 (-124.9 to -16.8)^ -184.1 (-424.0 to -49.3)^
                                           below 138% FPL or                           Table 1                    Table 1               Table 1            Authors' estimation       Authors' estimation
                                            low-ed, citizen, no
                                               SSI receipt
      Black et al. 2019                     Adults ages 55-64         854         -2.6 (-14.3 to 9.2)               NR              1.1 (0.2 to 1.6)               NR                -17.3 (-782.9 to 66.6)^
                                                                                Estimates provided by                             Table A-3, estimated                                Authors' estimation +
                                                                                authors, converted into                             for ages 50-64                                       Adjustment (1)
                                                                              level change from baseline
      Borgschulte and Vogler 2020           Adults ages 20-64         359        -11.4 (-18.4 to -4.3)              NR              4.2 (2.0 to 6.4)               NR                -47.3 (-118.7 to -17.4)^
                                                                                        Table 2                                        Table A.3                                       Authors' estimation +
                                                                                                                                                                                          Adjustment (1)
      Chen 2019                             Adults ages 25-64         386               -2.2                        5.3                   3.9              -4.6 (-10.7 to 0.6)^         -9.1 (-21.2 to 1.2)^




67
                                                                                       Table 5                    Table 2               Table 2           Authors' estimation +        Authors' estimation +
                                                                                                                                                           Adjustments (1)-(2)            Adjustment (1)
                                            Adults ages 55-64         859               -10.6                       4.0                   2.4             -13.2 (-23.4 to -4.2)^      -32.1 (-57.3 to -10.0)^
                                                                                       Table 3                    Table 2               Table 2           Authors' estimation +        Authors' estimation +
                                                                                                                                                           Adjustments (1)-(2)            Adjustment (1)
      Swaminathan et al. 2018               Nonelderly patients      6900       -600 (-1000 to -200)         10.5 (7.7 to 13.2)     4.2 (2.3 to 6.0)      -35.5 (-96.5 to 17.8)^    -129.4 (-282.9 to -43.9)^
                                             initiating dialysis                       Table 2                    Table 2               Table 2           Authors' estimation +        Authors' estimation +
                                                                                                                                                           Adjustments (1)-(2)            Adjustment (1)

      Other insurance expansions
      Sommers 2017                          Adults ages 20-64         318        -19.1 (-31.4 to -6.8)              NR                    NR                       NR                -64.5 (-89.1 to -42.3)^
      (AZ, ME, NY expansions)                                                         Tables 1, 3                                                                                           Table 6 +
                                                                                                                                                                                         Adjustment (1)
      Sommers, Sharon, and Baicker          Adults ages 20-64         283         -8.2 (-13.6 to -2.8)             N/A                    6.8                      N/A                        -27.3
      2014                                                                      Table 3, converted into                                 Table 5                                       Authors' estimation +
      (MA health care reform)                                                 level change from baseline                                                                                Adjustment (1)
      Notes: NR=Not Reported. Baseline (counterfactual) mortality rate for Miller, Johnson, and Wherry is calculated as described in the text. Sommers (2017) average treatment effect estimates based on
      results from a model that interacts county level uninsurance rates with Medicaid expansion. Estimates from Black et al. (2019) are from the triple difference specification and received through e-mail
      correspondence with the authors. Models in Chen are estimated in terms of changes in Medicaid eligilibility; we follow the author in interpreting the change associated with an increase from the 5th to
      the 95th percentile of changes in Medicaid eligibility between 2016 and 2012 as the effect of the ACA expansions. ^Confidence interval was estimated using the parametric bootstrapping procedure
      described in Appendix Section F.
      Adjustment (1): Multiply baseline mortality rate by 1.60 to account for higher relative risk of death for poor adults, calculated using linked NHIS-mortality data (see Appendix Section F).
      Adjusment (2): Divide change in Medicaid coverage estimated from survey data by (1-0.314=0.686) to account for underreporting.
                                      Table A14: Sources for Parent and Adult Medicaid Eligibility Rules by Year

     Year        Sources                                                 Notes
     2008-2010   Adults: NGA Center for Best Practices (2010), Table 9   We follow the criteria reported in Heberlein et al. (2011), Table 4 to determine whether programs
                                                                         described in NGA Center for Best Practices (2010) meet the full coverage criteria. We turned to
                                                                         additional sources to reconcile other differences with the program details reported in Kaiser Family
                                                                         Foundation (2019a). Specifically, we added a program for AZ following National Conference of State
                                                                         Legislatures (2009), a DC program based on Meyer et al. (2010), and altered HI and VT program
                                                                         details using Indiana Legislative Services Agency (2011).




68
     2011-2017   Adults: Kaiser Family Foundation (2019a)                We consider eligibility rules to be in place as of the date of the relevant KFF survey. To be consistent
                                                                         with our definition of implementation of the ACA Medicaid eligibility expansions, we consider the
                                                                         expansion in Indiana to take place in 2015.

     2008-2017   Parents: Kaiser Family Foundation (2019b)               We consider eligibility rules to be in place as of the date of the relevant KFF survey with the exception
                                                                         of the December 2009 survey for parents eligibility, which we apply to the 2010 year. To be consistent
                                                                         with our definition of implementation of the ACA Medicaid eligibility expansions, we consider the
                                                                         expansion in Indiana to take place in 2015.
