                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS REPRESENT VOTER PREFERENCES? EVIDENCE
       FROM HOSPITAL FINANCING UNDER THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

                                         Victoria Perez
                                         Justin M. Ross
                                         Kosali I. Simon

                                      Working Paper 26094
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26094


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Victoria Perez, Justin M. Ross, and Kosali I. Simon. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Local Governments Represent Voter Preferences? Evidence from Hospital Financing under
the Affordable Care Act
Victoria Perez, Justin M. Ross, and Kosali I. Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 26094
July 2019
JEL No. H71,H72,I1,I11

                                          ABSTRACT

A mainstream motivation for decentralized government is to enable public service investments to
better align with political preferences that may differ by geographical region. This paper
examines how political preferences determine local government provision of hospital services.
We find that local governments in areas more supportive of public insurance expansion
responded to such state action by increasing expenditures on hospitals, whereas those in areas that
voted against such expansions used the savings to reduce property taxes. This finding suggests
that local government financial responses indeed align with political preferences.


Victoria Perez                                   Kosali I. Simon
O'Neill School of Public and                     O'Neill School of Public and
Environmental Affairs                            Environmental Affairs
Indiana University                               Indiana University
1315 E 10th St                                   Rm 357
Bloomington IN 47401                             1315 East Tenth Street
vieperez@indiana.edu                             Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
                                                 and NBER
Justin M. Ross                                   simonkos@indiana.edu
O'Neill School of Public and
Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
1315 E 10th St
Bloomington, IN 47405
justross@indiana.edu
1       Introduction
According to Oates' 1972 Decentralization Theorem, one of the main rationales for the
existence of local (as opposed to only state or national) governments is that they can
better respond to differing consumer-voter preferences for the public provision of goods
and services (Oates, 1993; Besley and Coate, 2003; De Groot, 1988; Brueckner, 2000).
However, scholars and practitioners have long expressed skepticism about whether de-
centralization works in practice, particularly as voters may not be able to monitor local
government actors due to asymmetric information. Preemption policies (e.g. Local Tax-
And-Expenditure Limits, Dillon Rules) that grant states the power to constrain local
governments are arguably motivated by the perspective that local voters systematically
lack the capacity to constrain the actions of their local governments for their own benefit.
    While much research in the political economy literature demonstrates government
errors­particularly in the area of fiscal illusion, whereby voters underestimate the cost
of government spending­there is comparatively little causal empirical research on gov-
ernment adherence to voter preferences. Another prominent critique of decentralization
is that local governments will not be efficient providers of welfare or poverty assistance
programs due to inter-jurisdictional competition: local governments compete for mobile
actors who will only support taxes for services from which they directly benefit, and
hence higher levels of government are better suited for the provision of social insurance
programs. These competing concerns regarding the trustworthiness of local governments
to support efficient and equitable societies are important determinants in a longstanding
debate over the appropriate degree and scope of governmental decentralization.
    Local governments participate in the healthcare system as both patient-care providers
and third-party payers. This paper provides evidence of local government adherence to
voter preferences by treating state expansion of Medicaid under the 2010 Affordable Care
Act (ACA) as an exogenous relative price shock for public provision of health services.
Specifically, by providing reimbursement to a previously uninsured pool of patients, the
ACA allows local governments to reduce their financial role in supporting local hospi-
tals and spend more on other public services or reduce tax burdens. Alternatively, the
ACA represents an opportunity to expand local hospital provision given a new source of
reimbursement for community healthcare activities that may not have been financially
feasible prior to expansion.1
    The value of the ACA as an identification strategy for investigating local government
responses to incentives lies in its contentious political and legal history. In 2012, the
    1
    Journalistic coverage and ACA advocates have emphasized that when states opt into Medicaid
expansion, they present a valuable opportunity for fiscal relief to local governments already providing
support for hospital and health services (e.g. see Ollove (2015)).


                                                  1
U.S. Supreme Court ruled the Medicaid expansion provision of the ACA to be voluntary
for individual states. To date, 31 states have elected to expand Medicaid. Other provi-
sions of the ACA, such as the creation of an individual health insurance marketplace and
extensions of employer-sponsored health insurance to young adults, were applied nation-
ally. Subsequent state-level decisions to expand Medicaid under the ACA represent an
arguably exogenous shock at the local government level. This expansion reduces the share
of uninsured patients within local markets. We find that in 2013, county-level estimates
of uninsurance among those meeting the Medicaid expansion provision's income criteria
ranged from nine to 65% of the population.2 Moreover, the federal government covers
the cost in the initial years of the expansion: thus local governments acting to capitalize
on this opportunity do not impose heavy costs on state budgets.
    From the perspective of a voter with preferences regarding local public goods and ser-
vices, the Medicaid expansion provision of the ACA resembles a matching categorical aid
grant to local governments in that it offers reimbursements for previously uncompensated
hospital care services.3 A median voter whose preferences include delivering services to
poor community residents might encourage an expansion of these services as they become
further subsidized through Medicaid. On the other hand, if their voter demand for public
sector altruism is already satiated near current levels, then local governments may take
this opportunity to retreat from their role of underwriting hospital provision, spend on
other public goods, or reduce taxes to increase private consumption. How these different
possible financial reactions actually net out is an empirical question addressed by this pa-
per. Assessing the effect of state Medicaid expansion on relevant local government fiscal
variables enables us to study the elasticity of local government support for hospitals to
alternative sources of payment.
    To test our central question of whether local governments behave in ways that are
consistent with voter preferences, we split our sample based on whether the encompassing
county voted for Barack Obama or Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential election as a
proxy for local voter preferences for the ACA and, more generally, for public intervention
in the financing of healthcare. We believe this proxy to accurately reflect voter preferences
for local government response to ACA incentives because healthcare reform was the most
divisive issue of the election.4 The inference assumption is that the propensity toward
   2
     Authors' own analysis of the Small Area Health Insurance Estimates based on Census data.
   3
     Prior to the ACA, hospitals reporting uncompensated charity care were partially compensated by
lump-sum payments under the federal Disproportionate Share Hospital (DSH) program. These payments
are highly concentrated; large, urban hospitals received over 90% of total DSH payments. Previous studies
have also noted uneven distribution of these payments across regions (Fagnani and Tolbert, 1999).
   4
     Further support for this inference can be found in a study by Hollingsworth et al. (2018) demon-
strating that gains in health insurance predicted gains in Democratic vote share in the 2008 to 2016
elections.



                                                   2
greater fiscal engagement with hospitals would be greater in Obama-voting areas than in
Romney-voting areas. Regardless of whether a state expanded Medicaid, in 2012 there
was wide variation in the presidential preferences of individual local populations (see
Figure 1).
    We examine local government behavior in areas that had high uninsurance prior to
2014, as these are the areas that stood to financially gain the most from Medicaid ex-
pansion, compared to areas with low baseline rates of uninsurance. Using data from
the U.S. Census of Governments for the years 2006-2015, we examine governments' fis-
cal decisions, paying special attention to hospital-related expenditures and to revenue
raised from property taxes. We find that on average, there was no response to ACA
state expansion in terms of local hospital spending decisions: states that expanded and
states that didn't expand see similar changes post 2013. However, when we split our sam-
ple by 2012 presidential preference, we find notable opposing effects: local governments
in Obama-supporting areas increased their spending on local hospital services, whereas
those in Romney-leaning areas reduced their spending and lowered property taxes. This
pattern holds consistently across local governments with urban and rural designations.
We also confirm are findings are robust to controlling for other significant differences in
demographic composition.
    Local governments primarily support public hospitals in their area. Increased local
government spending after the ACA could reflect an effort to support public hospitals
subjected to "cream skimming" if now-profitable patients relocate to nonpublic hospitals.
In order to rule out competing explanations for the results we observe, we supplement our
study with an analysis of financial data for hospitals receiving government support, as
well as for other competing hospitals in the area. Examining hospital financial records to
rule out this alternative explanation, we find that low profits for public hospitals following
expansion does not account for our observed result. Indeed, we find that public hospitals
experienced profit increases.
    This paper most directly contributes to the literature on the quality of local demo-
cratic governance. However, almost all political economy research in this space assumes
a decisive-voter model and infers deviations from that model as evidence of government
failure. In particular, the literature on fiscal illusion typically begins with the presump-
tion that local governments behave according to the preferences of the median voter and
then identifies patterns that are inconsistent with that model. For instance, Hines and
Thaler (1995) point out that states and localities typically increase spending on services in
response to federal lump-sum grants by the full amount of the grant, when in theory this
increase should be limited to the amount predicted by income elasticity alone. Setting
aside specification errors, they argue that the remaining explanations are voter confusion


                                              3
or self-interested government bureaucrats (p. 222). Studies typically follow in this mold,
testing hypotheses of fiscal illusion to mixed results while relying upon the underlying
assumptions of a median-voter-driven local government.5 Similar to this literature, our
paper assumes a decisive-voter model but infers responses to the ACA's incentives by
presidential preference as evidence of government responsiveness to constituent prefer-
ences.
    The literature on decentralization and government responsiveness also intersects with
our work. In recent decades, the study of fiscal federalism and the appropriate degree of
devolution has been particularly motivated by widespread governmental structure reforms
throughout Latin America, many parts of Asia and Africa, and in the regions of the
former Soviet Union. The rise of the European Union has further spurred the debate. In
this context, proponents of decentralization and devolution argue that local governments
will be more responsive than state or federal governments, by virtue of their ability to
customize spending decisions to local needs, preferences, and values (Wallis and Oates,
1988). The critical literature, particularly where equity-based services are paramount, has
articulated the case for centralization on the basis of expertise and capability at higher
levels of government, as well as a greater robustness to the corruption and organized
interests that might be experienced among relatively resource-poor local governments
(Crook and Sverrisson, 1999).
    While the decentralization literature is massive, most of it investigates various observ-
able differences in economic indicators as decentralization occurs. This literature looks
for the effect of decentralization on any number of topics that include economic growth
(Oates, 1993; Zhang and Zou, 1998), total government spending (Fiva, 2006), and pub-
lic service quality (de Janvry et al., 2012; Galasso and Ravallion, 2005). Few studies,
however, demonstrate whether such differences are a consequence of adhering to local
voter preferences. Investigations of voter responsiveness have tended to be case studies of
decentralization, particularly in countries that have experienced recent structural shifts,
making generalizations quite difficult (Robinson, 2007; von Braun and Grote, 2000).6
Faguet (2004) is an exception and the most similar of the decentralization literature to
this paper. Faguet studied the case of substantial structural decentralization in Bolivia
following a major national reform in 1994. A unique database of objective indicators
based on local "needs" was linked to measures of public investment. The study finds that
in these areas of need, public investment increased with decentralization; this finding is
consistent with the view that local governments are better than central governments at
   5
     Further examples of this approach include fiscal illusion tests of the revenue elasticity hypotheses
(Ross and Yan, 2013), renter effects (Banzhaf and Oates, 2013), and debt illusion (McEachern, 1978).
   6
     For an extensive overview of these studies, see the special issue of World Development introduced
by Faguet (2014).


                                                   4
targeting public investment. While there is perhaps some argument that decentralization
responds to voters' own subjectively determined priorities rather than a central author-
ity's objective determination of local needs, this study nevertheless provides compelling
evidence of local governments' institutional capabilities beyond rejecting evidence of fiscal
illusion or failed decentralization.
    Our study represents a new contribution to the literature because it examines local
government responsiveness to changes in institutional setting (the exogenous incentive
under Medicaid expansion), whereas prior work has examined cases in which government
functions and purposes were realigned. That is, we study a moment when, due to a
changing environment, local governments were presented with an opportunity in which
they could respond in accordance with local voter preferences.7 Such a setting should
carry greater external validity than the settings of previous case studies, since shifting
vertical assignment functions within federalist systems are a less common occurrence than
the many presumed environmental changes citizens expect their government to respond
to while representing their interests.
    Finally, in addition to contributing to our understanding of representative democracy,
the course of this research contributes to a generally understudied stakeholder in the
public health service economy (local governments), making it policy-relevant research. In
the aggregate, local governments represent the majority contributor to public hospitals
and to health-related services as measured by expenditures, as they have outspent state
governments by about $3-to-$2 on hospitals (see Figure 2) and matched state spending on
public health service expenditures.8 While total spending is driven by a relatively small
number of local governments (802 of 89,004), these entities serve one third of the Amer-
ican population. Furthermore, hospitals represent a significant consumer of government
inputs, with one tenth of non-education-related local government employees working in
hospitals (see Figure 3). Despite this high level of fiscal involvement, almost no attention
has been given to the public economics of healthcare delivery at the local government
level.
    To this end, this paper also contributes to the literature on the financing of hospitals
and charity care. Medicaid expansion following the ACA significantly reduced hospital
financial losses related to the provision of charity care (Dranove et al., 2016), which
suggests financial improvement on the part of hospitals in expansion states. However,
previous policies similarly intended to alleviate charity care costs costs (such as California
   7
     While it is certainly the case that work on topics like categorical aid grants to local governments
often relies on decisive voter models for theoretical predicted impacts, such papers typically measure
general elasticities, given the theoretical ambiguity of government responses; we are aware of no such
studies that attempt to empirically establish evidence that these responses are actually in line with voter
preferences.
   8
     Authors' analysis of FY 2013-2015 data from the Census of State and Local Governments.


                                                    5
enhancement of DSH policy) may have left publicly supported hospitals worse off due to
cream-skimming behaviors from private competitors (Duggan, 2002). As mentioned in
our preview of results, this is treated as a competing hypothesis to our own about voter
preference, and in exploring it this paper contributes an empirical assessment of how
publicly supported hospitals were affected by the ACA and state Medicaid expansion.
This potential for cream skimming is highly policy-relevant due to the already anticipated
$44 billion cut in federal support for hospital charity scheduled to take effect by 2025
(Ellison, 2017; Aizer et al., 2005). As mentioned in our preview of results, this type of
compensatory behavior by local governments could also lead to the results we observe in
our paper. We thus include an additional analysis of hospitals profits, which separately
contributes an empirical assessment of how publicly supported hospitals were affected by
the ACA and state Medicaid expansion.


2    Background: The Affordable Care Act and Re-
     lated Research
Medicaid is a federal and state partnership with shared authority and financing. The cen-
tral purpose of Medicaid is to provide health insurance to low-income, medically needy
individuals (Cohen et al., 2015). Traditionally, the program has concentrated on low-
income children, pregnant women, the elderly, and individuals with disabilities. All states
must meet federal minimum requirements, but they have options for expanding Medicaid
beyond the minimum federal guidelines. States, at their discretion, have extended cover-
age to parents of children in low-income homes and to childless low-income adults (Kaiser
FF).
    The Medicaid expansion provision of the ACA fills coverage gaps among low-income
households by creating a minimum Medicaid income eligibility level (income up to 138%
of the federal poverty line) across the country. That minimum level took effect as of
January 1, 2014 and represented the largest expansion of the program since its inception
(Cohen et al., 2015). To encourage adoption of the threshold, the federal government
offered to reimburse state governments for costs associated with the eligibility expansion.
This enhanced rate was 100% in 2014 and is scheduled to decrease at regular intervals to a
minimum federal reimbursement rate of 90% by 2020; the regular match rate continues for
other eligibility avenues. Thus far, 31 states and the District of Columbia have expanded
Medicaid in response to these new incentives. However, the actual effect within and across
states is expected to vary because of differences in pre-expansion levels of uninsurance
among low-income adults. For states without prior adult Medicaid coverage, like New


                                            6
Mexico, this provision was predicted to increase enrollment by 30%. For other states,
like Connecticut, the anticipated effect was small because the pre-ACA income eligibility
requirements of the state already exceeded the ACA's threshold. Within states, wide
variation exists in initial uninsurance rates as well.
    The ACA explicitly offered fiscal relief to state governments through a number of
mechanisms, but importantly for identification in our study, no similar provisions were
available to local governments.9 Further, projections of the ACA's net impact on non-
federal finances have focused on states (Bachrach et al., 2015; Dorn et al., 2015). State-
specific reports indicate encouraging financial results from the ACA Medicaid expansion
decisions (Antonisse et al., 2016). Several states reported savings in non-health budget
items like criminal justice (Smith et al., 2015). Sommers and Gruber (2017) find that
the national increase in spending associated with Medicaid expansion was funded by the
federal government (12.2 percent increase), with no significant increases in state spending.
Despite the relatively small net change in state spending at the national level, there has
been considerable heterogeneity across states: while states allocated an additional $846
million in 2017 to their Medicaid programs overall, 19 states implemented mid-year budget
cuts (NASBO, 2017). States represent the level at which Medicaid operates, but local
governments represent the level that engages in healthcare delivery: they are healthcare
providers (owning hospitals), or else substantially supporting such providers financially.
Thus to judge government response to expanded insurance in relation to voter preferences,
we turn to the local government level. This is the first study, to our knowledge, to consider
the effect of the ACA and the Medicaid expansion on local government finances.
    There are plausible indirect channels through which both state and local governments
stand to benefit from the ACA. For instance, to the extent that expanded coverage
reduces non-emergency use of emergency department services by diverting that care to
an ambulatory setting, the volume of charity care provided by hospitals should decline.
Previous studies suggest that a reduction in non-emergent use of ER services could affect
volume by nearly one third (DeLia, 2006). General population health improvements
may similarly affect finances; indeed, a study by Freudenberg et al. (2006) shows that
reductions in municipal government support of hospitals ultimately translated into a
five-times-the-cut increase in spending due to worsened rates of tuberculosis, human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, and homicide. Further, Medicaid services, such
as mental and behavioral health programs, are funded by state and local funds. The
expansion reduces the state's pre-ACA share of the cost from their federal match rate
of at least 45% to 0% under the enhanced federal funding rate (increasing to 10% in
   9
    For example, state governments were expected to gain revenue as insurers and healthcare providers
gained revenue from increased demand (Bachrach et al., 2015).



                                                 7
2020) (Rudowitz, 2014). Following Medicaid expansion, these services are reimbursed
at the enhanced match rate with federal dollars, rather than state and local funds. A
recent working paper by Duggan et al. (2017) found that California Medicaid expansion
crowds out local government-funded coverage and results in high hospital revenue among
hospitals that serve a high proportion of uninsured patients.


3     Conceptual Framework and Empirical Strategy
3.1    Medicaid Expansion and Voter Demand for Local Public
       Hospital Services
Local governments are substantive actors in the healthcare system through their support
of community hospitals (see Figures 2 and 3), so we motivate our conceptual framework
to be one in which local governments' constituent voters derive some utility from the
provision of some set of low-income hospital services (h), as well as from private and
other non-hospital public services (z ). The cost per unit of providing services h is P ,
but voter preferences for a particular level of local government provision will be based
on some fraction of P defined as s  (0, 1). The fraction s can be regarded as the share
of P not recovered through patient charges or insurance reimbursements. We assume
some agreement between the government representative serving as the voters' agent and
representatives of the hospital as they establish some h as their provision level. Taxes
on the voter must therefore cover the local government's share of the expenditures on
delivery. Likewise, observed expenditures by the government will be sP h .
    If the local government resides within a state that opted to expand Medicaid to all
low-income adults under the ACA, then care providers of the newly covered patients can
now bill Medicaid and seek reimbursement; this includes health providers with whom
they had negotiated sP h in the pre-expansion period. This represents an effective price
reduction to providing service h. If we define   (0, 1) to be the share of P remaining
after Medicaid reimbursement, then the local government agent negotiates the delivery
of services on the effective price of sP for each unit of h. The new negotiated service
provision level in the post-period is defined as h , which consequently results in local
government expenditures of sP h that must be supported by local taxpayer revenue.
    The magnitude of change from h to h results from income and relative price sub-
stitution effects of the usual Slutsky decomposition. The negotiated service level will
not increase at all (i.e. h = h ) if the voter demand price and income elasticities
are zero at current margins, so consequently local public expenditures on h will fall by
(1 -  )sP h . Agents negotiating for voters with positive income and/or non-zero price


                                           8
elasticities should negotiate h > h . Defining the change in provision as h, the ob-
served change in spending from the pre-period will become sP h ( (h/h ) - 1) and is
ambiguous in sign.10 If the Marshallian price elasticity exceeds one, then the reduction
in price induced by  will increase local spending on h.
    Observing a change in spending on h as a result of the ACA is, by itself, not indica-
tive of whether local government agents are representing their constituents' interests. If
spending on hospital services increases, for example, it could mean that hospitals or local
organized medical interest groups have been able to leverage the opportunity into addi-
tional subsidies by lobbying local governments. While the framework demonstrates that
state Medicaid expansion will have ambiguous effects on local government expenditures
on health services, it also implies that, ceteris paribus, observed change in h should be
more positive for a local government representing a voter with a high preference (i.e.,
high income or price elasticity) than it would for a local government representing a voter
with a low preference; this offers a potential testable prediction.
    We do not directly observe voter preferences for h, but we argue that preference
levels are signaled through voting data for the 2012 presidential election. Elections,
and particularly the 2012 presidential election, presumably signal to the researcher voter
preferences that local government officials already know. In the 2012 election, survey
respondents ranked healthcare and public insurance as second in importance only to the
state of the economy (Blendon et al., 2012).11 The candidates themselves had distinct
brands of healthcare reform: "Obamacare" and "Romneycare," which while actuarially
similar in value, were characterized as favoring government intervention and market-based
intervention, respectively.
    Therefore, the ACA offers a quasi-experimental design opportunity: states make initial
decisions about whether to expand Medicaid to all low-income adults, and then health
care providers bill and seek reimbursement from Medicaid. This decision represents a price
reduction in the provision of healthcare to local governments in Medicaid expansion states,
which can be used by the local government to increase hospital-related spending, increase
the provision or quality of other non-health services, or transfer funds back to the median
voter via lower taxes. The key assumption for our inference on the representativeness of
local governments is that local governments with constituents who voted for Obama will
have higher income elasticity and price elasticity for local public hospital services than
those whose constituents voted for Romney in 2012.
  10
      The term "observed" here is not meant to be implied in the empirical counterfactual sense, but in the
perfectly identified sense where s, P ,  , and h are all unobservable to the researcher, as only spending
outcomes are observable.
   11
      By contrast, Americans did not list healthcare and public insurance as a top-five concern in the 2008
election (Blendon et al., 2012).



                                                    9
   Section 3.2 provides more detail on the empirical model specifications and the fiscal
outcomes we monitored in order to draw inferences for the research question.


3.2    Empirical Approach
To assess local governments' responses to the ACA, and in particular to the Medi-
caid expansion, we estimate a difference-in-differences-in-differences model using local
government-year observations. This model leverages three sources of variation: pre/post
differences defined as before/after the standard start date of the expansion (P ost2013),
differences in Medicaid expansion and non-expansion states (Expansions ), and differ-
ences in pre-expansion uninsurance rates at the county level (U nins2013l ). This last
dimension is the potential intensity of treatment, as it captures the degree to which the
population at hand was impacted by the expansion of Medicaid, following previous liter-
ature (e.g. Courtemanche et al. (2017), Miller (2012)). The effect of the ACA on local
governments in non-expansion states is presented by 1 , as the ACA could have impacted
market conditions even in non-expansion states. The effect of the Medicaid expansion in
expansion states is presented by 2 . Thus the full effect of the ACA in expansion states
is 1 + 2 . However, because this paper asks whether local governments responded to the
price change incentives created by state Medicaid expansion, the effect of interest is 2 .
Both terms will be systematically reported for those interested in the full effect, but our
identification claims and discussion will be restricted to 2 .


                 Ylst =  + 1 P ost2013 × U nins2013l
                        +2 P ost2013 × Expansions × U ninsur2013l                       (1)
                        +Xlt 3 + l + t + st + lst

   Outcome Ylst refers to financial indicators of local government l in state s at time
t. Outcomes of interest are (1) total hospital expenditures, (2) expenditures on hospital
construction, (3) hospital charges received by the local government, and (4) property tax
revenues. Total hospital expenditures is the fiscal outcome directly motivated by the con-
ceptual model in section 3. Hospital construction is a subset of total hospital expenditures
and might provide insight as to whether local governments changed their propensities to
invest in hospital systems as a result of Medicaid expansion. Property taxes represent
a sacrifice of private sector spending from the local constituency. Most American local
governments rely on the property tax because it is a stable source of revenue. Local gov-
ernments can declare in the budget process an amount to collect in property tax revenues
from their stock of taxable property wealth, as opposed to other revenue instruments


                                            10
where a rate is set and the base fluctuations are forecast for anticipated revenues (Mike-
sell and Liu, 2013). The consequence of this approach is that, at the margin, the last
dollar of public budget expenditures is implicitly determined by property tax revenues
(Ross et al., 2015).12 Finally, anticipated reimbursements from Medicaid for hospital care
charges are a source of revenue that can be used as government income, particularly for
care provided by public hospitals that are dependent on local governments. Even when
hospitals are privately-run, governments may fund and subsequently share in the hospital
charges that are successfully collected for a subset of services. Consequently, Medicaid
expansion could increase revenue to local governments as more charges are paid. Alterna-
tively, observe revenues from this source could decrease if governments and hospitals no
longer undertake such agreements because local governments expect hospitals to better
finance themselves from Medicaid reimbursements alone.
     One challenge to our approach is the potential for omitted variable bias. Local gov-
ernments may differ in their spending patterns due to differences in baseline population
or heterogeneity in local economic conditions. We control for this possibility in the vector
Xlt : median income at the county level; population demographics: age, sex, and race;
and hospital market characteristics, such as market concentration by hospital bed size
and the number of private hospitals operating within the same hospital referral region as
the public hospital. Further, given the richness of the data, we include local government
unit fixed effects (l ) to account for time-invariant differences among units, like council
structure or use of a professional city manager. To control for national changes in the
demand and supply of hospital services, the specification also includes year-fixed effects
(t ), which control for changes in patient mix from provisions in the ACA that apply to
all states, such as the individual health mandate. These two-way fixed effects present
a basic difference-in-differences framework to estimate the effect of Medicaid expansion
on local government outlays. We also include state-by-year interaction dummies to ac-
count for differences across states over time (st ). These trends account for differences in
trajectory related to other aspects of Medicaid program design, the federal match rate
that subsidizes state costs, or population health. In particular, they subsume variation
typically controlled for by a P ost2013 × Expansions indicator.
     The estimation of equation (1) is not easily interpretable because it requires a selected
level of U nins2013l in order to report magnitude and statistical significance levels. For
presenting our main results, U nins2013s will be replaced with an indicator variable that
equals 1 if the local government is in a county that fell into the highest quartile of the
national uninsured distribution. This specification is provided in equation (2) and will
  12
    This is a bit of an oversimplification, since a variety of state rules exist to regulate local government
property taxation; it is accurate enough, however, that we can infer a general picture of local government
behavior in response to Medicaid expansion.


                                                     11
appear in the main body of the paper, while estimates of equation (1) will be provided
in the appendix.


                 Ylst =  + 1 P ost2013 × U nins2013Qt4l
                        +2 P ost2013 × Expansions × U ninsur2013Qt4l                                (2)
                        +Xlt 3 + l + t + st + lst

    Finally, as described in the conceptual framework, estimates on 2 (the full sample
of governments) do not necessarily indicate that local governments are acting according
to their constituents' preference. Our main inference will come from splitting the sample
based on whether the county voted for Obama or Romney in the 2012 election, so we will
         k
report 2   , where k is an indicator for Romney or Obama samples.13
    A fundamental assumption of this approach is that trends among treatment groups
are parallel in the pre-period. Visual inspection of these outcomes in the difference-in-
differences setting (Figure 4) indicates that the assumption holds for our four outcome
variables. We formally test this assumption via an event-study regression. Restricting
the sample to data from 2006 to 2013, we drop the post-period from the specification and
test for pre-trends by interacting individual years from the pre-treatment period instead
of P OST to provide comparable estimates of 1 and 2 . The results for each fiscal
outcome and eventual subsample explored in the paper are provided in the Appendix,
Tables A1 to A4. Overall, the pre-trend assumption seems reasonably satisfied. Looking
at total hospital expenditures in Appendix Table A1, the pre-trend year interactions with
U nisur2013 × Expansion are not significant in the Obama or Romney county samples.
Among the subsamples, only rural Romney voting areas demonstrate problematic pre-
trend significance levels. Nevertheless, the overall samples for the main results (Obama
and Romney) look promising for the pre-trend assumptions, and this pattern is repeated
throughout the other dependent variables shared in Appendix Tables A2 through A4.


3.3     Data
Measures of local government fiscal indicators are collected from the Census's Annual
Survey of State & Local Government Finances. For the purposes of the study, we focus on
local general-purpose governments that constitute counties and municipalities providing
  13
    About one fourth of our general-purpose local governments are cities, rather than counties, which
introduces some concern of errantly binning cities according to the wrong presidential preference if the
non-city portion of counties (or city portions outside the home county) are sizable enough with opposing
magnitudes. However, we have no reason to believe the difference is or would be systematic for one
presidential side.



                                                  12
general government services. This focus leads us to exclude specialized districts such
as those for schools, fire services, waste treatment, etc. Further, we limit the sample
to general-purpose local governments that had hospital expenditures in the pre-period
and were observed in the survey at least twice. The Census surveys large governments
annually and a sample of smaller local governments are sampled at random throughout
the period. The result is an unbalanced panel of 802 local governments observed over the
2006-to-2015 period.
    As measured by population, these governments represent relatively large units. The
average population size for the local governments appearing in our 2006 sample was
200,301, collectively representing about 98 million Americans. Consequently, these local
governments are sampled more frequently in the annual Census of Government Finances,
with 45 percent appearing in every year of the data, and just 7 percent appear only
twice. With a mean hospital spending level of $8.4 million in 2006, the corresponding per
capita mean was $42. Table 1 offers a sense of the governments represented, listing the
30 largest local governments by total hospital spending as well as the Obama share of the
2012 election votes. For these governments expenditures on hospitals represent a large
share of their total expenditures, averaging 35% in 2012 (Figure 5). Most (76 percent) of
the governments are county rather than municipality; there are no examples of city and
county overlap among the 802 general-purpose local governments that meet these sample
criteria (e.g. Hamilton and Cuyahoga County appear in the sample, but Cincinnati and
Cleveland do not).
    The four outcomes described in Section 3.2 are extracted from the Annual Survey to
assess local government responses to voter preferences: (1) total hospital expenditures
made by local governments, regardless of hospital ownership status; (2) expenditures on
hospital construction; (3) hospital charge revenue received by the local government; and
(4) property tax revenue. Presenting the results based on within-variation in the levels
means that results across dependent variables are directly comparable if governments sub-
stitute across each other, e.g. a $1 reduction in hospital expenditures and a $1 reduction
in property tax revenues would imply the government passed the reduced expenditures
onto households via a tax cut. Furthermore, the levels of expenditures and property tax
revenues correspond directly to the financial concept that is altered through the local
government budgeting process. However, since the levels can be more sensitive to outlier
level responses, we demonstrate in the Appendix that the inferences are not driven by
this phenomena by applying the log transformation to these variables.
    The measure of pre-Medicaid expansion uninsurance rates at the county level is ex-
tracted from the Census Bureau's Small Area Health Insurance Estimates data. We
include the estimated uninsurance rate among adults 19-64 who reported income less


                                           13
than 200% of the federal poverty line in 2013. We also use the Census Bureau's Small
Area Income and Poverty Estimates program, which produces single-year estimates of
income and poverty for all U.S. states and counties.
    We limit the sample by excluding states that expanded Medicaid after early 2014:
Alaska, Indiana, Pennsylvania, Montana, and Louisiana. These states adopted later,
either in 2014 or in 2015; therefore, their post-period is brief. As a sensitivity check, we
confirm that the main results are not altered when we exclude states that implemented
some level of Medicaid expansion prior to January 1, 2014 (Appendix Table A14). Table
2 provides corresponding summary statistics to reference sizes for the regression results.


4     Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Local Govern-
      ment Expenditures and Revenue
4.1    Main Results
Table 3 presents the estimated treatment effect of Medicaid expansion on local govern-
ment finances for the specifications in equation (2) for the following outcomes: local
government total expenditures on hospitals, local government expenditures on hospi-
tal construction, local government revenues from hospital charges, and property tax
revenue. The regressions include local government and state-year time trends. Ro-
bust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The causal variable of interest is
P ost × Qt4U nins2013 × Expansion, but as described in section (3.2) the sum of the
two coefficients provides an overall estimated effect of the Medicaid expansion provision
due to potential impacts experienced in non-expansion states.
    The first column of results in Table 3 provides the estimation of equation (2) before
sample splitting. Broadly, the results are not statistically significant and quite small
when compared to the dependent variables' respective means and standard deviations.
The exception is that spending on hospital construction declines by a margin that is
significant at the 0.05 level and a magnitude that is about 20% of the pre-period standard
deviation of the expansion states. Aside from this finding, no clear effects or patterns
emerge from the first column.
    The second and third columns of Table 3 split the sample based on whether the
encompassing county voted for Obama or Romney in the 2012 elections, as these are
the main specifications for inference. In three of the four cases, signs on the variable
of interest take opposing directions. For total health expenditures, the Obama-voting
governments in Medicaid expansion states increased total expenditures on hospitals by
about $32.7 million, which is about 30% of the standard deviation in the pre-treatment

                                            14
period and is statistically significant at the 0.01 level. Romney areas, by contrast, reduced
spending on hospitals by a $4.9 million margin that is statistically significant at the 0.10
level. Both specifications for local government expenditures on hospital construction were
negative and statistically insignificant, implying that total expenditures were driven by
non-capital expenditures.
    On the revenue side, Obama-voting local governments in expansion states reported
more revenue from hospital charges while Romney governments reported less, but neither
case was statistically significant or economically meaningful in value. Revenue from prop-
erty taxes decreased by economically small magnitudes that were statistically insignificant
in both cases, albeit the magnitude of the decrease was greater in Romney-voting than
Obama-voting areas.
    A possible counter explanation is that the results in Table 3 are simply picking up
differences between populations that reside in these areas: education, income, racial
composition. Time-varying controls in the main specification control for most of these
possibilities.14 As a sensitivity check, consider the possibility that results are driven by
an urban-rural divide in response to the ACA, as hospitals in these types of areas are
likely to be very different types of entities. If there is a correlation between party voting
across these geographic types within this sample (such as if urban areas are likely to
contain more Democratic voters), then the results could be described as an urban-rural
phenomenon characterized incorrectly as a political dichotomy.
    To consider this, we split the sample again for relevant distinctions; these results
are also reported in Table 3. Splitting the full sample on urban or rural designations
does not immediately reproduce the Obama-Romney results, though it does demonstrate
differences between the two. While statistical significance is only occasionally present,
hospital expenditures increase in both urban and rural areas, as do revenues from hospital
charges and property in rural areas. Though it does not seem to be the case that the
choice of Obama or Romney is simply a proxy for urban and rural designations, the
differences in the specifications suggest that further investigation is warranted.
    Splitting further the Obama and Romney sub-samples by urban and rural designa-
tions, we see in Table 3 that the original Obama versus Romney results remain direc-
tionally intact. That is, if we compare urban areas that voted for Obama to urban areas
that went for Romney, then we see the same pattern emerge as in the full Obama and
Romney samples. Urban Obama areas spent more on hospitals, but hospital charges
and property taxes did not significantly change. In urban Romney areas, spending on
hospitals declined by a larger magnitude and at a higher significance level than in the
  14
    Table A7 shows that these areas significantly differed along other demographics, besides rurality
prior to the expansion. We present the robustness of our results to controlling for those differences (Table
A8).


                                                    15
broader Romney results. Similarly, there was a larger decline in revenue from hospital
charges for urban Romney areas than in the broader Romney results, but the effect re-
mained statistically insignificant. However, it seems that this reduction in obligations
from hospital services resulted in property tax savings for urban Romney areas, as a $1.5
million decrease in property tax revenues was significant at the 0.05 level. The urban
Romney results suggest that about 17 percent of the reduced hospital expenditures were
channeled into private consumption via lower property tax burdens.
    In rural Obama areas, which represented a relatively small sample of local govern-
ments, the direction of the effects was the same as in the full Obama sample but without
statistical significance for property taxes, total hospital expenditures, or expenditures
on hospital construction. Rural Obama local governments did, however, report receiving
larger revenues from hospital charges, consistent with receiving greater levels of reimburse-
ments from patient services for local governments connected to hospitals. By contrast,
rural Romney results were directionally different than the general Romney results under
all outcomes, albeit the only statistically significant effect was for the $612 thousand in-
crease in property taxes. In this particular subcase, the result may be due to previously
discussed problematic pre-trends.
    Another possibility is that other intergovernmental transfers for health and hospital
services from the state or federal government are systematically changing on the expec-
tation of improved financial conditions, thus biasing the results. In this scenario, state or
federal institutions recognize that local governments in expansion states should be treated
differently, and so they adjust intergovernmental grants in some manner that correlates
with presidential voting and drives these results. We test this possibility by considering
intergovernmental transfers for health and hospital services as outcomes in Table 4; the
corresponding pre-trend analysis appears in Appendix Tables A5 and A6. Generally, the
results offer no statistically significant evidence that transfers from the state to the local
government or from the federal to the local government differed over time or between
Medicaid expansion states in the sample. The only exception appears to be an increase
in federal grants to urban Romney local governments, which is statistically significant
at the ten percent level. The magnitude of the effect is quite small at $687 thousand,
however, far short of the $12.3 million decrease in governments' own spending on local
hospitals or the $1.5 million decrease in property taxes found in Table 3.
    The pattern of results revealed in Table 3 demonstrates that, in general, local gov-
ernments in counties that voted for Obama and Romney responded differently to state
Medicaid expansion, particularly in urban areas. Obama-voting communities saw in-
creased hospital expenditures among their local governments, while Romney communities
saw decreases. In Romney-urban areas, some of these reduced expenditures on hospitals


                                             16
translate into property tax reductions. Rural areas provide less clear evidence when using
the Obama-Romney dichotomy.


4.2    Robustness Checks
In the time trend of Figure 4, there is a visible tick upward in many of the indicators,
which could be evidence of some anticipatory responses on the part of local governments
during the year between the Supreme Court ruling of 2012 and the 2014 implementation of
the ACA's incentives for Medicaid expansion. If so, then our post-period treatment effect
will be biased towards zero as the behavior becomes prevalent during the pre-treatment
period. Appendix Table A9 presents results that exclude 2013 from the analysis, but this
proves to have virtually no effect on the analysis, as the results are extremely similar to
the main results of Table 3.
    The main results also employ a dummy variable to indicate if the local government
was part of a community that was in the state's top quartile of low-income uninsured
people for 2013, which could potentially mask a non-linear effect. Table A10 exchanges
this definition with a continuous measure of the size of the uninsured population. While
comparing magnitudes and obtaining statistical significance at selected levels require
computation with chosen uninsured rates, one can see from Appendix Table A10 that the
directions are consistent with the main results of Table 3. This remains true if we also
exclude 2013 from the analysis (Appendix Table A11).
    It is possible that using the 2013 uninsured rate overestimates the return to Medi-
caid expansion. After the passage of the ACA, the Medicaid expansion provision was
well publicized, as state governments challenged the federal mandate. While there was
some uncertainty about which states would expand Medicaid following the 2012 Supreme
Court decision, it is possible that our results are biased by an Ashenfelter dip whereby
individuals dropped private coverage in anticipation of becoming Medicaid-eligible. Such
anticipatory actions would bias measurement of treatment effects. To address this pos-
sibly, we re-estimate the results using a pooled measure of uninsurance from 2011 to
2013. These results are consistent in magnitude and direction with the main analysis
(Table A12).
    Appendix Table A13 employs the logged transformations on the fiscal outcomes and
estimates the main specifications once again. Statistical significance is sensitive to the
transformation, but the overall pattern of results looks similar to how the Obama and
Romney responses to expansion differ. While neither differs from zero, the elasticity on
Obama and Romney for total health expenditures is 0.59 and -0.53, respectively. The
reduction in property taxes is now statistically significant at the 0.01 level in Romney
areas and the 0.001 level in urban Romney areas. The biggest departure from the main

                                            17
results is that total hospital construction expenditures experience a statistically signifi-
cant increase among local governments whose constituents voted for Obama, unlike the
insignificant and negative results of the main results; this is undoubtedly a consequence
of the within-government annual volatility characteristic of these capital expenditures.
Broadly, the results still signal a greater propensity to spend in Obama areas, while
Romney areas were more likely to cut spending and taxes.
    Finally, six states undertook some early expansion of Medicaid in 2014.15 Appendix
Table A14 drops local governments in these states from the analysis and reports the
results. For local governments whose constituents voted for Obama, the statistical signif-
icance is lower for hospital expenditures at the 0.05 level than in Table 3, but is otherwise
similar. In Romney areas, the point estimates are similar, but now none of the results
are significant, including total health expenditures. In Romney-urban areas, however,
property tax reductions remain statistically significant.


5      Hospital Financial Conditions
It appears that the best explanation for the previous results is that local governments
reacted to state Medicaid expansion in ways that are likely to be consistent with the
preferences of their voters. Reducing the cost of supporting local hospitals caused Obama-
voting counties to invest further in hospital service delivery, while Romney-voting counties
used the ACA subsidy as a crowd-out of local efforts and passed the savings to their voters
in the form of lower taxes.
    In the following section we analyze hospital financial conditions to consider whether
changes in the market conditions of local hospitals, rather than local voter preferences,
drove post-expansion changes in local government spending. If changes in the market
conditions of local hospitals also drove voting patterns, then this would overstate the
relative effect of voter preferences. For the Obama results, an alternative explanation
is that public hospitals represent an inferior good among those who were induced into
obtaining private insurance because of the ACA, and as a result the local governments
were helping these hospitals maintain services as they lost their more profitable patients
("cream skimming"). In the Romney results, if crowd-out is the primary factor at work,
then it should not be the case that such hospitals were overall made worse off. Rather,
they merely substituted funding to obtain similar services at a lower tax cost. These
cases could be particularly likely in areas with limited provider access and where a strong
component of the community safety net centers on the public funding of local hospitals.
  15
   These states are California, Connecticut, the District of Columbia, Minnesota, New Jersey, and
Washington.


                                               18
   Using data from the Medicare Cost Reports, we can test to determine the extent
to which these changes were driven by variation in patient profitability, as well as the
subsequent effect of these changes on hospital finances.


5.1    Background: Hospitals and Government Compensation for
       Charity Care
The relationship between hospitals and local governments has traditionally been defined
by public (owned by the local government) or private ownership status. However, these
distinctions oversimplify the ways in which vulnerable populations access hospital care
through private and public co-production. For example, local governments may directly
fund extensions to the Medicaid program, which allow beneficiaries to seek care in either
public or private hospitals; private hospitals may also receive direct subsidies from local
governments if their operations are considered a public priority for the local government.
Further, public hospitals bill public and private insurers and are not exclusively open to
the publicly insured or uninsured. In this section, we describe hospitals that are likely
to be affected by Medicaid expansion in terms of their patient case load and reliance on
public funds, rather than ownership status.
    In anticipation of lower rates of uninsurance, the ACA also included provisions to re-
duce federal financial support to hospitals providing uncompensated care to the uninsured
("charity care"). These cuts were intended to maintain budget neutrality and applied to
all hospitals, regardless of their state's Medicaid expansion decision.
    Hospitals with a 24-hour emergency department (ED) are unique from other health-
care providers as the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA) requires
them to treat anyone who enters, regardless of the patient's insurance status or ability
to pay. EMTALA is an unfunded mandate for hospitals to treat the uninsured as a form
of "bad debt" (Lee, 2004; Coughlin et al., 2004). Hospitals also face potential financial
losses from the treatment of Medicaid patients: the differences between treatment costs of
Medicaid payments and Medicaid reimbursement rates are known as "Medicaid shortfalls"
(Dobson et al., 2006). The term "charity care" is the sum of bad debt from uninsured
patient care and Medicaid shortfalls.
    Hospital charity care is indirectly compensated when hospitals provide a higher share
of uncompensated care relative to others in their state. Such hospitals are designated
as Disproportionate Share Hospitals (DSH) and, as a result, receive payments from the
Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS) to cover the costs of providing care
to uninsured patients. DSH payments are paid by CMS to states and are capped at
12% of what states spend on their respective Medicaid programs. State governments, in


                                            19
turn, distribute the payments to hospitals, though they are not required to target DSH
payments to hospitals with high levels of uncompensated care.
    In a study of hospital finances in California, Neuhausen et al. (2014) find that decreases
in uncompensated care costs due to the ACA insurance expansion may be outpaced by
losses related to patients who remain uninsured, low Medicaid reimbursement among the
newly insured, and medical cost inflation. They estimate that unmet DSH costs will
increase by $156 million by 2019, relative to 2010 levels. In a more recent descriptive
survey, Hayford et al. (2016) find that one quarter of hospitals reported negative profit
margins following Medicaid expansion, though these losses were not large enough to cause
hospitals to discontinue operating.
    The financial vulnerability of hospitals that receive local government funding has
been established in the literature. In a survey about the role of local governments in
three cities, Meyer (1999) finds that while sites differed in their financial solvency, none
were completely financially secure or solvent. Duggan (2002) exploits a change to Cali-
fornia's Medicaid program in 1990 that increased DSH payments. He finds that higher
reimbursement for publicly insured patients resulted in a higher share of such patients
in private hospitals. Moreover, local governments reduced funding to local hospitals at
an equal rate to the hospitals' gains under the changed DSH policy. However, due to
cream-skimming behaviors across hospitals, local public hospitals were left worse off be-
cause private hospitals treated the least severe, most profitable Medicaid patients. This
conclusion implies that decentralized management of safety-net hospitals reduces waste
when re-allocating funds from a centralized source. However, less is understood about
how well local governments can predict changes in hospital financial dependence on trans-
fers following changes in the patient insurance mix. Further, public hospital vulnerability
arises from inelastic supply of unprofitable services (Hansmann et al., 2003) relative to
private hospitals, whether for-profit or nonprofit.


5.2    Empirical Approach
Changes in Medicaid eligibility and the funding of that coverage could affect the financial
performance and service provision of hospitals that rely on these local government trans-
fers. We test this possibility by extending our analysis to evaluate hospitals in markets
within and surrounding the local governments in the sample. This analysis is conducted
at the hospital level (i) and includes hospitals that reported receiving state/local funds
prior to Medicaid expansion. As in the case above, we can similarly predict changes in




                                             20
hospital financial measures using the triple-difference specification:

           HospF inanceist =  + P ostt × Expansions × U ninsur2013ist
                                                                                          (3)
                             +lt + l + t + lst

    The hospital financial outcomes (HospF inanceist ) are (1) measures related to patient
profitability: operating margins and profit margins; (2) measures of financial exposure:
bad debt-to-receivables ratio (i.e., uncompensated care); (3) Medicaid care provision:
outpatient visits and inpatient stays; and (4) hospital receipt of public funds (state or
local grants or transfers made for hospital operations). This last measure is only available
for a briefer time, after 2011, but captures partnerships between local governments and
private hospitals, which are not centrally documented. Summary statistics of the universe
of 2,440 acute-care hospitals are presented in Table 5.
    The coefficient of interest ( ) represents the change among hospitals operating in areas
that expanded Medicaid and had low insured rates prior to Medicaid expansion among
low-income households. U ninsur2013ist is an indicator variable that equals 1 if the local
government is in a county that fell into the highest quartile of the uninsured distribution.
    Similar to the main analysis, we include local government unit fixed effects (l ) to
account for time-invariant differences among local governments, such as different degrees
of integration between local hospitals and local governments. To control for national
changes affecting hospital finances, year-fixed effects(t ) are included, which control for
changes that apply to all hospitals, such as any changes in Medicare policies. Local
government-by-year interaction dummies account for differences across local governments
over time (lt ). These trends account for differences in trajectory related to other aspects
of hospital and local government situations, such as differences in safety net structures
and population health.


5.3    Data
The data in the hospital-level analysis uses the Medicare Cost Reports (MCRs) to observe
changes in hospital finances, the provision of care to publicly insured patients, and hospital
size. The location of each hospital was verified using the Provider of Service files and
Google API. Details of the MCRs are provided in Appendix. 3; this section will discuss
sample selection criteria.
    Assigning hospitals to the local governments that support them is not a straightfor-
ward task. Traditionally, ownership is one approach to the problem, but the designation
of "public" versus "private" hospitals ignores transfers from local governments to private
facilities. Further, private hospitals that treat Medicaid patients whose coverage is funded


                                             21
by local governments are, in a sense, dependent on local government funds as well. Thus,
we consider different means of assigning hospitals to local governments based on location.
     By geo-coding addresses to government boundary maps, we can similarly split the
sample according to the government types to see if the results are consistent with the
government analysis and to rule out competing concerns of market conditions biasing the
results. We assign hospitals in counties that overlap with local governments as belong-
ing to the sample of potential hospitals from our local government sample affected by
those changes in spending. As an alternative, we also consider patient-identified market
boundaries ("hospital referral regions"), which result in a wider sample of hospitals with
consistent results.16
     The assumption of parallel trends appears to hold in the visual inspection of pre-trends
for all outcomes, with the exception of profit margins (Figure 6). Using the event history
approach, where a year indicator is interacted with the 2013 uninsured rate and the
Medicaid expansion indicator, we find that the assumptions of parallel trends are likely
to hold (Table B13 to Table B18). Since the triple-difference coefficients are collectively
not significant, then trends observed after 2013 are reasonably attributable to Medicaid
expansion that began in 2014.
     The outcomes extracted from the Medicaid Cost Report data are operating margins,
profit margins, and the ratio of bad debt to receivables. The inflows reported to calculate
these measures consist of both public and private sources. The metrics related to utiliza-
tion are the reported number of Medicaid inpatient days and the number of outpatient
visits. The last outcome ("Any Government grants, appropriations, or transfers") equals
1 if hospitals received any state or local government funding and zero otherwise. Unfortu-
nately for the purposes of this paper, this measure cannot separately distinguish between
state and local funding. However, it operates as a proxy for the number of hospitals, at
the extensive margin, receiving public support.


5.4     Results
Table 6 presents the estimated treatment effect of Medicaid expansion on hospitals located
within and close to local governments in the sample, for the specifications in equation (3).
The sample of included hospitals is split similarly to the government analysis. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses, but clustering is not possible due to the
limited number of observations. For rural areas that voted for Obama, there are too few
  16
    Hospital referral regions (HRRs) define hospital markets based on the utilization patterns of Medi-
care patients, because all hospitals accept Medicare, and utilization patterns are not constrained by
administrative definitions of networks. Each of the 306 HRRs has a minimum population size of 120,000.
Wennberg (1996) provides additional details on this market definition.



                                                  22
hospitals to estimate a triple-difference specification. The outcomes for the hospital-level
analysis are hospital operating margins, profit margins, bad-debt-to-receivables ratio, and
the number of inpatient days and outpatient visits provided to Medicaid patients. Finally,
we consider the differences in the likelihood of receiving state/local funds, which is only
available in the data from 2011 forward. The variable of interest is P ost × U nins2013Q4 ×
Expansion.
     For hospitals in areas that voted for Obama, Medicaid expansion does not signifi-
cantly change operating or profit margins between expansion and non-expansion states
(Table 6). This finding indicates that the profitability of patient mix did not shift follow-
ing Medicaid expansion. If there was cream-skimming among hospitals, the distribution
of operating and profit margins would have shifted. While the direction of these coef-
ficients suggests a decrease, none are statistically significant. Therefore, we do not find
compelling evidence that hospitals that previously did not serve Medicaid patients began
to extract the most profitable Medicaid patients from their usual choice of hospitals after
the expansion. Charity care, as measured by the bad debt ratio, decreased by a statisti-
cally insignificant margin; this is inconsistent with a cream-skimming narrative in which
hospitals supported by local funding face worsening financial conditions. The provision
of Medicaid care did not change significantly, though the point estimates are generally
positive in expansion states.17 While state funding is mixed with local funding, Obama
areas reported a slight, statistically insignificant increase in the likelihood of receiving
any money from governments. The picture here appears to be more consistent with our
inference of increased governmental support rather than a narrative of market condition
changes induced by state Medicaid expansion under the ACA.
     For the Romney results, across the board we see small effect sizes that are not sta-
tistically significant. There is nothing to suggest that these hospitals have been made
financially worse off. This is consistent with the previous analysis that they are now
being reimbursed by Medicaid, rather than relying on local tax support.
     Table 6 shows that these findings remain in place across urban and rural political
subsamples. As a further sensitivity check, we limit the sample to only hospitals that
reported state/local funds prior to 2014 (Table 7). The coefficients are largely not sta-
tistically significant. However, hospitals in rural areas that voted for Romney are one
exception. These hospitals reported improved profit margins following the expansion
(0.47, significant at the 0.001 level). The broader trend, however, suggests that effects of
local government spending were not isolated to a subset of hospitals identified as needing
state/local government support prior to the expansion.
  17
    Appendix Figures B1 and B2 compare trends of included hospitals to the universe of acute-care
hospitals to ensure comparable trends.



                                               23
    Our findings are robust to a number of sensitivity checks. First, we test for trends in
the selected outcomes using pre-expansion uninsurance. We find no notable or consistent
evidence that observed changes in the main analysis were underestimated due to pre-
expansion trends (Appendix Table B13 to Appendix Table B18). We also check whether
results are driven by the inclusion of states that expanded Medicaid before January 1,
2014 (Appendix Table B19). Finally, we test the sensitivity of these results by considering
alternate definitions of hospitals that local governments could support, such as markets
defined by Medicare patient flows (Appendix Table B20 and Table B21).


6    Conclusion
Whether governments represent the interests of their constituents is central to any argu-
ment for the existence of representative government. Yet in the case of local, representa-
tive governance, few empirical investigations of its effectiveness exist. Our paper provides
evidence that American local governments did indeed react in a manner that was voter-
preference consistent, given incentives created when states expanded Medicaid under the
ACA. A difference-in-differences empirical analysis of data on general-purpose local gov-
ernments from 2006 to 2015 demonstrates that local governments in areas that voted
for Romney reduced their entanglement with local hospitals by reducing their spending
on hospital services and cutting property taxes. By contrast, local governments in areas
that voted for Obama took advantage of the lower cost of providing hospital services by
raising property taxes and spending more on hospital services.
    Yet, whether a preference is consistent with the superficial will of the electorate says
nothing about its long-term impact on civic life. A Romney-voting district, for example,
may disentangle local government from hospitals at one level, but increase its eventual
obligation to provide healthcare services by unintentionally creating a sicker population.
Our results demonstrate that the spending changes in both Obama- and Romney-voting
areas closely correspond to changes in profitability, but not to changes in Medicaid pa-
tient volume or operating margins. Moreover, these findings imply that local government
financing has had a substantial influence on hospital financing, even as the rate of unin-
surance has declined. As future provisions of the ACA implement reductions in federal
support for charity care through 2025, the role of local governments may be expected by
policy makers or voters to increase over time.
    Looking towards future research, this paper is the first to investigate the local, public
economics of healthcare delivery. In doing so, it also establishes the existence of a siz-
able gap in the public and health economics literature by illustrating the importance of
local governments to hospital service provision. Consequently, there are substantial op-


                                             24
portunities for future work in the area of local government entanglement with hospitals.
Moreover, while pre-policy trend analyses support the differences-in-differences approach
employed here, in some subsamples, improvements would be desirable. Continuing re-
search could employ propensity score matching to improve in this regard. Finally, the
post-ACA period is, at this point, only two years long: future data releases will likely
provide additional insights.




                                           25
References
Aizer, A., A. Lleras-Muney, and M. Stabile (2005). Access to care, provider choice, and
  the infant health gradient. American Economic Review 95 (2), 248­252.

Antonisse, L., R. Garfield, R. Rudowitz, and S. Artiga (2016). The Effects of Medi-
 caid Expansion under the ACA: Updated Findings from a Literature Review. Health
 Affairs 35 (10), 1810­1815.

Bachrach, D., P. Boozang, and D. Glanz (2015). States expanding Medicaid see significant
  budget savings and revenue gains. Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation .

Banzhaf, H. S. and W. E. Oates (2013). On fiscal illusion in local public finance: Re-
  examining ricardian equivalence and the renter effect. National Tax Journal 66 (3),
  511­40.

Besley, T. and S. Coate (2003). Centralized versus decentralized provision of local public
  goods: a political economy approach. Journal of public economics 87 (12), 2611­2637.

Blendon, R. J., J. M. Benson, and A. Brul´
                                         e (2012). Understanding health care in the
  2012 election. New England Journal of Medicine 367 (17), 1658­1661.

Brueckner, J. K. (2000). Urban sprawl: diagnosis and remedies. International regional
  science review 23 (2), 160­171.

Cohen, A. B., D. C. Colby, K. Wailoo, and J. E. Zelizer (2015). Medicare and Medicaid
  at 50. Oxford University Press: New York, NY.

Coughlin, T. A., B. K. Bruen, and J. King (2004). States' use of Medicaid UPL and DSH
  financing mechanisms. Health Affairs 23 (2), 245­257.

Courtemanche, C., J. Marton, B. Ukert, A. Yelowitz, and D. Zapata (2017). Early impacts
  of the Affordable Care Act on health insurance coverage in Medicaid expansion and
  non-expansion states. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36 (1), 178­210.

Crook, R. C. and A. S. Sverrisson (1999). To what extent can decentralized forms of gov-
  ernment finance the development of pro-poor policies and improve poverty-alleviation
  outcomes?

De Groot, H. (1988). Decentralization decisions in bureaucracies as a principal-agent
  problem. Journal of Public Economics 36 (3), 323­337.

de Janvry, A., F. Finan, and E. Sadoulet (2012). Local electoral incentives and decen-
  tralized program performance. The Review of Economics and Statistics 94 (3), 672­85.

DeLia, D. (2006). Potentially avoidable use of hospital emergency departments in New
  Jersey. Rutgers Center for State Health Policy .

Dobson, A., J. DaVanzo, and N. Sen (2006). The cost-shift payment `hydraulic': founda-
 tion, history, and implications. Health Affairs 25 (1), 22­33.


                                           26
Dorn, S., N. Francis, L. Snyder, and R. Rudowitz (2015). The effects of the Medicaid
 expansion on state budgets: an early look in select states. Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser
 Family Foundation .

Dranove, D., C. Garthwaite, and C. Ody (2016). Uncompensated care decreased at
  hospitals in Medicaid expansion states but not at hospitals in nonexpansion states.
  Health Affairs 35 (8), 1471­1479.

Duggan, M. (2002). Hospital market structure and the behavior of not-for-profit hospitals.
 RAND Journal of Economics , 433­446.

Duggan, M., A. Gupta, and E. Jackson (2017). The Impact of the Affordable Care Act:
 Evidence from California's Hospital Sector.

Ellison, A. (2017). CMS moves forward with $43B in DSH payment cuts. Becker's
  Hospital CFO Report .

Fagnani, L. and J. Tolbert (1999). The dependence of safety net hospitals and health sys-
  tems on the Medicare and Medicaid disproportionate share hospital payment programs.
  Commonwealth Fund New York (NY).

Faguet, J.-P. (2004). Does decentralization increase government responsiveness to local
  needs? Evidence from Bolivia. Journal of Public Economics 88, 867­93.

Faguet, J.-P. (2014). Decentralization and governance. World Development 53, 2­13.

Fiva, J. H. (2006). New evidence on the effect of fiscal decentralization on the size and
  composition of government spending. FinanzArchiv / Public Finance Analysis 62 (2).

Freudenberg, N., M. Fahs, S. Galea, and A. Greenberg (2006). The impact of New York
  City's 1975 fiscal crisis on the tuberculosis, HIV, and homicide syndemic. American
  Journal of Public Health 96 (3), 424­434.

Galasso, E. and M. Ravallion (2005). Decentralized targeting of an antipoverty program.
 Journal of Public Economics 89 (4), 705 ­ 727. Cornell - ISPE Conference on Public
 Finance and Development.

Hansmann, H., D. Kessler, and M. B. McClellan (2003). Ownership form and trapped
  capital in the hospital industry. In The governance of not-for-profit organizations, pp.
  45­70. University of Chicago Press.

Hayford, T., L. Nelson, and A. Diorio (2016). Projecting Hospitals' Profit Margins Under
  Several Illustrative Scenarios: Working Paper 2016-04. Technical report.

Hempstead, K. and J. C. Cantor (2016). State Medicaid expansion and changes in hospital
  volume according to payer. New England Journal of Medicine 374 (2), 196­198.

Hollingsworth, A., A. Soni, A. Carroll, J. Cawley, and K. Simon (2018). Gains in health
  insurance coverage explain variation in democratic vote share in the 2008-2016 presi-
  dential elections. Indiana University School of Public & Environmental Affairs Working
  Paper .

                                           27
James R. Hines, J. and R. H. Thaler (1995). Anomalies: The flypaper effect. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 9 (4), 217­26.

Lee, T. M. (2004). An EMTALA primer: The impact of changes in the emergency
  medicine landscape on EMTALA compliance and enforcement. Annals Health L. 13,
  145.

McEachern, W. A. (1978). Collective decision rules and local debt choice: A test of the
 median-voter hypothesis. National Tax Journal 31 (2), 129­36.

Meyer, J. A. (1999). The role of local governments in financing safety net hospitals:
 Houston, Oakland, and Miami.

Mikesell, J. and C. Liu (2013). Property Tax Stability: A Tax System Model of Base
 and Revenue Dynamics Through the Great Recession and Beyond. Public Finance &
 Management 13, 310­34.

Miller, S. (2012). The impact of the Massachusetts health care reform on health care use
 among children. American Economic Review 102 (3), 502­07.

Neuhausen, K., A. C. Davis, J. Needleman, R. H. Brook, D. Zingmond, and D. H. Roby
  (2014). Disproportionate-share hospital payment reductions may threaten the financial
  stability of safety-net hospitals. Health Affairs 33 (6), 988­996.

Nikpay, S., T. Buchmueller, and H. Levy (2015). Early Medicaid expansion in Connecticut
  stemmed the growth in hospital uncompensated care. Health Affairs 34 (7), 1170­1179.

Oates, W. E. (1972). Fiscal Federalism. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Oates, W. E. (1993). Fiscal decentralization and economic development. National Tax
 Journal 46 (2), 237 ­ 43.

Ollove, M. (2015). Local Governments Pay When States Don't Expand Medicaid. Gov-
  erning Magazine June 26.

Robinson, M. (2007). Introduction: Decentralising service delivery? evidence and policy
  implications. IDS Bulletin 38 (1), 1­17.

Ross, J. M. and W. Yan (2013). Fiscal illusion from property reassessment? an empirical
  test of the residual view. National Tax Journal 66 (1), 7­32.

Ross, J. M., W. Yan, and C. Johnson (2015). The Public Financing of America's Largest
  Cities: A Study of City Financial Records in the Wake of the Great Recession. Journal
  of Revional Science 55, 113­38.

Rudowitz, R. (2014). Understanding How States Access the ACA Enhanced Medi-
 caid Match Rates. The Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured (Septem-
 ber 2014), available at http://kff. org/medicaid/issue-brief/understanding-how-states-
 access-the-acaenhanced-medicaid-match-rates .



                                          28
Smith, V. K., K. Gifford, E. Ellis, R. Rudowitz, L. Snyder, and E. Hinton (2015). Medicaid
  reforms to expand coverage, control costs and improve care: Results from a 50-state
  Medicaid budget survey for state fiscal years 2015 and 2016. Menlo Park, CA: The
  Kaiser Family Foundation, and National Association of Medicaid Directors .

Sommers, B. D. and J. Gruber (2017). Federal Funding Insulated State Budgets From
  Increased Spending Related To Medicaid Expansion. Health Affairs 36 (5), 938­944.

von Braun, J. and U. Grote (2000). Does decentralization serve the poor? IMF Conference
  Paper .

Wallis, J. J. and W. E. Oates (1988). Decentralization in the public sector: An empirical
 study of state and local government. In H. Rosen (Ed.), Fiscal Federalism: Quantitative
 Studies, pp. 5­32. Oxford University Press.

Wennberg, J. E. (1996). The Dartmouth Atlas of health care in the United States. Amer-
 ican Hospital Association.

Zhang, T. and H.-f. Zou (1998). Fiscal decentralization, public spending, and economic
  growth in China. Journal of public economics 67 (2), 221­240.




                                           29
7        Tables

Table 1: 30 Largest Local Governments by Own Spending on Hospitals ($100s), 2006


         Name                          Hospital Expenditures % Voting for Obama
     1   New York City                       7,647,884              84.2
     2   Los Angeles County                  2,454,328              68.9
     3   Metropolitan Dade County            1,380,005              61.6
     4   Dallas County                       1,010,143              57.1
     5   Cook County                          915,516               74.0
     6   Santa Clara County                   904,683               69.8
     7   Harris County                        887,926               49.4
     8   Cambridge City                       700,137               62.6
     9   San Francisco City And County        596,898               83.4
    10   Westchester County                   591,179               60.4
    11   Bexar County                         577,714               51.6
    12   Cuyahoga County                      576,386               68.8
    13   Indianapolis City                    548,498               60.2
    14   Madison County                       512,120               45.1
    15   Clark County                         494,641               56.4
    16   Jefferson Parish                     488,914               39.8
    17   Hennepin County                      479,839               62.5
    18   Tarrant County                       445,583               41.4
    19   Hamilton County                      437,662               41.3
    20   Contra Costa County                  436,950               65.7
    21   New Hanover County                   433,079               47.1
    22   Colorado Springs City                417,011               38.1
    23   Alameda County                       394,373               78.5
    24   Nassau County                        379,512               52.9
    25   San Bernardino County                376,381               51.6
    26   Flint City                           334,470               63.6
    27   North Kansas City                    334,249               44.8
    28   Shelby County                        307,401               62.6
    29   Forrest County                       283,670               43.5
    30   Lubbock County                       282,330               28.8

Note: (1) Table reports 30 largest total hospital expenditures made by local governments in 2006. (2)
 Local governments that operate as specialized districts such as those for schools, fire services, waste
 treatment, etc., are excluded.

             Source: Census' Annual Survey of State & Local Government Finances, 2006




                                                 30
                                                Table 2: Summary Statistics of Local Government Sample

                                                       Non-expansion States                       Expansion States                Expansion-Non-expansion
                                                2006-2013   2014-2015                2006-2013       2014-2015                          2006-2013

                 Outcomes
                   Total Hospital Expenditure    82591.7    119120.7 -36529.0**       144095.4       300736.0   -156640.6**               -1631.3
                                                (204894.8) (256349.8)                (640428.0)     (1055937.1)
                   Hospital Construction         2816.9       2714.3      102.6        4154.1         9425.6         -5271.5*             -2255.4
                                                (10465.5)    (7269.1)                 (28385.7)      (43697.2)
                   Hospital Charges               63587.5    55453.7     8133.8       83931.6         122505.4       -38573.8+            7607.7
                                                (139044.1) (120956.8)                (283435.6)      (402203.9)
                   Property tax                   56361.3    78466.4    -22105.1*     208529.3       241454.0        -32924.7            72730.2
                                                (190480.1) (223278.9)                (1259112.3)    (1634578.1)
                 Covariates:
                   Poverty Rate                    0.16        0.15     0.013***        0.13           0.16          -0.025***            -0.014
                                                 (0.062)     (0.064)                   (0.049)        (0.054)
31




                   Median household income       42760.1     50301.6    -7541.6***     48754.1        48765.3          -11.1             6943.0+
                                                 (9974.6)   (12970.6)                 (12644.9)      (12570.7)
                   Total population              134569.5   166371.1     -31801.6     367854.3        310513.6        57340.7            219676.3
                                                (381509.6) (426192.2)                (1106857.4)     (933442.9)
                   Non-White                       18.4        17.3        1.15         11.1            12.1           -1.01               4.26
                                                  (18.5)      (19.2)                   (12.7)          (12.1)
                   Above 65                        14.8        17.1      -2.33***       15.8            17.1         -1.29***              -0.62
                                                  (3.78)      (3.62)                   (3.89)          (4.75)
                   Female                          50.3        50.6      -0.22***       50.2            49.6          0.61***             0.58*
                                                  (1.98)      (1.29)                   (1.67)          (2.23)
                 Sample Subset:
                   Obama majority (2012)           0.23        0.35      -0.13***       0.43            0.21          0.22***              0.16
                                                  (0.42)      (0.48)                   (0.50)          (0.41)
                   Rural                           0.28        0.27      0.0097         0.31            0.41         -0.098***             -0.12
                                                  (0.45)      (0.45)                   (0.46)          (0.49)
                   Obs.                           2588         553        3141          1790            380            2170                 38
                                      + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Rural refers to areas with Rural-Urban Continuum Codes between 7 and 9. (2) Non-white, Above 65, and Female are the share of the county
      population that fall within those respective categories. (3) Excluded states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 1/1/2014: AK, IN, PA, MT, and LA.
      (4) Includes only local governments that reported hospital expenditures. (5) Reports average values within each time period and standard deviations
      in the parentheses.
       Table 3: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Selected Outcomes Among Local Governments Reporting Hospital Expenditures

                                       Total Hospital Expenditure
                                   Full Sample    Obama          Romney     Urban   Urban/Obama     Urban/Romney   Rural   Rural/Obama     Rural/Romney
               Post × Qt4Unins2013   6972.5    -134123.6***      24558.7   15700.6   -123874.6***      48569.9   -15748.9*  -28695.5**       -19424.4+
                                    (15292.7)    (33612.4)     (21550.8) (20159.7)     (36883.8)      (30811.7)   (7465.7)    (8522.3)        (10811.1)
               ..× Expansion         10614.1    322692.7**     -48888.7+ 47719.0      374637.9**      -89089.8*   12435.3      2910.9          14883.7
                                    (48820.9)   (119852.7)      (24954.0) (83212.3)   (133497.6)      (37231.9)   (8520.4)   (12931.6)        (11666.5)
                                     Hospital Construction
               Post × Qt4Unins2013      746.8     -7297.9**     1081.9     1007.7       -7484.3*       1635.9      -452.2       369.8          -144.3
                                      (1112.2)     (2478.1)    (1585.7)   (1468.0)      (3020.0)      (2289.6)    (599.5)      (946.0)        (808.1)
               ..× Expansion          -5703.8*      -8438.8     -779.3    -8893.7+       -9016.8       -1601.8      664.0      -1972.8          406.3
                                      (2907.4)    (11040.6)    (1730.2)   (4829.2)     (11952.1)      (2539.8)    (714.4)     (1492.3)        (904.7)
                                       Hospital Charges
               Post × Qt4Unins2013      5215.6    -29898.8**   10726.1      7437.0    -45335.9***      16641.4     -3249.9   -11518.3***      -1875.5
                                       (5713.8)    (10114.0)   (7539.4)    (7707.6)    (11535.0)      (11050.6)   (2547.5)     (3207.3)      (3790.1)
               ..× Expansion            -6046.4     43622.5     -9573.1     4852.4      72940.0        -18593.7   5022.4+     16615.9**        3218.3
                                      (16299.1)    (45198.6)   (8822.7)   (27179.3)    (49197.7)      (13689.5)   (2905.3)     (5125.9)      (4076.2)
                                        Property tax
               Post × Qt4Unins2013      2255.9      -26582.1    1611.0      5165.8      -16567.1        2591.0      102.8       358.4           57.5
32




                                       (2823.7)    (19941.1)   (1883.8)    (4444.3)    (29583.9)       (2699.9)    (305.5)     (669.5)        (370.4)
               ..× Expansion           -14800.3      -1181.4    -6152.4    -27139.5     -23245.2      -15249.7*   5172.1+       -386.1       6123.6*
                                      (11762.0)    (39322.7)   (4253.6)   (19486.3)    (49191.3)       (6877.4)   (2716.0)     (888.3)       (3091.6)
                   Obs.                  5077         1353       3646        3548         1136           2332       1447         146           1265

                                     + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Post period: after 1/1/2014. (2) Qt4U nins2013 equals one if the local government is in a county ranked in the top quartile of low-income
      uninsured rate of 2013. The sample of the distribution of the uninsured rate is defined by the column title. (3) Excludes governments without
      hospital-related expenditures. (4) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK, IN, PA, MT and LA. (5) Covariates include
      poverty rate (all ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of population above age 65, and percent female. (6)
      All specifications include county fixed effects, year fixed effects, and state-specific time trends.
     Table 4: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on State and Federal Intergovernmental Transfers Among Local Governments Reporting
     Hospital Expenditures

                                           State Intergovernmental Transfers: Health/Hospitals
                                         Full Sample    Obama    Romney     Urban   Urban/Obama Urban/Romney Rural Rural/Obama Rural/Romney
                   Post × Qt4Unins2013    -2176.0+    -13244.5** -2995.4* -2798.4+    -10101.6+    -4205.8*    76.7     56.2        66.1
                                           (1236.6)     (5094.7) (1261.0) (1680.1)      (5212.8)   (1829.6)   (72.5)  (311.2)      (93.7)
                   ..× Expansion           10228.4      22642.8   2561.4   16926.3      20614.5     1895.3     -23.1  -1685.9       64.5
                                           (6372.1)    (17693.8) (1634.3) (10701.9)    (19420.5)   (2777.3)  (145.2) (1603.6)     (149.8)
                                            Federal Intergovernmental Transfers: Health/Hospitals
                   Post × Qt4Unins2013     -3340.3     226.8    -4972.6+     -4493.3      97.7    -7361.3+     20.5      13.8        38.2
                                          (2232.5)    (601.8)    (2776.9)   (3030.4)   (1232.6)    (4103.9)   (34.4)    (38.6)      (49.0)
                   ..× Expansion            3287.3    -2354.2     4581.0      4563.3    -2598.7    6871.9+    -129.4    175.3       -159.0
                                          (2291.1)   (1784.4)    (2785.7)   (3188.2)   (2567.2)    (4169.5)   (89.3)   (208.4)     (103.2)
                       Obs.                  5077      1353        3646        3548      1136        2332      1447      146         1265

                                     + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

      Note: (1) Post period: after 1/1/2014. (2) Excludes governments that appear for only one year over the course of the panel, that only appear during
       Census years, or that have no hospital-related expenditures. Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK, IN, PA, MT and LA.
33




       (3) Covariates include poverty rate (all ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of population above age 65,
       and percent female.
                                                Table 5: Summary Statistics of Acute-Care Hospitals

                                                            All States                       Non-expansion States                 Expansion States
                                                  Excluded     Included    Excl.-Incl. Excl:  Pre/Post Incl:  Pre/Post Excl:  Pre/Post Incl:  Pre/Post
     Occupancy Rate                                  0.48          0.47       0.0054        0.026***         0.030*         0.034***         0.035*
                                                    (0.21)        (0.24)
     Medicaid Outpatient Visits                     943.1        1095.2     -152.1***       199.6***         235.6**        179.2***        491.8***
                                                  (1781.3)      (1925.5)
     Medicaid Inpatient days                       4441.8        6520.0    -2078.2***       681.8***       1160.3***        763.9***       4011.3***
                                                  (9453.4)     (13519.9)
     Operating margin                               -0.049         -0.11       0.058*         0.0036          0.085           0.044          -0.045*
                                                    (1.15)        (1.40)
     Profit Margin                                   1.82          1.63       0.19***       -0.57***         -0.37**        -0.32***         -0.45**
                                                    (1.84)        (1.93)
     Bad debt ratio to receivables                   0.12         -0.028        0.14           0.62          0.47***         0.44***         0.36***
                                                    (38.2)        (0.45)
     Adult and pediatric beds                       147.1         173.6      -26.5***          3.29            3.71            4.51            9.07
                                                   (185.1)       (241.6)
     Receipt of state and local funding (1=Yes)     0.097          0.11      -0.016**      -0.085***        -0.11***       -0.094***       -0.074***
34




                                                    (0.30)        (0.32)
     HHI (Beds)                                  15611026.5   20301573.5 -4690547.0***       -6242.8       -123565.9        166794.1       1819838.9
                                                (18708947.7) (32357162.3)
     Obama-majority, 2012                            0.38           0.46    -0.080***         0.0063          0.014           0.0035          0.022
                                                    (0.48)        (0.50)
     Rural [RUCC code 7-9]                           0.18          0.26     -0.088***       -0.00016        0.000054         -0.0039         -0.0060
                                                    (0.38)        (0.44)
     State expanded Medicaid in 2014                 0.50          0.54     -0.043***
                                                    (0.50)        (0.50)
       Obs.                                         37274          3776        41050          18607           1721            18667           2055
                                   + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) The Office of Management and Budget 2013 Rural-Urban Continuum Codes (RUCC) classifies counties by degree of urbanization and adjacency
      to a metro area on a scale of 1 (urban) to 9 (rural). (2) Post period: after 1/1/2014. (2) "Receipt of state and local funding" refers to any Government
      grants, appropriations or transfers for support of hospital operations.

                                                           Source: Medicare Cost Reports, 2006-2015
                                             Table 6: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Hospital Outcomes

                                         Hospital Operating Margin
                                       Full Sample Obama     Romney    Urban      Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney Rural Rural/Obama Rural/Romney
                    Post × Unins2013       0.10      0.48      0.021     0.13          0.52         0.016     0.015    0.050       -0.013
                                         (0.076)   (0.40)    (0.017)   (0.10)        (0.44)        (0.022)   (0.019)  (0.043)     (0.029)
                    ..× Expansion         -0.11     -0.47     0.0044    -0.13         -0.51         0.039     -0.12                -0.085
                                         (0.080)   (0.40)    (0.065)   (0.11)        (0.44)        (0.067)   (0.088)              (0.093)
                                         Profit Margin
                    Post × Unins2013     0.13+    0.36*      0.10     0.21*          0.40*          0.18+          -0.090    -0.37*     -0.11+
                                        (0.068)   (0.15)   (0.071)   (0.090)         (0.16)        (0.099)        (0.063)    (0.16)     (0.059)
                    ..× Expansion        -0.039    -0.35     0.30      -0.15          -0.38          0.11           0.18                  0.21
                                         (0.22)   (0.34)    (0.28)    (0.24)         (0.35)         (0.37)         (0.14)                (0.15)
                                        Bad debt ratio to receivables
                    Post × Unins2013     0.014    0.041    0.52    -0.00055          0.024           0.52          0.056      -0.18      0.034
                                        (0.042)  (0.049)  (0.63)    (0.056)         (0.048)         (0.68)        (0.036)    (0.16)     (0.047)
                    ..× Expansion         0.59     0.97    -0.48      0.67            1.00           -0.51         0.070                 0.098
                                         (0.47)   (0.82)  (0.63)     (0.52)          (0.84)         (0.68)        (0.090)               (0.096)
                                        Medicaid Outpatient Visits
35




                    Post × Unins2013     -75.8       392.8    -137.5     -153.5      508.3           -163.0       114.1*      305.4        30.9
                                        (604.3)    (1913.4) (524.7)     (828.5)     (2022.6)        (706.6)        (55.1)    (224.2)     (44.4)
                    ..× Expansion        412.6      -832.1   1372.2*      538.6      -953.7        1827.3+         -127.6                 -60.9
                                        (943.5)    (2105.5) (695.9)    (1146.6)     (2210.7)        (940.8)       (128.0)               (125.0)
                                        Medicaid   Inpatient Stays
                    Post × Unins2013      32.4    -25.7    -23.8   16.1              -19.7           -44.1          11.4       71.1      5.69
                                         (99.5)  (333.2)  (85.8)  (137.1)           (351.0)         (117.8)        (19.1)     (56.0)    (16.2)
                    ..× Expansion         76.1     46.5   213.0    107.4             37.8            263.4          -49.3                -48.0
                                        (161.8)  (359.7) (136.0)  (195.3)           (376.9)         (188.0)        (49.7)               (49.1)
                                        Any Government grants, appropriations       or transfers for support of   hospital operations
                    Post × Unins2013     -0.011     0.024    0.066*    0.0081        0.033         0.078*          -0.074     0.19       0.087
                                        (0.022)    (0.053)   (0.026)   (0.026)      (0.057)        (0.031)        (0.047)    (0.13)     (0.054)
                    ..× Expansion         0.026    -0.0060    -0.094    0.016       -0.0024         -0.061          0.12                0.0017
                                        (0.041)    (0.066)   (0.077)   (0.044)      (0.069)        (0.099)        (0.097)                (0.10)
                        Obs.              9049      4276       4767     7363         4072            3291           1640      152         1465

     Note: (1) Post period begins on 1/1/2014. (2) Include hospital fixed effects, year fixed effects, and state-specific time trends. (3) The sample of hospitals
      are in any part of the included counties of the COGS sample. (4) The outcome in the bottom panel is from 2011 to 2015. (5) The specification for the
      sample of local governments in rural counties that voted for Obama is a difference-in-differences model due to small sample size.

                                                              Source: Medicare Cost Reports, 2006-2015
     Table 7: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Hospital Outcomes Among Hospitals that Reported State/Local Program Costs Pre-2014


                                         Hospital Operating margin
                                       Full Sample   Obama     Romney    Urban      Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney     Rural    Rural/Obama Rural/Romney
                    Post × Unins2013      0.030     0.11*       -0.031    0.028        0.13*          -0.041       0.055       -0.056       -0.011
                                         (0.019)   (0.047)     (0.029)   (0.021)      (0.050)        (0.034)      (0.041)     (0.068)      (0.061)
                    ..× Expansion         -0.075   -0.11+        -0.19    -0.028       -0.13*         0.070         -0.53                    -0.46
                                         (0.058)   (0.060)      (0.29)   (0.034)      (0.063)        (0.044)       (0.81)                   (0.87)
                                         Profit Margin
                    Post × Unins2013     0.33**       0.60**     0.25*    0.39**      0.71***         0.29+        -0.060       -0.74      -0.13+
                                         (0.099)      (0.21)    (0.13)    (0.12)       (0.21)         (0.16)      (0.098)      (0.47)      (0.076)
                    ..× Expansion          -0.26       -0.62    -0.065     -0.37        -0.73          -0.37        0.24                   0.47**
                                          (0.28)      (0.46)    (0.25)    (0.30)       (0.47)         (0.31)       (0.19)                   (0.17)
                                         Bad debt    ratio to receivables
                    Post × Unins2013      -0.25        0.11    0.53        -0.27       0.056           0.56       0.0039        0.57        -0.070
                                         (0.22)       (0.11)  (1.44)      (0.22)       (0.11)         (1.79)      (0.096)      (0.47)      (0.088)
                    ..× Expansion         0.22        -0.083   -0.55        0.24       -0.034          -0.58        0.13                     0.17
36




                                         (0.22)       (0.11)  (1.44)      (0.23)       (0.11)         (1.80)       (0.17)                   (0.18)
                                         Medicaid    Outpatient Visits
                    Post × Unins2013      46.0        -3567.6 1384.1+      -68.1       -3904.0       1721.4+     528.2***      719.7        190.2
                                        (1070.6)     (2214.1) (764.9)    (1275.8)     (2381.9)        (932.5)     (148.4)     (464.2)      (142.9)
                    ..× Expansion         21.6         1478.0  793.0       167.4       1802.1         1025.2       -323.3                    7.04
                                        (1567.0)     (2632.0) (1128.4)   (1762.7)     (2787.6)       (1476.3)     (369.4)                  (390.9)
                                         Medicaid    Inpatient Stays
                    Post × Unins2013      66.7     -373.5   99.8    -2.84              -415.3          119.9       136.5*       75.0          58.5
                                         (175.3)  (390.0) (156.4)  (207.3)            (421.0)         (189.9)       (59.8)     (71.4)       (54.4)
                    ..× Expansion         39.4     224.1   150.3    109.5              261.3           136.2        -103.7                   -23.8
                                         (258.2)  (441.6) (238.0)  (288.9)            (470.6)         (311.4)      (135.7)                 (140.6)
                                         Any Government grants, appropriations        or transfers for support of hospital operations
                    Post × Unins2013     0.077*        0.079   0.11**    0.12***       0.087          0.11*       -0.065         0          0.037
                                         (0.032)     (0.075)   (0.041)   (0.035)      (0.080)        (0.048)      (0.10)        (.)         (0.13)
                    ..× Expansion         -0.069      -0.057    -0.068    -0.092       -0.060         0.073        -0.20                   -0.31+
                                         (0.054)     (0.089)   (0.099)   (0.057)      (0.094)         (0.12)      (0.15)                    (0.17)
                        Obs.               5856        3382      2402      5380         3315           1989         389         36           327

      Note: (1) Post period begins on 1/1/2014. (2) Include hospital fixed effects, year fixed affects, and state-specific time trends. (3) The sample of hospitals
       are in any part of the included counties of the COGS sample. (4) The outcome in the bottom panel is from 2011 to 2015. (5) The specification for the
       sample of local governments in rural counties that voted for Obama is a difference-in-differences model due to small sample size.

                                                                 Source: Medicare Cost Reports, 2006-2015
8     Figures

Figure 1: Number of Local, General Purpose Governments with Hospital Expenditures
by Presence in Medicaid Expansion State




 Note: (1) 802 of counties and municipalities providing general government services that had hospital
  expenditures in the pre-period and were observed in the survey at least twice during the study period
  (2006-2015). Local governments that operate as specialized districts such as those for schools, fire
  services, waste treatment, etc., are excluded. (2) "Obama" and "Romney" designation is based on
  which candidate received the majority vote in the county.

                     Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2015.




                                                 37
    Figure 2: State and Local Government Expenditures on Hospitals, 1977-2015
                            (a) Hospital Expenditures (Millions, $)




                               (b) Percent of Total Expenditures




Note: Expenditures among all general purpose, local governments. Local governments that operate as
 specialized districts such as those for schools, fire services, waste treatment, etc., are excluded.

                    Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 1977-2015.




                                                38
       Figure 3: Trends in Local Government Hospital Employment, 2000-2016
                   (a) Hospital Employment/Total Non-Edu. Employment




                              (b) Hospital Employment by Sector




Note: Subfigure (a) presents national public hospital employment as a share of public employees, ex-
 cluding education (Range: 0,1). Subfigure (b) presents national public hospital employment (number
 of employees on left-hand side axis) and private sector (number of employees on right-hand side axis)
 hospital employment.

                         Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2000-2016



                                                39
Figure 4: Trends in Local Government Hospital Expenditures and Property Tax Rev-
enues, 2006-2016
           (a) Hospital Expenditures                              (b) Hospital Construction




              (c) Hospital Charges                                     (d) Property Tax




 Note: (1) Expenditures among 802 general purpose (county or municipality) local governments that
  surveyed in the pre-period and observed in the survey at least twice. Local governments that operate
  as specialized districts such as those for schools, fire services, waste treatment, etc., are excluded. (2)
  Hospital Expenditures is the total of local government expenditures, regardless of hospital ownership
  status. Hospital construction is a subset of hospital expenditures. Hospital Charges are for publicly-
  administered hospitals. Figures present levels of each local government outcome.

                            Source: Census of Local Governments, 2006-2015




                                                    40
                                                    Figure 5: Functions of Local Government Expenditures, 2012




                                                                                        0.0%    5.0%      10.0%        15.0%   20.0%   25.0%   30.0%   35.0%   40.0%


                                                                 General Administration                         9.9%


                                                                                Welfare         3%


                                                                                  Health          4.1%


                                                                               Hospitals                                                                   35.4%


                                           Transportation (Roads, Parking, Transit, etc.)                       10.4%
41




                                                Public Safety (Fire, Police, Corrections)                          12.2%


                                                                                Utilities             5.6%


                              Environment & Housing (Sewage, Stormwater Mgmt., etc.)                     7.1%


                                                                        Interest on Debt       2.0%


                                                                                   Other                        10.0%




     Note: The reported percentages are the mean percentage share of local governments expenditures as a share of their total expenditures. Restricted to
      the 802 general purpose (county or municipality) local governments that surveyed in the pre-period with hospital expenditures and observed in the
      survey at least twice. Local governments that operate as specialized districts such as those for schools, fire services, waste treatment, etc., are excluded.

                                                 Source: Census' Annual Survey of State & Local Government Finances, 2012
       Figure 6: Trends in Hospital Financial & Utilization Measures, 2006-2015
             (a) Operating Margin                                   (b) Profit Margin




            (c) Bad debt:Receivables                        (d) Medicaid Outpatient Visits




         (e) Medicaid Inpatient Stays                            (f) Any Gov. Funding




Note: (1) Trends controls for hospital and year, fixed effects. (2) Hospitals in/near 802 general purpose,
 local governments. Local governments that operate as specialized districts such as those for schools,
 fire services, waste treatment, etc., are excluded. (3) Government funding refers to the receipt of
 any grants, appropriations, or transfers for hospital operations made by state or local governments.
 Levels of each hospital financial measure are presented.
                                                  42
                               Source: Medicare Cost Report, 2006-2015
     Appendix. 1   Pre-Trends
43
                                                          Table A1: Pre-trends: Total Hospital Expenditures

                                                                    Full Sample    Obama       Romney        Urban  Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney     Rural  Rural/Romney
                       Unins2013× 2006                                -2163.0      38048.6      -7474.7      1135.6    38773.9        -7163.4  10053.6***   12143.7**
                                                                     (2788.8)     (30614.8)   (11662.9)   (18092.4)   (31062.7)     (18264.7)    (2482.5)    (4090.6)
                       ...× 2007                                      -2441.8      37742.6      -7947.4     -2553.2    41671.2        -9941.9  10377.2***   11889.0**
                                                                     (2612.8)     (27871.1)   (11473.6)   (17198.1)   (27966.9)     (17496.5)    (2296.7)    (3975.5)
                       ...× 2008                                      -2480.4      29199.0     -10328.3     -6457.9    28581.3       -10467.9   9367.4***   11693.6**
                                                                     (2526.8)     (24536.9)   (11643.2)   (17184.1)   (20311.6)     (17903.6)    (2518.0)    (4126.7)
                       ...× 2009                                      -2521.3      34197.7     -11380.3     -8754.0   31824.3+       -10683.9    7125.6*     8023.7+
                                                                     (2518.7)     (21653.1)   (11657.8)   (17015.6)   (17214.4)     (17433.7)    (2681.1)    (4652.4)
                       ...× 2010                                      -2185.4      32781.5      -8279.2     -6066.9   31075.0+        -7090.3    7837.1**    8526.0+
                                                                     (2457.1)     (21011.4)   (11774.0)   (16964.1)   (16863.0)     (17929.8)    (2344.4)    (4439.0)
                       ...× 2011                                      -3140.0      28418.7      -5426.5     -7674.1    26584.6        -2474.5   8689.9***     9507.5*
                                                                     (2675.9)     (21666.7)   (12221.5)   (17074.1)   (20184.7)     (18667.3)    (2084.4)    (3800.1)
                       ...× 2012                                      -3750.4      19756.4      -7305.3    -11285.8     6750.0        -7172.4   9863.7***   11007.9**
                                                                     (2664.2)     (22572.1)   (12248.6)   (17223.0)   (18065.0)     (18754.4)    (2080.9)    (3470.7)
                       Unins2013× Expansion × 2006                    3798.9       1291.7      26020.1     18206.5      1602.0        38216.3      817.4     -9993.3*
                                                                     (5040.6)     (85301.1)   (20370.6)   (60330.8)   (97608.5)     (37205.1)    (8069.6)    (4691.4)
                       ...× 2007                                     7805.6+       83876.4     28767.6      74199.9    99667.8        44700.8     -1593.4   -10700.9*
                                                                     (4570.8)     (80432.6)   (20490.4)   (47058.8)   (87653.6)     (37327.0)    (7837.6)    (4209.8)
                       ...× 2008                                       7327.6      79205.8     28638.2     73041.6     95439.1       37434.9      -1088.3   -10162.0*
                                                                     (4855.5)     (82104.9)   (20508.6)   (52219.2)   (91447.8)     (37026.3)    (7620.1)    (4522.2)
                       ...× 2009                                       4904.1      39908.3     27844.5     51786.3     53137.8       35713.9        497.1     -7122.2
44




                                                                     (4204.6)     (73690.2)   (20125.8)   (45041.9)   (83042.7)     (36098.2)    (8042.7)    (5361.0)
                       ...× 2010                                       4222.8      37495.0     22268.6     45196.8     47431.5       28859.8       -974.7     -9332.5
                                                                     (4193.4)     (73818.2)   (20451.4)   (44985.9)   (80115.7)     (36826.2)    (8127.6)    (5696.2)
                       ...× 2011                                       4039.6      27678.3     20378.3     32255.4     35397.4       24043.4      -1840.9   -10142.2*
                                                                     (4238.1)     (75354.2)   (20805.6)   (45768.0)   (82840.2)     (37511.0)    (7902.9)    (4919.7)
                       ...× 2012                                       3671.8      17345.0     20597.9     22651.7     29481.5       25057.1      -2803.5   -11795.3*
                                                                     (4336.5)     (74257.7)   (20927.8)   (47993.2)   (84135.8)     (37470.5)    (7805.4)    (4578.5)
                            Obs.                                        4132        1092         2974         2921       913           1942         1141        989
                            2006-2010 Mean                           107651.9     224902.9     59617.9    144471.5    265211.5       81424.6      18366.9     18050.3
                            2006-2010 SD                             442373.3     799075.1    144103.8    521452.3    868199.5       173269.5     27179.1     27507.5
                       P-value: joint significance of pretrend test     0.23       1.9e-09    0.000059     0.00024     0.0020       0.0000044  0.00000016     4.5e-12

                                      + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Excludes governments not reporting hospital-related expenditures. (2) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK,
      IN, PA, MT and LA. (3) Covariates include poverty rate (all ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of
      population above age 65, and percent female.

                                                           Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2013
                                                           Table A2: Pre-trends: Hospital Construction

                                                            Full Sample    Obama      Romney       Urban  Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney   Rural  Rural/Romney
               Unins2013× 2006                                  -58.4      7391.1+      -1073.1     281.2     5369.8         -1284.0    300.8      466.7
                                                              (216.1)      (3900.2)   (1193.1) (1490.1)      (3621.6)       (1433.8)  (359.0)     (394.7)
               ...× 2007                                       -209.0       4601.0    -1798.8+ -1518.0         2579.0      -2562.8*    583.8       782.8
                                                              (167.7)      (3008.2)     (939.4)  (1187.2)    (2689.3)      (1079.1)   (497.9)     (547.0)
               ...× 2008                                       -210.0       4362.9    -1877.9* -1747.3+        1686.1      -1997.6+     -29.4       42.3
                                                              (143.7)      (3080.7)     (820.3)   (981.3)    (2413.2)      (1016.7)   (468.6)     (532.8)
               ...× 2009                                      -382.3*       1810.3    -2384.0* -2461.7*        -807.4      -2187.9+   -1348.7     -1458.7
                                                              (175.1)      (2820.2)     (907.9)  (1103.5)    (2784.1)      (1236.7)   (810.6)    (1059.9)
               ...× 2010                                       -153.3       3067.6      -1405.0   -1143.4       711.8         -814.9   -852.5      -781.4
                                                              (189.4)      (2741.3)     (982.6)  (1025.6)    (1909.6)      (1194.1)   (725.7)     (806.1)
               ...× 2011                                       -117.3       1627.8       -981.2 -1370.6+        0.18          -469.9   -262.9       -58.3
                                                              (174.4)      (2593.1)     (799.6)   (795.0)    (1899.2)        (799.6)  (398.2)     (503.8)
               ...× 2012                                       -106.1        810.2      -1033.8   -1427.8     -1245.2         -803.3    324.4      510.0
                                                              (186.1)      (2744.6)     (906.3)   (920.4)    (1837.5)        (960.0)  (676.7)     (749.9)
               Unins2013× Expansion × 2006                     707.2        7179.3       -562.8    2894.2    10085.0         -1463.4   -620.5       -39.3
                                                              (685.0)     (12382.8)    (2545.7) (9600.4)    (13268.8)       (4421.2)  (693.0)     (924.5)
               ...× 2007                                     1047.8+       14760.2       1519.6   8898.8     19492.1         1850.9    -413.5       -30.7
                                                              (597.5)     (12114.9)    (1210.0) (8289.2)    (13143.1)       (1935.1)  (809.1)     (925.5)
45




               ...× 2008                                     1250.7+       16600.5       1560.9  12404.7     22462.7          523.7     -65.3       723.0
                                                              (635.9)     (12860.9)     (986.5) (8205.4)    (14439.6)      (1495.5)   (902.6)     (875.5)
               ...× 2009                                     1133.0+       15501.1    2064.2+    10438.6     21134.4           898.2   1394.3    2206.6+
                                                              (602.9)     (12962.5)    (1114.4) (7895.4)    (14682.5)       (1682.8)  (893.0)    (1202.6)
               ...× 2010                                     1353.6+       20091.6       1744.2 14191.3+    26163.1+           176.1  2500.1*      2138.3
                                                              (674.8)     (13745.0)    (1249.7) (8337.4)    (14917.3)       (1412.3) (1080.3)    (1324.3)
               ...× 2011                                       981.5       17092.4       943.4   10123.1     21616.6         -1340.0 2031.2**    1876.1*
                                                              (644.5)     (13543.6)    (1195.3) (8548.1)    (14763.4)       (1492.4)  (643.4)     (866.6)
               ...× 2012                                       1033.4      19715.2        469.4  11898.1     24482.7         -1313.3    175.2       457.4
                                                              (621.9)     (13991.6)    (1209.2) (8160.9)    (15592.9)       (1642.6)  (932.8)    (1182.7)
                    Obs.                                        4132         1092         2974      2921         913           1942     1141         989
                    2006-2010 Mean                             3317.4       6810.7       2057.6   4387.7       7996.6         2764.5    757.7      734.7
                    2006-2010 SD                              19904.7      36558.9       7271.6  23530.6     39857.9          8714.4   2711.7      2643.5
               P-value: joint significance of pretrend test     0.12        3.7e-11     0.0023    0.0013      1.3e-22      0.000018   2.7e-10     1.5e-09

                                      + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Excludes governments not reporting hospital-related expenditures. (2) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK,
      IN, PA, MT and LA. (3) Covariates include poverty rate (all ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of
      population above age 65, and percent female.

                                                        Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2013
                                                               Table A3: Pre-trends: Hospital Charges

                                                             Full Sample     Obama Romney       Urban     Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney     Rural  Rural/Romney
                Unins2013× 2006                                 -280.3      -15360.0 -6632.7   -3859.6       -15003.2       -9674.9       850.1      1385.2
                                                               (886.0)     (14967.0) (6874.6) (8365.6)      (19385.2)     (10332.6)     (780.1)     (958.1)
                ...× 2007                                       -101.9       -8846.4  -5865.9  -3802.5        -6867.9      -10004.4    1254.0*      1354.1
                                                               (895.3)     (10255.6) (6886.8) (8286.3)      (14053.8)     (10174.5)     (598.2)     (896.4)
                ...× 2008                                       156.4        -9354.3  -4891.7  -1192.0        -6627.0       -7734.5      596.9     1548.7+
                                                               (886.8)      (9882.6) (7067.5) (8565.8)      (12010.0)     (10714.6)     (651.2)     (760.2)
                ...× 2009                                       332.6          960.3  -5615.0  -2667.9         3174.3       -7887.0      -397.8      -228.9
                                                              (1169.2)      (4622.2) (7367.0) (9198.7)       (6448.9)     (10344.9)     (586.2)     (835.9)
                ...× 2010                                       -706.3        3869.1 -11208.2 -11247.2         7918.9      -15863.8       -28.2      -746.2
                                                              (1108.1)      (5834.1) (8548.5) (10607.5)     (10632.4)     (12240.2)     (486.9)     (826.8)
                ...× 2011                                       -271.8        3880.5  -8382.6  -8852.5        10574.1      -11828.2        46.6      -688.3
                                                              (1119.1)      (6807.5) (8783.6) (10743.7)     (12427.6)     (12756.7)     (468.3)     (644.2)
                ...× 2012                                       -303.7        2141.0  -7427.0  -7591.8         1411.7      -11684.1      531.9        296.4
                                                               (988.2)      (5387.6) (7656.1) (9930.0)       (9511.4)     (11644.7)     (727.5)     (761.3)
                Unins2013× Expansion × 2006                   2877.6+      51159.4+ 10455.6 33413.1+          56411.7       14605.9     3583.3       -221.3
                                                              (1681.4)     (27332.8) (7915.3) (17891.6)     (33413.3)     (12711.3)    (2282.4)    (2149.4)
                ...× 2007                                       2317.4     45502.0* 10029.2 27562.5+        50614.3+        16226.5       793.0      -894.8
                                                              (1403.7)     (21990.8) (7338.9) (13782.4)     (26296.2)     (11826.9)    (1810.8)    (1486.8)
46




                ...× 2008                                       2083.1     38747.5+ 5836.1     23410.2      42405.8+        7036.2        763.6     -1073.4
                                                              (1526.7)     (21485.6) (7147.3) (15099.7)     (24375.9)     (11360.1)    (1753.5)    (1908.7)
                ...× 2009                                       626.1        17789.3   4829.1  16663.2        20164.6        4373.0     2252.0       1711.9
                                                              (1579.6)     (16462.0) (7534.3) (14860.9)     (18899.1)     (11202.7)    (1977.7)    (1663.6)
                ...× 2010                                       1756.3       17166.0  10951.0 24111.9+        16853.4       14744.0      598.9        538.1
                                                              (1502.6)     (17546.4) (8649.8) (13486.3)     (20905.7)     (13006.4)    (2032.0)    (1884.9)
                ...× 2011                                       653.7        10380.1   6559.1  14840.1         6368.4        7519.1        77.2       -99.2
                                                              (1562.3)     (17519.1) (8825.6) (14103.3)     (22021.6)     (13017.5)    (1943.4)    (1769.7)
                ...× 2012                                       1109.7        8024.1   7690.3  16794.7         9823.5       10009.1     1083.4        -34.4
                                                              (1475.8)     (17048.6) (7669.6) (13678.1)     (21423.4)     (11808.9)    (1642.9)    (1471.3)
                     Obs.                                        4132          1092     2974    2921            913           1942        1141         989
                     2006-2010 Mean                            72390.9     128608.1 48247.0    95710.3      150753.6        65400.4    15691.6     15485.7
                     2006-2010 SD                             211837.2     356545.9 97623.2 247847.6        386014.1       116103.2    21661.6     22101.7
                P-value: joint significance of pretrend test     0.35        3.0e-11  0.0022 0.0000067        0.0013       0.000031     7.7e-10     1.6e-16

                                      + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Excludes governments not reporting hospital-related expenditures. (2) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK,
      IN, PA, MT and LA. (3) Covariates include poverty rate (all ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of
      population above age 65, and percent female.

                                                         Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2013
                                                                Table A4: Pre-trends: Property Taxes

                                                             Full Sample    Obama      Romney       Urban   Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney    Rural Rural/Romney
                Unins2013× 2006                                1564.9       96340.7     -1054.8     9162.5    124793.5        -1659.2     -171.3      -34.0
                                                              (1222.4)     (62116.2)    (924.8)    (6622.9)   (75470.6)      (1352.4)    (334.7)    (348.9)
                ...× 2007                                      1226.6       40483.8      -826.1     3218.8    55580.3+        -1395.3      -77.4       78.7
                                                               (972.9)     (26561.3)    (855.2)    (4004.4)   (32787.4)      (1291.4)    (270.2)    (278.8)
                ...× 2008                                      1456.5       35817.2      -688.7     2080.0     44028.4        -1154.4      -26.5     188.4
                                                              (1068.0)     (23732.8)    (802.1)    (4034.3)   (26986.9)      (1143.5)    (303.4)    (362.3)
                ...× 2009                                      1499.2       26440.4        95.5     2412.0     38705.2          193.3     -117.9       30.3
                                                              (1054.1)     (24194.0)    (605.5)    (3425.7)   (35329.2)       (913.1)    (274.8)    (298.0)
                ...× 2010                                      1612.6       17160.8      791.5      3391.4     13058.3         1158.8      -39.5      70.0
                                                              (1025.8)     (23130.0)    (625.6)    (3329.6)   (27696.5)       (860.3)    (247.3)    (255.1)
                ...× 2011                                       728.2       12074.3       524.0      250.1      5242.9          899.9     -118.8      -54.6
                                                              (1058.9)     (21380.2)    (705.5)    (3466.8)   (27945.8)      (1023.8)    (257.6)    (237.3)
                ...× 2012                                       876.2       13711.7       258.5     2480.2     17167.2          766.5      -71.7      -29.4
                                                               (918.8)     (15774.1)    (656.4)    (3413.3)   (22223.5)       (952.0)    (252.4)    (258.2)
                Unins2013× Expansion × 2006                    5168.1       40178.6     3437.8     83737.1     24218.2         8827.7       43.5    -1074.2
                                                              (5366.0)     (98887.6)   (2469.6)   (71499.5)  (114458.7)      (5474.7)    (891.3)   (1425.7)
                ...× 2007                                      5532.2      104084.2     6073.4     87223.7    106864.5       14926.7*     -279.7    -1218.4
                                                              (4395.2)     (84313.7)   (3931.0)   (54998.6)   (94820.6)      (7104.9)    (796.6)   (1125.0)
47




                ...× 2008                                      7248.1      131784.8     4593.0    115700.2    146746.8       12562.5      -430.2    -1697.6
                                                              (5652.8)     (98534.9)   (3692.5)   (74497.9)  (113969.2)      (8113.0)    (787.2)   (1318.6)
                ...× 2009                                      4781.0       93452.9      3712.4    76568.5     98890.1        11246.8     -234.4    -1185.8
                                                              (4310.1)     (77865.5)   (3753.4)   (52700.9)   (89966.9)      (8439.1)    (737.6)   (1095.0)
                ...× 2010                                      1372.8       37466.8      1611.9    33978.2     48983.0        5372.1       -62.8     -644.4
                                                              (4519.6)     (89310.8)   (2294.8)   (55704.2)   (98613.9)      (5119.7)    (528.9)    (739.1)
                ...× 2011                                      1332.4       30391.3      422.2     25510.5     44097.6          813.5      373.0      384.2
                                                              (4792.2)     (92556.6)   (3402.0)   (58612.4)  (100612.1)      (8722.0)    (797.1)   (1324.0)
                ...× 2012                                      1314.6       14527.3     -1926.3    20621.3     16588.4        -3475.1      197.1      29.7
                                                              (4778.5)     (98858.6)   (5312.6)   (59925.4)  (110105.6)     (11869.7)    (514.9)    (920.0)
                     Obs.                                        4132        1092         2974       2921        913            1942       1141        989
                     2006-2010 Mean                           114003.0     330098.9     29713.2   159307.0     391257.5      43102.9     4495.5      4339.7
                     2006-2010 SD                             822747.5     1561739.5   117494.2   975003.5    1701261.1      143577.6    4614.6      4827.8
                P-value: joint significance of pretrend test     0.28       9.0e-09     0.0058       0.11      0.00098      0.0000012    2.2e-20  0.000025

                                      + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Excludes governments not reporting hospital-related expenditures. (2) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK,
      IN, PA, MT and LA. (3) Covariates include poverty rate (all ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of
      population above age 65, and percent female.

                                                        Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2013
                                                   Table A5: Pre-trends: State Inter-Governmental Transfers

                                                           Full Sample      Obama    Romney       Urban    Urban/Obama    Urban/Romney Rural Rural/Romney
              Unins2013× 2006                                 645.0       10512.1+    2561.5+   5811.1**      12899.7*        4129.6*     77.2     -4.17
                                                             (420.9)       (5508.7)  (1343.4)   (1965.5)       (5667.7)       (1796.2)  (92.2)    (67.3)
              ...× 2007                                       479.0          8107.5     1899.8  4735.9**      10011.6+        3282.5+     43.6     -40.9
                                                             (322.6)       (4882.8)  (1166.2)   (1742.7)       (5407.0)       (1725.7)  (58.8)    (55.3)
              ...× 2008                                       492.2        7519.7+      1647.8  4211.2*        8141.1*          2790.9    36.8     4.55
                                                             (305.9)       (3926.4)  (1189.9)   (1756.7)       (3982.1)       (1817.1)  (50.7)    (43.4)
              ...× 2009                                       445.6         7428.9*     1575.1  4018.6*        7963.5+          2794.3    65.9     23.4
                                                             (295.6)       (3537.1)  (1269.6)   (1736.9)       (3993.8)       (1873.8)  (51.2)    (35.4)
              ...× 2010                                       342.8        5398.3+      1471.7  3236.7+        5801.3+          2444.5    95.3     22.0
                                                             (293.7)       (3163.8)  (1291.7)   (1758.3)       (3037.3)       (1827.2)  (70.2)    (42.1)
              ...× 2011                                       210.1          4865.0     1365.6    2644.1        4688.4          2173.1   -18.8      15.8
                                                             (311.9)       (2987.2)  (1326.5)   (1764.1)       (2966.0)       (1851.3)  (62.2)    (42.8)
              ...× 2012                                       186.3          1916.0     1119.1    2368.3          796.0         1781.8    7.00      12.3
                                                             (312.8)       (3118.0)  (1334.2)   (1793.1)       (3437.6)       (1859.2)  (58.9)    (38.3)
              Unins2013× Expansion × 2006                    -1273.3       -14881.5  -5303.7+  -16392.9*     -19566.7+         -7928.1   14.7     -259.4
                                                             (860.7)      (10029.6)   (2949.6)  (7883.0)      (11544.3)       (6020.6) (319.6)  (163.3)
              ...× 2007                                       -598.7        -3728.3  -4418.8+  -7531.2+         -5283.7        -7112.3   475.9    114.5
                                                             (475.9)       (4586.7)  (2566.9)   (3814.9)       (5611.4)       (5452.6) (525.1)   (180.9)
48




              ...× 2008                                       -782.2        -6479.1  -4516.3+  -8511.6+         -7634.0        -8220.5   415.0    164.5
                                                             (530.1)       (4321.2)  (2430.1)   (4790.9)       (5132.9)       (4987.9) (518.8)   (281.0)
              ...× 2009                                       -846.5       -9975.4*  -4478.6+  -10972.5*     -10929.3+       -7899.7+   -195.2  -173.5+
                                                             (514.0)       (4619.2)  (2221.0)   (4813.2)       (5395.0)       (4506.7) (252.7)    (94.8)
              ...× 2010                                       -154.8        1072.9   -5562.8*    -1430.2         1247.1     -11083.7+   -235.7     -40.3
                                                             (515.4)       (5217.7)  (2616.1)   (5308.9)       (6700.3)       (5544.4) (307.1)    (65.2)
              ...× 2011                                        -7.49         -773.1    -3025.6    -426.3         -158.4        -5486.6   -60.3    110.1
                                                             (585.0)       (4730.1)  (1918.1)   (6849.8)       (6191.2)       (4056.0) (328.9)   (100.0)
              ...× 2012                                       -255.0         -320.2    -3062.9   -2313.6        1110.0         -5593.8  -270.2    -166.5
                                                             (456.5)       (4321.6)  (2083.0)   (4808.9)       (5061.6)       (4121.7) (322.3)   (236.9)
                   Obs.                                        4132           1092       2974      2921            913           1942    1141       989
                   2006-2010 Mean                            15969.3        47805.6     4366.7   22384.6       56696.1          6461.1   486.7     414.4
                   2006-2010 SD                              94406.8       171198.9   33268.9   111655.5      185859.6        40998.4  1958.2    1851.1
              P-value: joint significance of pretrend test     0.67      0.000000037 1.6e-25 0.000000090        7.5e-14        1.2e-48 2.8e-11   0.0027

                                      + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Excludes governments not reporting hospital-related expenditures. (2) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK,
      IN, PA, MT and LA. (3) Covariates include poverty rate (all ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of
      population above age 65, and percent female.

                                                         Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2013
                                                Table A6: Pre-trends: Federal Inter-Governmental Transfers

                                                            Full Sample   Obama Romney Urban Urban/Obama      Urban/Romney    Rural    Rural/Romney
               Unins2013× 2006                                   58.4      -397.7  661.5+   134.7    -183.0       841.7+       -47.8        6.29
                                                               (59.4)     (555.1) (344.8)  (480.6)  (855.1)       (427.3)     (55.1)       (68.7)
               ...× 2007                                         77.1      -117.5   495.2    218.2    -79.7       715.7+       -41.3        -34.0
                                                               (63.2)     (453.2) (332.1)  (477.4)  (632.3)       (392.9)     (45.5)       (60.4)
               ...× 2008                                         86.1       -78.5    438.1   219.9    548.3         563.8      -52.9        -50.3
                                                               (72.1)     (531.7) (338.2)  (464.5)  (475.7)       (439.1)     (48.6)       (64.7)
               ...× 2009                                         94.3      -195.0   529.0    565.1    24.9        712.5+       -42.5        -39.7
                                                               (65.3)     (447.2) (325.3)  (466.7)  (476.0)       (385.1)     (43.4)       (58.3)
               ...× 2010                                         17.6       39.1   563.3+   305.5    619.8        756.7+       -29.5        -16.0
                                                               (74.1)     (554.8) (332.2)  (441.3)  (595.9)       (385.2)     (47.0)       (60.2)
               ...× 2011                                         21.8      -490.6   660.0*  -107.8    -38.7        883.2*      -31.7        -7.41
                                                               (59.9)     (520.0) (303.0)  (462.9)  (448.0)       (350.9)     (48.2)       (69.2)
               ...× 2012                                         59.2      -478.0   463.1    351.4    112.3       715.2+       -61.7        -38.0
                                                               (53.3)     (622.1) (326.6)  (450.7)  (774.3)       (373.3)     (48.1)       (66.6)
               Unins2013× Expansion × 2006                     -139.4       139.0   -963.9 -1251.1     88.1        -678.7     106.0          4.58
                                                               (94.8)     (699.5) (950.1) (1197.2) (1066.8)      (1593.4)     (80.6)       (73.5)
               ...× 2007                                       -122.4       300.5  -1011.6  -856.4    503.2       -1254.0      57.7          43.2
                                                               (82.1)     (572.4) (751.4)  (879.2)  (853.5)      (1360.8)     (59.1)       (68.1)
49




               ...× 2008                                       -109.3       122.4    -0.96  -445.1   -325.2         506.4     144.1        131.8
                                                               (91.0)     (781.2) (628.3)  (841.6)  (854.2)      (1112.9)     (87.7)       (99.7)
               ...× 2009                                       -111.7       200.5   -221.8  -775.2    121.0         -46.3     107.1          80.8
                                                               (80.6)     (603.7) (588.8)  (785.5)  (750.3)       (980.0)     (72.5)       (76.0)
               ...× 2010                                        -23.8      116.1    -273.6  -399.7   -326.0         -95.5       69.0         54.9
                                                               (93.3)     (859.3) (591.2)  (865.0) (1108.1)      (1078.8)     (84.6)       (87.4)
               ...× 2011                                        -18.4      675.7    -567.0   75.9    334.9         -639.1       27.9        -5.62
                                                               (86.4)     (753.3) (611.7)  (892.5)  (902.9)      (1236.2)     (61.1)       (78.9)
               ...× 2012                                        -69.8      540.0    -272.8  -535.4     45.8         -95.0       20.3         1.35
                                                               (80.9)     (965.3) (557.4)  (894.9) (1286.5)      (1040.6)     (69.2)       (79.3)
                    Obs.                                        4132        1092     2974    2921      913          1942       1141          989
                    2006-2010 Mean                             1312.1      2682.4    761.8  1837.1  3160.3         1140.0      47.5          51.8
                    2006-2010 SD                              11389.5     19316.8 6414.7   13510.9 21086.2         7909.9     288.8        305.9
               P-value: joint significance of pretrend test     0.65      0.00026 0.000063  0.052   1.0e-19      0.000015  0.000000034  0.00000065

                                      + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Excludes governments not reporting hospital-related expenditures. (2) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK,
      IN, PA, MT and LA. (3) Covariates include poverty rate (all ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of
      population above age 65, and percent female.

                                                        Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2013
                                               Table A7: Pre-Expansion County-level Demographics

                                                                                              Pre-expansion:2006-2013
                                                                                      Non-expansion   Expansion         Diff.
                                                Poverty Rate                               0.16           0.13      0.017***
                                                                                         (0.062)        (0.049)
                                                Median household income                 42760.1         48754.1    -5187.7***
                                                                                        (9974.6)       (12644.9)
                                                Total population                        134569.5        367854.3  -296049.4***
                                                                                       (381509.6)     (1106857.4)
                                                Percent of County Non-White [0-100]       18.4           11.1       3.82***
                                                                                         (18.5)         (12.7)
                                                Percent of County Above 65 [0-100]        14.8           15.8       -0.10***
                                                                                         (3.78)         (3.89)
                                                Percent of County Female [0-100]          50.3           50.2       0.14***
                                                                                         (1.98)         (1.67)
                                                Obama majority (2012)                     0.19           0.41       -0.18***
                                                                                         (0.39)         (0.49)
                                                Rural [RUCC code 7-9]                     0.27           0.31       0.0058+
                                                                                         (0.45)         (0.46)
50




                                                  Obs.                                    2464           1714           69375

                                  + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Excludes governments not reporting hospital-related expenditures. (2) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK, IN,
      PA, MT and LA.

                                                 Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2013
     Appendix. 2                 Robustness Checks for Local Government Results

     Table A8: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Selected Outcomes Among Local Governments Reporting Hospital Expenditures,
     Excluding Demographic Controls

                                        Total Hospital Expenditure
                                     Full Sample   Obama     Romney     Urban    Urban/Obama      Urban/Romney   Rural   Rural/Obama   Rural/Romney
                 Post × Qt4Unins2013  36551.9*      -630.6   35727.3  54161.2**    38928.8*          61339.5*  -13770.8+  -32143.7*      -17856.7+
                                      (14687.7)   (17120.5) (21918.2) (18857.0)    (19747.0)        (31216.3)   (7295.6)   (16063.4)      (10782.9)
                 ..× Expansion         35693.1    310449.1   -42694.9  100986.6    369967.5         -68510.4+   11221.8      2254.2        15272.6
                                      (68654.9)  (205235.1) (26753.0) (118719.4)  (230766.5)        (40510.3)   (8638.5)   (20960.7)      (11965.9)
                                       Hospital Construction
                 Post × Qt4Unins2013    2439.7*     -2262.8*    1696.7     3279.1*       -164.1      2434.0      -395.5     -1622.0         8.17
                                        (1124.3)     (878.1)   (1650.2)    (1472.7)     (810.8)     (2382.5)    (585.2)    (1159.1)       (777.5)
                 ..× Expansion         -5294.7+     -14250.4    -434.9    -7987.3+     -17164.3      -405.4       586.8     1027.4         275.6
                                        (2757.2)   (10916.2)   (1842.8)    (4605.1)   (11834.3)     (2765.8)    (688.2)    (1460.7)       (875.4)
                                         Hospital Charges
51




                 Post × Qt4Unins2013   11312.6*      1428.1    11775.2    15929.0*       -53.6       17624.7     -2842.5   -13153.0*      -1375.5
                                        (5507.9)    (4381.6)   (7535.9)    (7329.1)    (5227.5)     (11006.0)   (2552.3)    (5795.0)     (3786.3)
                 ..× Expansion           -4785.5    31852.7     -9550.7     6657.3     52772.5       -17844.8     4638.9    16008.3*       3138.5
                                       (19726.6)   (62999.4)   (8889.9)   (33798.8)   (70975.2)     (13781.6)   (2930.4)    (6176.1)     (4131.8)
                                         Property tax
                 Post × Qt4Unins2013   5452.4**    10140.2+    3850.1+    7194.9**      7945.0       5518.6+      239.3      920.0         165.8
                                        (1912.3)    (5526.1)   (1981.1)    (2529.0)    (7135.9)      (2844.2)    (282.0)    (698.8)       (332.0)
                 ..× Expansion           -5591.1    -26872.0    -4724.6     -6622.0    -21755.6     -11085.3*   4967.1+     -1325.4      5876.5+
                                       (13950.8)   (42834.5)   (3373.7)   (24406.9)   (48745.9)      (5119.6)   (2754.8)    (976.2)      (3141.0)
                     Obs.                 5077        1353       3646        3548        1136          2332       1447        146          1265

      Note: (1) Post period: after 1/1/2014. (2) Qt4U nins2013 equals one if the local government is in a county ranked in the top quartile of low-income
       uninsured rate of 2013. The sample of the distribution of the uninsured rate is defined by the column title. (3) Excludes governments without hospital-
       related expenditures. (4) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK, IN, PA, MT and LA. (5) All specifications include county
       fixed effects, year fixed effects, and state-specific time trends.

                                                      Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2015
     Table A9: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Selected Outcomes Among Local Governments Reporting Hospital Expenditures,
     Excluding 2013

                                        Total Hospital Expenditure
                                     Full Sample    Obama          Romney     Urban   Urban/Obama      Urban/Romney   Rural   Rural/Obama     Rural/Romney
                 Post × Qt4Unins2013   9508.7    -154068.4***      28825.1   20032.9   -141992.3***      56859.2+   -18193.6* -29897.3***       -22815.8*
                                      (16674.7)    (37124.3)      (23326.5) (22055.4)    (41335.6)       (33519.9)   (7904.9)    (8709.6)       (11381.1)
                 ..× Expansion         13684.8    353898.8**      -55933.5* 58157.8     407700.6**       -99435.9*   14404.1      4127.9         17547.5
                                      (52387.1)   (121578.1)      (27094.3) (89275.7)   (132207.2)       (40749.2)   (8815.2)   (14050.8)       (11997.8)
                                       Hospital Construction
                 Post × Qt4Unins2013     986.3     -7871.8**       1454.6     1311.1       -7998.1*       2220.3      -456.3       674.0          -203.1
                                       (1137.3)     (2836.4)      (1572.1)   (1509.6)      (3424.8)      (2261.3)    (606.7)      (953.9)        (826.9)
                 ..× Expansion         -5758.0*     -10271.4       -764.2    -8823.9+      -11157.9       -1271.2      713.1      -2338.2          519.9
                                       (2844.4)    (10970.3)      (1769.5)   (4681.7)     (11358.1)      (2608.1)    (728.0)     (1553.4)        (931.7)
                                        Hospital Charges
                 Post × Qt4Unins2013     5742.2    -36269.3**     12532.9      8283.9    -54019.4***     19584.8+     -3755.9   -11391.5***      -2434.7
                                        (6143.4)    (11841.2)     (8003.3)    (8308.8)    (13470.7)      (11750.8)   (2601.3)     (3243.3)      (3845.3)
52




                 ..× Expansion           -8663.5     46652.5      -12379.0     3086.9      78023.8        -22117.0   5736.5+     16285.1**        3878.7
                                       (16587.3)    (44312.3)     (9363.5)   (27638.9)    (48239.5)      (14601.1)   (2923.4)     (5199.3)      (4094.3)
                                         Property tax
                 Post × Qt4Unins2013     1885.2        -32972.0    1305.2      4882.1      -20184.9        2171.2       84.1       435.3          -52.2
                                        (3138.8)      (22928.3)   (1934.7)    (4925.9)    (32690.2)       (2771.3)    (327.5)     (704.0)        (395.9)
                 ..× Expansion          -16639.4        -3663.1    -7109.2    -31412.5     -32548.2      -17858.4*   5388.9*       -464.3       6506.2*
                                       (12618.2)      (43481.7)   (4792.0)   (21032.8)    (54189.6)       (7990.9)   (2662.9)     (920.7)       (3041.9)
                     Obs.                 4651           1229       3354        3256         1031           2154       1320         133           1154

      Note: (1) Post period: after 1/1/2014. (2) Qt4U nins2013 equals one if the local government is in a county ranked in the top quartile of low-income
       uninsured rate of 2013. The sample of the distribution of the uninsured rate is defined by the column title. (3) Excludes governments without
       hospital-related expenditures. (4) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK, IN, PA, MT and LA. (5) Covariates include
       poverty rate (all ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of population above age 65, and percent female. (6)
       All specifications include county fixed effects, year fixed effects, and state-specific time trends. (7) Observations from 2013 are excluded to avoid bias
       from anticipatory effects among local governments.

                                                   Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2012, 2014-2015
     Table A10: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Selected Outcomes Among Local Governments Reporting Hospital Expenditures using
     Continuous measure of insurance

                                                  Total Hospital Expenditure
                                               Full Sample Obama Romney              Urban      Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney Rural Rural/Obama     Rural/Romney
                              Post × Unins2013    -211.4   -6022.0+   723.1          416.6        -6079.0+        1830.8    -708.8 -3588.2*          -673.6
                                                (1134.0)    (3192.0) (1114.2)       (1650.8)       (3409.8)      (2100.6)  (508.4) (1467.2)         (584.6)
                              ... × Expansion    1570.7     11158.6 -3625.0*         2550.2        12750.3      -7872.9**   135.0   -1216.4           173.6
                                                (3492.9)   (10353.3) (1581.8)       (5386.6)      (11146.5)      (2897.4)  (599.1) (2841.6)         (671.3)
                                                 Hospital Construction
                              Post × Unins2013      -83.9   -617.2**        140.9      -54.8       -631.4*       331.9+      -96.4      107.9       -102.5
                                                   (88.0)    (235.1)       (98.4)    (125.7)       (258.6)       (187.1)    (78.5)     (107.9)      (85.8)
                              ... × Expansion      -250.8     -783.0       -107.9     -401.5        -834.7        -286.4      69.5    -472.5+        72.5
                                                  (327.6)   (1177.8)      (139.1)    (508.5)      (1275.1)       (282.0)    (82.9)    (272.8)       (90.1)
                                                  Hospital Charges
                              Post × Unins2013      299.1        -296.4    778.6      771.4         -477.7        1613.5     -207.7   -1039.1*       -155.6
                                                   (508.9)     (1134.1)   (707.1)    (774.3)      (1194.0)       (1390.7)   (185.8)    (460.7)      (215.6)
                              ... × Expansion      -1526.6      -1861.3    -987.2    -2641.2       -1564.2      -2527.4+      64.8     1569.8         -12.1
                                                  (1099.2)     (3221.0)   (774.8)   (1680.0)      (3450.4)       (1503.8)   (262.1)   (1030.4)      (292.1)
                                                   Property   tax
                              Post × Unins2013     -34.2       -3604.6*     18.3       122.5      -3346.6+         84.3       -22.7     62.8          -31.2
                                                  (291.1)      (1656.2)   (132.6)     (413.7)      (1969.8)      (262.5)     (31.2)    (88.5)        (35.1)
53




                              ... × Expansion    -7603.4*      -17810.0    -117.8   -12027.2*      -19534.1       -528.5     335.7      -66.6        355.3
                                                 (3471.2)     (12247.2)   (282.8)    (5373.8)     (13265.1)      (563.0)    (207.3)   (160.4)       (223.3)
                                  Obs.             5077          1353       3646       3548          1136          2332       1447       146          1265

                                         + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

      Note: (1) Post period: after 1/1/2014. (2) U nins2013 is the uninsured rate at the county level in 2013. (3) Excludes governments without hospital-related
       expenditures. (4) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK, IN, PA, MT and LA. (5) Covariates include poverty rate (all
       ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of population above age 65, and percent female. (6) All specifications
       include county fixed effects, year fixed effects, and state-specific time trends.

                                                            Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2015
     Table A11: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Selected Outcomes Among Local Governments Reporting Hospital Expenditures,
     Excluding 2013 and Using a Continuous Measure of Uninsurance

                                           Total Hospital Expenditure
                                         Full Sample Obama Romney             Urban      Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney Rural Rural/Obama     Rural/Romney
                     Post × Unins2013       -190.6    -7377.2*   818.4        542.7         -7529.4*       2145.6    -854.6 -3810.0*          -868.3
                                          (1213.9)    (3476.2) (1198.8)      (1769.8)       (3705.4)      (2248.0)  (559.1) (1547.5)         (642.1)
                     ... × Expansion       2034.7      12479.3 -3811.5*       3182.7         14139.8     -8284.5**    461.3  -769.1            519.5
                                          (3761.8)   (11130.1) (1704.8)      (5757.3)      (11998.3)      (3096.2)  (625.1) (3153.1)         (701.4)
                                           Hospital Construction
                     Post × Unins2013        -82.2    -639.7*       152.9       -48.4       -678.2*       374.4*      -99.9      129.6       -111.7
                                            (94.1)    (260.1)      (100.3)    (134.6)       (288.4)       (188.9)    (79.1)     (113.9)      (86.1)
                     ... × Expansion        -274.3    -1058.4       -37.9      -431.0       -1114.7        -113.3      75.2    -516.5+        81.6
                                           (337.9)   (1158.7)      (135.2)    (523.5)      (1258.0)       (262.1)    (83.3)     (290.0)      (90.7)
                                           Hospital Charges
                     Post × Unins2013        258.2        -777.5    866.0       752.8       -1033.4        1849.1     -233.2   -1044.1*       -198.2
                                            (544.0)     (1223.3)   (763.0)     (823.9)     (1290.0)       (1499.2)   (200.3)    (463.7)      (230.0)
                     ... × Expansion        -1714.4      -1735.5   -1070.9   -3050.0+       -1407.8      -2928.1+     293.1     1524.7         232.9
                                           (1141.3)     (3314.1)   (833.1)    (1728.3)     (3551.5)       (1616.5)   (235.3)   (1006.6)      (264.8)
                                            Property   tax
54




                     Post × Unins2013        -80.3      -4063.5*     -35.7       53.3      -3723.1+         -23.4      -17.6      74.1         -25.8
                                            (324.0)     (1881.6)   (140.2)     (450.8)      (2180.6)      (280.8)     (34.7)    (92.9)        (39.1)
                     ... × Expansion       -8447.1*     -19289.6    -219.2   -13375.2*      -21299.6       -830.7    356.2+      -78.4       378.0+
                                           (3752.7)    (12793.1)   (295.8)    (5806.4)     (13914.1)      (584.6)    (208.4)   (163.9)       (224.9)
                         Obs.                4651         1229       3354       3256          1031          2154       1320       133          1154

                                        + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

      Note: (1) Post period: after 1/1/2014. (2) U nins2013 is the uninsured rate at the county level in 2013. (3) Excludes governments without hospital-related
       expenditures. (4) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK, IN, PA, MT and LA. (5) Covariates include poverty rate (all
       ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of population above age 65, and percent female. (6) All specifications
       include county fixed effects, year fixed effects, and state-specific time trends. (7) Observations from 2013 are excluded to avoid bias from anticipatory
       effects among local governments.

                                                         Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2015
     Table A12: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Selected Outcomes Among Local Governments Reporting Hospital Expenditures using
     Uninsured Rates from 2011-2013

                                                  Total Hospital Expenditure
                                                Full Sample   Obama     Romney          Urban      Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney   Rural  Rural/Obama    Rural/Romney
                          Post × Qt4Unins2013               -71308.8** -16422.7        -21020.6     -81124.9**      -14731.9   -3439.2  -15522.4+         -1013.2
                                                             (24051.8) (26359.3)      (19416.6)      (27299.0)     (32206.0)  (8762.6)    (8619.9)       (9834.6)
                          ..× Expansion                       56415.5   -32497.9       -84083.3       98678.9      -64817.6+   4124.3   53696.2***        -2251.6
                                                            (104407.1) (29088.5)      (62947.5)     (145810.9)     (38560.0)  (9387.9)   (10902.1)      (10324.7)
                                                  Hospital Construction
                          Post × Qt4Unins2013               -3514.4+        1808.0      93.1          -4518.4*       2880.5     246.7       465.6          506.6
                                                             (1857.1)     (1595.2)    (1244.0)        (2230.3)      (2092.1)   (809.7)     (828.5)       (950.2)
                          ..× Expansion                       7601.7       -2507.6      563.6         10515.2      -4921.2+     -80.3       367.6         -322.1
                                                             (7669.1)     (1791.7)    (3827.8)       (10678.2)     (2655.5)    (866.6)    (1538.4)       (993.8)
                                                  Hospital Charges
                          Post × Qt4Unins2013               -19433.0*      -8008.7      -8848.8     -24472.1**      -11590.4    -746.3      -5532.6       574.3
                                                             (8038.4)     (6739.9)     (5428.6)       (9272.3)      (9592.9)   (2665.8)    (3769.5)     (2976.2)
                          ..× Expansion                      -25600.2      -2634.3   -42910.1+        -27208.9       -7140.2     37.1     -7799.9+       -1218.7
                                                            (41536.7)     (7690.7)    (22092.0)      (59965.3)     (11771.9)   (3035.9)   (4437.6)      (3388.5)
                                                  Property tax
                          Post × Qt4Unins2013                  -23062.6   2895.2+      6515.4+        -27928.9     3602.1+        62.6    1308.6*          2.98
                                                              (14202.4)   (1664.6)     (3830.1)      (20609.7)     (2130.8)     (274.1)   (627.1)        (302.5)
55




                          ..× Expansion                        -23742.1    -2859.7   -64491.2***      -31174.6      -6915.7     2926.2    -1164.6        3223.7
                                                              (36308.7)   (3118.6)    (18452.2)      (53970.7)     (5601.2)    (1982.4)   (776.9)       (2206.8)
                              Obs.                 5077          1353       3646         3548           1136         2332        1447       146           1265

                                      + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

      Note: (1) Post period: after 1/1/2014. (2) Excludes governments that appear for only one year over the course of the panel, that only appear during
       Census years, or that have no hospital-related expenditures. Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK, IN, PA, MT and LA.
       (3) Covariates include poverty rate (all ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of population above age 65,
       and percent female.

                                                          Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2015
     Table A13: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Selected Outcomes Among Local Governments Reporting Hospital Expenditures
     (Logged)

                                              Total Hospital Expenditure
                                            Full Sample Obama Romney         Urban     Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney   Rural     Rural/Obama   Rural/Romney
                      Post × Qt4Unins2013      0.091     -0.33    0.35        0.13         -0.20          0.50       0.62        -4.50*           0.22
                                               (0.34)   (0.59)   (0.44)      (0.37)       (0.61)         (0.50)     (0.69)       (2.08)         (0.88)
                      ..× Expansion             -0.83     0.59    -0.53       -1.08         0.70          -1.49      -0.46       4.36+           -0.37
                                               (0.57)   (0.70)   (0.75)      (0.76)       (0.70)         (1.04)     (0.97)       (2.30)         (1.16)
                                              Hospital Construction
                      Post × Qt4Unins2013     0.64+     -1.95***    0.71      0.67         -0.33          0.55       0.75         -0.11          1.07
                                              (0.36)     (0.58)    (0.45)    (0.44)       (0.61)        (0.58)      (0.63)       (0.94)        (0.81)
                      ..× Expansion           -1.07+     3.29**     -1.03     -1.22       2.06+          -1.04       -0.39        -1.46         -1.40
                                              (0.60)     (1.07)    (0.68)    (0.80)       (1.13)        (0.91)      (1.02)       (1.32)        (1.15)
                                              Hospital Charges
                      Post × Qt4Unins2013      0.45      1.10       0.12     0.72+         1.22           0.39        0.23       -4.28*         -0.26
                                              (0.34)    (0.86)     (0.40)    (0.37)       (0.85)        (0.43)      (0.70)       (2.00)        (0.88)
                      ..× Expansion           -1.04+     -0.72      -0.25    -1.22+        -0.71         -0.70       -0.35       6.26**         -0.21
                                              (0.54)    (0.95)     (0.68)    (0.69)       (0.95)        (0.93)      (1.03)       (2.23)        (1.21)
                                              Property tax
56




                      Post × Qt4Unins2013     -0.059      0.043     0.41+     -0.093      0.029         0.60+        -0.040        0.16          -0.11
                                             (0.065)     (0.032)    (0.22)   (0.086)     (0.043)        (0.31)      (0.068)      (0.16)        (0.100)
                      ..× Expansion            -0.21      -0.025   -0.90**   -0.31+       0.032        -1.54***      0.047        -0.23          0.13
                                              (0.16)     (0.060)    (0.32)    (0.18)     (0.071)        (0.44)       (0.27)      (0.42)         (0.29)
                          Obs.                 5077        1353      3646      3548       1136           2332         1447         146           1265

                                      + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

      Note: (1) Post period: after 1/1/2014. (2) Excludes governments that appear for only one year over the course of the panel, that only appear during
       Census years, or that have no hospital-related expenditures. Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK, IN, PA, MT and LA.
       (3 Covariates include poverty rate (all ages), median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of population above age 65,
       and percent female.

                                                       Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2015
     Table A14: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Selected Outcomes Among Local Governments Reporting Hospital Expenditures,
     Excluding States that Expanded Prior to 2014

                                           Total Hospital Expenditure
                                         Full Sample    Obama     Romney        Urban     Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney   Rural   Rural/Obama     Rural/Romney
                   Post × Qt4Unins2013      -3371.1   -114905.2* -4507.8        7016.4      -132826.1       6547.9   -15826.6*  -28684.3**       -19356.9+
                                          (15218.4)    (49080.8) (17870.7)    (22530.6)     (85949.1)     (27592.0)   (7475.4)    (8480.6)        (10781.0)
                   ..× Expansion           -22973.8    156236.7* -21635.4      -37787.1     177947.3*      -53962.6   12141.1      2917.1          14356.8
                                          (21266.0)    (63963.1) (21932.3)    (35308.0)     (88977.0)     (34755.0)   (8533.0)   (12880.5)        (11647.2)
                                            Hospital Construction
                   Post × Qt4Unins2013      1492.2    -14246.9**     1830.6    2500.4      -19396.7*        3033.7     -444.1       370.6          -145.5
                                           (1448.4)    (4925.0)    (1952.9)   (2195.2)      (7799.8)      (3195.5)    (601.5)      (945.5)        (809.6)
                   ..× Expansion          -3203.2+       754.1      -1880.1   -5333.3*       3908.7        -3689.3     652.9       -1972.3         402.4
                                           (1680.5)    (6427.7)    (2069.1)   (2662.8)      (8120.9)      (3342.7)    (717.8)     (1489.5)        (907.1)
                                            Hospital Charges
                   Post × Qt4Unins2013     -2147.7    -18033.7      -3612.5    -805.1      -57293.7**      -5087.1     -3251.0   -11515.3***      -1773.5
                                          (3303.3)   (11353.4)     (4231.7)   (4937.6)      (18513.0)     (6562.0)    (2555.7)     (3196.0)      (3785.5)
                   ..× Expansion         -11401.2+    -28144.7      2877.4    -15261.7        -573.9       -1157.0    4875.7+     16617.6**        2914.5
                                          (6038.2)   (18799.3)     (5918.9)   (9816.3)      (23743.4)     (9692.7)    (2912.6)     (5125.4)      (4069.0)
                                           Property tax
57




                   Post × Qt4Unins2013      661.5     -114139.8*   3839.2*      1085.9     -230005.5*      6348.0*      100.0       358.0           84.4
                                           (2898.4)    (48655.3)   (1924.2)    (5550.0)     (95908.6)      (3063.6)    (311.5)     (669.4)        (380.4)
                   ..× Expansion          -20042.6*     -8203.3     -3179.5   -38436.0*      65620.4      -9894.2**   5151.4+       -386.3       6063.2*
                                           (9284.6)    (60335.3)   (2587.9)   (17316.2)     (96005.1)      (3264.4)   (2715.2)     (888.0)       (3085.9)
                       Obs.                  4608        1190        3347        3179          977           2122       1358         144           1185

                                     + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

      Note: (1) Post period: after 1/1/2014. (2) Excludes governments with no hospital-related expenditures. (3) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid
       expansion after 2014: AK, IN, PA, MT and LA, and before 2014: CA, CT, DC, MN, NJ, and WA. (4) Covariates include poverty rate (all ages),
       median income, total population, percent of non-white population, percent of population above age 65, and percent female.

                                                       Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2015
     Table A15: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Health and Non-Health/Non-Hospital Expenditures Among Local Governments Re-
     porting Hospital Expenditures

                                           Health Expenditures
                                         Full Sample     Obama    Romney      Urban    Urban/Obama     Urban/Romney    Rural     Rural/Obama   Rural/Romney
                   Post × Qt4Unins2013    -6602.4**   -10839.4+ -4575.0+ -9080.5**       -12620.5+        -6695.7+      35.1        -191.1*        -19.3
                                           (2140.7)     (6044.5)  (2388.0)  (2931.2)       (7521.9)        (3518.4)    (78.2)        (95.0)       (113.7)
                   ..× Expansion           13231.1      -25970.2  8160.1*    24835.2       -22595.1       13442.1*      -34.2      432.2**          75.2
                                           (9163.3)    (29691.6)  (3355.1) (15395.9)      (31806.2)        (5568.5)   (104.0)       (157.4)       (156.6)
                                            Total Expenditures, excl. Hospitals/Health
                   Post × Qt4Unins2013     -1801.7     136236.4** -19066.2    -6019.9     156041.7*       -38071.1    11783.3*    21150.0**      16319.8*
                                          (14072.3)     (51844.3) (17219.1) (18535.9)      (62602.8)     (24706.1)    (5432.5)     (6410.3)      (7862.4)
                   ..× Expansion          -104878.0   -590200.0** 22185.8    -197406.5   -691239.9**      37683.7      -8346.2      4869.2       -12497.9
                                          (83819.0)    (209387.9) (21550.4) (145218.2)    (237814.4)     (33764.8)    (6486.3)    (12105.8)      (8772.7)
                       Obs.                 5077          1353      3646       3548          1136           2332        1447         146           1265

                                     + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

      Note: (1) Post period: after 1/1/2014. (2) Excludes governments with no hospital-related expenditures. (3) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid
       expansion after 2014: AK, IN, PA, MT and LA. (4) Covariates include poverty rate (all ages), median income, total population, percent of non-
58




       white population, percent of population above age 65, and percent female. (5) "Health" expenditures include public health administration, public
       education, vital statistics, health-related inspection and regulation, sanitary engineering, environmental health activities. It also includes ambulance
       transportation, community nursing, and vaccines NOT already covered by the fire department, school health services, alcohol and drug prevention
       and rehabilitation programming, federal Women, Infants, and Children program, Food and Drug Administration, and the Environmental Protection
       Agency.

                                                        Source: Census of State and Local Governments, 2006-2015
Appendix. 3               Hospital Sample Definition
Hospital Address
Medicare Cost Reports list either the site of care or the billing address of the hospital,
which are not necessarily the same location. Further, hospital names listed in the reports
are either the name of the specific facility or the name of the chain that owns that
specific facility. Therefore, we use hospital identification numbers to combine Medicare
Cost Report files with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services Provider of Service
Files to verify. These files are a consensus of all providers certified to bill Medicaid and
Medicare and are considered to be the universe of hospitals.
    Since addresses provided in the Medicare Cost Report Data could refer to either the
site where hospital invoices are processed or the site of the hospital itself, we confirm loca-
tion by scraping hospital name, address, and coordinates from the Google API database.
We then geo-code hospital locations to observe their position within and around local
government boundaries.


Hospital Type
Medicare Cost Reports have two variables which indicate the hospital type. The first
indicator is based on the assigned provider number, which is constant over time. This
measure may be prone to error because facilities could, in theory, change their firm type
and not adjust their provider number. The most likely type of transition is that a hospital
is certified as a short-term acute-care hospital initially and then its competitors slowly
exit the market, rendering the facility eligible to become a critical access hospital. To
obtain a new number, the facility would have to allow its current Medicare certification
to lapse for 6 months and then reapply for a new number. Given that Medicare is a
valuable revenue source for hospitals, this is rarely done.
    The second indicator of hospital type is a field that is filled out annually by the
hospital on the S-2 form. Whereas the first measure suffers from mis-identifying hospitals
that change types, the second measure suffers from implausible inconsistency over time.
In some cases, a hospital is marked as a short-term hospital one year, a psychiatric
hospital the next year, and a short-term hospital the year after that. This inconsistency
arises because the Medicare Cost Report data is check for validity of financial measures
related to internal tracking within the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services, not
necessarily data analysis. However, as the most consistent census of hospitals, this data
is the standard for evaluating hospitals in the US.
    Further complicating cross-validation across these two measures is the fact that hos-


                                              59
pital categories do not necessarily match. The classification based on provider numbers
separately identifies hospitals as short-term acute-care, long-term care, pediatric, psychi-
atric, critical access, rehabilitative, or other. The second measure additionally separates
out cancer hospitals, religious non-medical healthcare institutions, and alcohol and drug
centers, but does not identify critical access hospitals.
    To reconcile these differences in hospital type, we include any hospital that is identified
as a short-term acute-care or a critical access hospital by the provider number or as a
short-term acute-care hospital by the S-2 form. We exclude hospitals that were not
identified as a short-term acute-care hospital at any point by either measure, excluding
121 hospital-year observations from 2006 to 2014. 431 hospital-years did not match to a
zip code.


Possibility of Sample Selection Bias
Previous literature has documented changes in hospital utilization following Medicaid
expansion in selected states (Nikpay et al., 2015; Hempstead and Cantor, 2016). While
ex-ante we cannot identify how the sample selection by COGs could be correlated with
characteristics of hospitals differentially affected by the expansion, we compare trends in
Medicaid utilization among in-sample hospitals and the universe of hospitals in the US
(Figure B1 and Figure B2). The trends appear similar.

                          Figure B1: Medicaid Outpatient Visits
           (a) In-Sample Hospitals                            (b) All Hospitals




                            Source: Medicare Cost Report, 2006-2015




                                              60
               Figure B2: Medicaid Inpatient Stays
(a) In-Sample Hospitals                           (b) All Hospitals




                Source: Medicare Cost Report, 2006-2015




                                 61
     Appendix. 4   Hospital Analysis: Robustness Checks
62
                                                          Table B13: Pre-trends: Hospital Operating Margins

                                                                                                               Hospital Operating margin
                                                                        Full Sample    Obama     Romney       Urban Urban/Obama     Urban/Romney     Rural  Rural/Romney
                           Unins2013× 2006                                -0.0023      -0.0051   -0.00079    -0.0016     0.0051         -0.0027     -0.0023     -0.0023
                                                                         (0.0023)     (0.0067)   (0.0036)   (0.0048)   (0.0095)        (0.0029)    (0.0097)    (0.0032)
                           ...× 2007                                       0.0063        0.030   0.00057       0.011      0.026          0.0048       0.049   -0.0097+
                                                                         (0.0080)      (0.034)   (0.0072)   (0.0096)    (0.020)         (0.011)     (0.050)    (0.0052)
                           ...× 2008                                       0.0035      -0.0048      0.011     0.0086      0.026          0.0015     -0.0028      0.0050
                                                                         (0.0037)     (0.0068)   (0.0074)    (0.010)    (0.022)        (0.0035)    (0.0099)    (0.0049)
                           ...× 2009                                      -0.0036      -0.0062    -0.0042    -0.0053    -0.0077         -0.0025     -0.0050   -0.00068
                                                                         (0.0031)     (0.0074)   (0.0060)   (0.0082)    (0.017)        (0.0031)     (0.011)    (0.0042)
                           ...× 2010                                      -0.0022      -0.0063    0.00026     0.0024     0.0099         -0.0038     -0.0049     -0.0017
                                                                         (0.0021)     (0.0068)   (0.0029)   (0.0040)   (0.0079)        (0.0028)    (0.0099)    (0.0029)
                           ...× 2011                                      0.00022      -0.0077     0.0042    0.0048      0.014          -0.0016     -0.0063      0.0020
                                                                         (0.0027)     (0.0077)   (0.0041)   (0.0077)    (0.016)        (0.0028)     (0.011)    (0.0024)
                           ...× 2012                                     -0.00090      -0.0036   -0.00012    -0.0017     0.0023        -0.00085     -0.0015   -0.00032
                                                                         (0.0021)     (0.0069)   (0.0031)   (0.0050)   (0.0097)        (0.0024)    (0.0099)    (0.0021)
                           Unins2013× Expansion × 2006                    0.0029        0.0074    -0.0021    0.0030     -0.0040          0.0037      0.0060     -0.0011
                                                                         (0.0025)     (0.0068)   (0.0043)   (0.0054)    (0.011)        (0.0032)    (0.0098)    (0.0038)
                           ...× 2007                                      -0.0053       -0.028     0.0013    -0.0086     -0.021         -0.0033      -0.046       0.012
                                                                         (0.0081)      (0.034)   (0.0090)   (0.0099)    (0.021)         (0.011)     (0.050)    (0.0085)
                           ...× 2008                                      -0.0036      0.0071    -0.016+     -0.0073     -0.023         -0.0019      0.0065    -0.012+
                                                                         (0.0039)     (0.0069)   (0.0084)    (0.011)    (0.023)        (0.0040)     (0.010)    (0.0066)
63




                           ...× 2009                                       0.0048       0.0087     0.0021    0.0053      0.011           0.0040      0.0088     -0.0024
                                                                         (0.0033)     (0.0074)   (0.0064)   (0.0086)    (0.019)        (0.0034)     (0.011)    (0.0047)
                           ...× 2010                                       0.0037       0.0092    -0.0021    -0.0016    -0.0082        0.0059+      0.0092    -0.00032
                                                                         (0.0024)     (0.0069)   (0.0038)   (0.0050)    (0.010)        (0.0030)     (0.010)    (0.0036)
                           ...× 2011                                      0.00050       0.010     -0.0077    -0.0052     -0.016          0.0028      0.010    -0.0061+
                                                                         (0.0029)     (0.0078)   (0.0047)   (0.0082)    (0.017)        (0.0031)     (0.011)    (0.0032)
                           ...× 2012                                       0.0045       0.0049     0.0073      0.014      0.023          0.0021      0.0038   -0.00072
                                                                         (0.0036)     (0.0070)   (0.0087)    (0.014)    (0.028)        (0.0028)     (0.010)    (0.0030)
                                Obs.                                       32349        12300      20009       5974       4998           26352       11325       15003
                                2006-2010 Mean                             -0.045       -0.048     -0.043     -0.086     -0.094          -0.035      -0.048      -0.026
                                2006-2010 SD                                0.73          0.78       0.71       1.07       1.17           0.63        0.81         0.46
                           P-value: joint significance of pretrend test     0.76         0.38       0.79       0.96       0.93            0.88         0.68        0.47

                                       + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Controls for hospital size. Includes year, state, and hospital fixed effects, as well as state-specific time trends. (2) There were too few hospitals
      in Rural/Obama areas to calculate pre-trends.

                                                                        Source: Medicare Cost Reports, 2006-2013
                                                           Table B14: Pre-trends: Hospital Profit Margins

                                                                                                 Hospital Profit Margin
                                                               Full Sample   Obama Romney Urban Urban/Obama          Urban/Romney     Rural  Rural/Romney
                  Unins2013× 2006                                -0.0044      -0.0067 -0.0034 0.00086    0.017**        -0.0081+    -0.00014     -0.013*
                                                                (0.0035)     (0.0062) (0.0044) (0.0061) (0.0055)         (0.0043)   (0.0070)    (0.0056)
                  ...× 2007                                     -0.0057+      -0.0098 -0.0057 -0.0031    0.013**        -0.0081*     -0.0019   -0.015**
                                                                (0.0034)     (0.0061) (0.0041) (0.0062) (0.0050)         (0.0040)   (0.0064)    (0.0053)
                  ...× 2008                                      -0.0013      -0.0043 -0.0019   0.0037   0.016**          -0.0060   0.00025      -0.012*
                                                                (0.0032)     (0.0057) (0.0040) (0.0058) (0.0050)         (0.0038)   (0.0064)    (0.0050)
                  ...× 2009                                      -0.0028      -0.0057 -0.0057   0.0021  0.0091+         -0.0071*     -0.0025   -0.014**
                                                                (0.0030)     (0.0051) (0.0039) (0.0054) (0.0051)         (0.0036)   (0.0055)    (0.0049)
                  ...× 2010                                      -0.0028      -0.0039 -0.0052   0.0043  0.0083+         -0.0069+     -0.0028     -0.011*
                                                                (0.0031)     (0.0052) (0.0039) (0.0053) (0.0048)         (0.0037)   (0.0057)    (0.0051)
                  ...× 2011                                      0.00035       0.0014  -0.0012  0.0058    0.0042          -0.0013    0.0013      -0.0030
                                                                (0.0031)     (0.0055) (0.0040) (0.0057) (0.0053)         (0.0038)   (0.0060)    (0.0050)
                  ...× 2012                                      0.00040       0.0011  0.0019   0.0026    0.0035        -0.00051     0.00053    0.00086
                                                                (0.0034)     (0.0058) (0.0043) (0.0059) (0.0050)         (0.0041)   (0.0064)    (0.0055)
                  Unins2013× Expansion × 2006                     0.0059       0.024    -0.012 0.00016   -0.0071           0.012      0.030      -0.0077
                                                                (0.0097)      (0.016) (0.0080) (0.0071) (0.0085)          (0.016)    (0.026)     (0.011)
                  ...× 2007                                       0.0076      0.027+ -0.0081    0.0058   0.00022           0.011      0.031      -0.0048
64




                                                                (0.0097)      (0.016) (0.0077) (0.0071) (0.0080)          (0.016)    (0.026)     (0.010)
                  ...× 2008                                       0.0090      0.029+ -0.0076 -0.00097    -0.0019           0.018      0.042      -0.0022
                                                                (0.0097)      (0.016) (0.0076) (0.0067) (0.0078)          (0.016)    (0.026)     (0.010)
                  ...× 2009                                        0.010      0.032*   -0.0091 -0.0022    0.0065           0.018     0.046+      -0.0086
                                                                (0.0096)      (0.015) (0.0075) (0.0066) (0.0085)          (0.016)    (0.026)    (0.0100)
                  ...× 2010                                        0.013      0.027+ -0.0021 -0.0048     -0.0030           0.024     0.042+       0.0020
                                                                (0.0095)      (0.015) (0.0073) (0.0061) (0.0072)          (0.015)    (0.025)    (0.0099)
                  ...× 2011                                        0.010        0.022  -0.0039 -0.0077   -0.0012           0.020      0.038      -0.0019
                                                                (0.0095)      (0.015) (0.0075) (0.0067) (0.0079)          (0.015)    (0.025)     (0.010)
                  ...× 2012                                        0.012        0.022 -0.00099 -0.0036   -0.0039           0.022      0.040       0.0011
                                                                (0.0096)      (0.015) (0.0078) (0.0069) (0.0077)          (0.015)    (0.025)     (0.010)
                       Obs.                                       32781        12584    20159    6017      5030            26741      11594       15121
                       2006-2010 Mean                               1.72         1.96    1.58    0.78      0.73             1.94       2.03        1.86
                       2006-2010 SD                                 1.74         1.55    1.83    0.87      0.82             1.81       1.56        1.98
                  P-value: joint significance of pretrend test     0.14         0.23    0.057    0.58   0.000034           0.038       0.85    0.000044

                                       + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Controls for hospital size. Includes year, state, and hospital fixed effects, as well as state-specific time trends. (2) There were too few hospitals
      in Rural/Obama areas to calculate pre-trends.

                                                                    Source: Medicare Cost Reports, 2006-2013
                                             Table B15: Pre-trends: Hospitals Bad-Debt-to-Receivables Ratios

                                                                                              Bad debt ratio to receivables
                                                                Full Sample   Obama Romney Urban Urban/Obama          Urban/Romney   Rural Rural/Romney
                   Unins2013× 2006                                  0.038      -0.035   0.11   0.0010  0.0089*               0.13    -0.032      0.25
                                                                   (0.23)      (0.71)  (0.13) (0.0029) (0.0037)            (0.33)    (0.77)    (0.25)
                   ...× 2007                                      -0.0087      -0.049 0.0035 -0.00026  0.0069+            -0.0027    -0.032   0.0074
                                                                   (0.22)      (0.71) (0.061) (0.0031) (0.0038)            (0.30)    (0.76)   (0.097)
                   ...× 2008                                        -1.24       -3.70   -0.29  0.0014  0.0087*              -1.72     -4.06     -0.42
                                                                   (1.09)      (3.49)  (0.28) (0.0031) (0.0039)            (1.49)    (3.82)    (0.42)
                   ...× 2009                                       -0.010      -0.032 0.00023 -0.0015   0.0064            -0.0077    -0.028   0.0014
                                                                   (0.22)      (0.72) (0.060) (0.0033) (0.0048)            (0.30)    (0.76)   (0.095)
                   ...× 2010                                      -0.0018      -0.015 0.0073    0.0013   0.0071          -0.00033    -0.016   0.0099
                                                                   (0.22)      (0.72) (0.059) (0.0040) (0.0045)            (0.30)    (0.76)   (0.093)
                   ...× 2011                                       0.0015      -0.014  0.0095 0.00060    0.0021            0.0010    -0.011     0.012
                                                                   (0.22)      (0.71) (0.059) (0.0033) (0.0043)            (0.30)    (0.76)   (0.093)
                   ...× 2012                                       0.0080     -0.0034 0.0056    0.0020 0.00081              0.016    0.0084    0.011
                                                                   (0.23)      (0.71) (0.058) (0.0033) (0.0041)            (0.30)    (0.76)   (0.093)
                   Unins2013× Expansion × 2006                     -0.040       0.032   -0.12  -0.0072  -0.018*             -0.13     0.031     -0.25
                                                                   (0.23)      (0.71)  (0.13)  (0.018) (0.0071)            (0.33)    (0.77)    (0.25)
                   ...× 2007                                       0.0062       0.045 -0.0060 -0.0047  -0.013+           0.000065     0.030   -0.0094
65




                                                                   (0.22)      (0.71) (0.061)  (0.018) (0.0073)            (0.30)    (0.76)   (0.097)
                   ...× 2008                                         1.26       3.73     0.28  -0.0086  -0.015*              1.75      4.13      0.42
                                                                   (1.09)      (3.49)  (0.28)  (0.019) (0.0073)            (1.49)    (3.82)    (0.42)
                   ...× 2009                                        0.023      0.042  -0.0019   0.022    -0.012            -0.024    -0.040   -0.0026
                                                                   (0.22)      (0.72) (0.060)  (0.026) (0.0079)            (0.30)    (0.77)   (0.095)
                   ...× 2010                                        0.061        0.11 -0.0031    0.055  -0.0032           -0.0072    0.0083   -0.0045
                                                                   (0.23)      (0.72) (0.059)  (0.056) (0.0093)            (0.30)    (0.76)   (0.093)
                   ...× 2011                                      -0.0020      0.013  -0.0087   0.0016   0.0088           -0.0022    0.0091    -0.011
                                                                   (0.22)      (0.71) (0.059)  (0.019) (0.0081)            (0.30)    (0.76)   (0.093)
                   ...× 2012                                       -0.030      -0.027 -0.0031 0.00098   0.0038             -0.053    -0.069   -0.0089
                                                                   (0.23)      (0.71) (0.059)  (0.019) (0.0084)            (0.31)    (0.76)   (0.093)
                        Obs.                                       32251       12230   19981     5975     5001             26253     11257     14972
                        2006-2010 Mean                               0.20        0.63  -0.060    0.055    0.033              0.23      0.67    -0.091
                        2006-2010 SD                                 40.6        56.7    26.3     1.22     0.40              45.0      59.1      30.4
                   P-value: joint significance of pretrend test     0.99        1.00    0.77     0.99    0.020               0.98      0.99      0.82

                                       + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Controls for hospital size. Includes year, state, and hospital fixed effects, as well as state-specific time trends. (2) There were too few hospitals
      in Rural/Obama areas to calculate pre-trends.

                                                                   Source: Medicare Cost Reports, 2006-2013
                                          Table B16: Pre-trends: Hospital Provision of Inpatient Medicaid Stays

                                                                                          Medicaid Inpatient Stays (% Hospital-level)
                                                            Full Sample     Obama    Romney      Urban  Urban/Obama       Urban/Romney    Rural  Rural/Romney
               Unins2013× 2006                               -0.0010**     0.00033 -0.0018*** 0.00014      -0.00088         -0.0017*** -0.0013+   -0.0023***
                                                             (0.00036)    (0.00071) (0.00049) (0.00066)   (0.00090)          (0.00043) (0.00068)    (0.00060)
               ...× 2007                                      -0.00050     0.000039 -0.00081+   0.00030    -0.00016          -0.00095* -0.0013+      -0.0012*
                                                             (0.00034)    (0.00068) (0.00045) (0.00065)   (0.00095)          (0.00040) (0.00064)    (0.00053)
               ...× 2008                                     -0.00063+     -0.00024  -0.00064 -0.000073    -0.00066          -0.00099*  -0.0017*     -0.00075
                                                             (0.00034)    (0.00069) (0.00042) (0.00066)   (0.00093)          (0.00039) (0.00068)    (0.00049)
               ...× 2009                                      -0.00045      0.00052 -0.00082*   0.00011     -0.0012          -0.00079*  -0.00088   -0.00083+
                                                             (0.00032)    (0.00065) (0.00041) (0.00061)   (0.00087)          (0.00037) (0.00061)    (0.00048)
               ...× 2010                                      -0.00035      0.00088  -0.0010*  0.000054     -0.0012           -0.00063  -0.00056   -0.00089+
                                                             (0.00033)    (0.00067) (0.00042) (0.00062)   (0.00088)          (0.00039) (0.00066)    (0.00049)
               ...× 2011                                      -0.00026    -0.000035 -0.00064   0.00020     -0.00074         -0.00061+   -0.00084     -0.00068
                                                             (0.00032)    (0.00074) (0.00040) (0.00062)   (0.00090)          (0.00037) (0.00063)    (0.00047)
               ...× 2012                                      -0.00012     -0.00040  -0.00029  -0.00025     -0.0012          -0.000042  -0.00037    0.000030
                                                             (0.00033)    (0.00077) (0.00042) (0.00064)   (0.00091)          (0.00039) (0.00066)    (0.00050)
               Unins2013× Expansion × 2006                   0.00087+      -0.00066   0.0019*  -0.00086    -0.00090           0.0017**  0.00068     0.0031**
                                                             (0.00048)    (0.00079) (0.00086)  (0.0010)    (0.0018)          (0.00061) (0.00087)     (0.0010)
               ...× 2007                                      0.00020      -0.00036  0.00054   -0.00074    -0.00054            0.00060   0.00033       0.0013
66




                                                             (0.00046)    (0.00076) (0.00089) (0.00096)    (0.0021)          (0.00060) (0.00084)     (0.0010)
               ...× 2008                                      0.000066     -0.00032  0.00011   -0.00096     -0.0013            0.00050   0.00091     0.00063
                                                             (0.00044)    (0.00076) (0.00077) (0.00089)    (0.0018)          (0.00056) (0.00084)    (0.00089)
               ...× 2009                                      -0.00027    -0.0012+    0.00018 -0.0015+     -0.00070           0.00024  -0.000023      0.00076
                                                             (0.00043)    (0.00073) (0.00077) (0.00089)    (0.0019)          (0.00054) (0.00078)    (0.00087)
               ...× 2010                                      0.000029      -0.0011  0.00043    -0.0013    -0.00040           0.00047    0.00018      0.00069
                                                             (0.00044)    (0.00074) (0.00079) (0.00092)    (0.0022)          (0.00055) (0.00084)    (0.00087)
               ...× 2011                                      -0.00020     -0.00025  -0.00024   -0.0012     -0.0015            0.00018  0.00036     0.000081
                                                             (0.00043)    (0.00081) (0.00081) (0.00088)    (0.0018)          (0.00055) (0.00082)    (0.00092)
               ...× 2012                                      -0.00026      0.00026  -0.00075  -0.00019     0.00029           -0.00034   0.00011     -0.00068
                                                             (0.00046)    (0.00084) (0.00086) (0.00094)    (0.0022)          (0.00059) (0.00085)    (0.00096)
                    Obs.                                        32738        12564     20136     6014        5027               26701     11574        15101
                    2006-2010 Mean                               0.12         0.13      0.12      0.11        0.11               0.13      0.13          0.12
                    2006-2010 SD                                 0.11         0.11      0.10     0.093       0.091               0.11      0.12         0.10
               P-value: joint significance of pretrend test     0.066         0.43     0.053      0.83        0.91              0.0085     0.26         0.017

                                       + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Controls for hospital size. Includes year, state, and hospital fixed effects, as well as state-specific time trends. (2) There were too few hospitals
      in Rural/Obama areas to calculate pre-trends.

                                                                    Source: Medicare Cost Reports, 2006-2013
                                         Table B17: Pre-trends: Hospital Provision of Outpatient Medicaid Visits

                                                                                           Medicaid Outpatient Visits (% Hospital-level)
                                                           Full Sample      Obama     Romney         Urban   Urban/Obama      Urban/Romney    Rural  Rural/Romney
              Unins2013× 2006                                -0.00046       0.00020 -0.0017***      0.00049     -0.00092        -0.0011**   -0.00030  -0.0018***
                                                            (0.00033)     (0.00055) (0.00036)     (0.00068)    (0.00071)         (0.00034) (0.00061)   (0.00042)
              ...× 2007                                      -0.00020       0.00012  -0.00072*      0.00053    -0.000047        -0.00063+   -0.00049   -0.00082*
                                                            (0.00033)     (0.00053) (0.00033)     (0.00065)    (0.00069)         (0.00034) (0.00061)   (0.00040)
              ...× 2008                                      -0.00030      -0.00033 -0.00057+       0.00019     -0.00030        -0.00053+   -0.00043    -0.00059
                                                            (0.00031)     (0.00053) (0.00031)     (0.00063)    (0.00070)         (0.00031) (0.00056)   (0.00036)
              ...× 2009                                      -0.00024       0.00035  -0.00066*     -0.00025     -0.00080          -0.00028   0.00019    -0.00057
                                                            (0.00030)     (0.00049) (0.00030)     (0.00059)    (0.00063)         (0.00031) (0.00059)   (0.00035)
              ...× 2010                                      0.000071       0.00060   -0.00048   -0.00000054    -0.00032          -0.00013   0.00022    -0.00043
                                                            (0.00029)     (0.00046) (0.00030)     (0.00060)    (0.00063)         (0.00029) (0.00054)   (0.00034)
              ...× 2011                                      0.000066       0.00048   -0.00034     0.000030     -0.00078          -0.00015 -0.000088    -0.00016
                                                            (0.00030)     (0.00051) (0.00030)     (0.00060)    (0.00066)         (0.00031) (0.00058)   (0.00035)
              ...× 2012                                      -0.00018     0.000091    -0.00043     -0.00040     -0.00073          -0.00030  -0.00019    -0.00030
                                                            (0.00031)     (0.00047) (0.00035)     (0.00062)    (0.00084)         (0.00032) (0.00058)   (0.00039)
              Unins2013× Expansion × 2006                    -0.00023      -0.00093    0.00085      -0.0016    -0.0032+            0.00042   -0.0012     0.0021*
                                                            (0.00045)     (0.00063) (0.00086)      (0.0010)     (0.0017)         (0.00052) (0.00076)   (0.00090)
              ...× 2007                                     -0.00082+      -0.00092    -0.0010     -0.0019*     -0.0036*          -0.00048   -0.0010    0.000047
67




                                                            (0.00044)     (0.00060) (0.00081)     (0.00096)     (0.0015)        (0.00050)  (0.00074)   (0.00084)
              ...× 2008                                      -0.00061      -0.00056   -0.00083     -0.0017+     -0.0037*          -0.00034   -0.0011     0.00026
                                                            (0.00041)     (0.00060) (0.00080)     (0.00094)     (0.0015)        (0.00047)  (0.00070)   (0.00082)
              ...× 2009                                      -0.00038    -0.00094+ -0.00023        -0.00076    -0.0026+           -0.00041 -0.0013+      0.00040
                                                            (0.00040)     (0.00056) (0.00074)     (0.00087)     (0.0014)        (0.00047)  (0.00072)   (0.00081)
              ...× 2010                                      -0.00044      -0.0013*    0.00051     -0.00087    -0.0024+           -0.00015 -0.0014+       0.0011
                                                            (0.00040)     (0.00054) (0.00074)     (0.00087)     (0.0014)        (0.00047)  (0.00070)   (0.00080)
              ...× 2011                                      -0.00025      -0.00082    0.00022      0.00025      0.00036          -0.00014  -0.00048     0.00015
                                                            (0.00042)     (0.00060) (0.00082)     (0.00092)     (0.0015)        (0.00051)  (0.00075)   (0.00090)
              ...× 2012                                    -0.0000080      -0.00040   0.00021       0.00081      0.00055          -0.00010  -0.00054     0.00032
                                                            (0.00042)     (0.00056) (0.00081)     (0.00089)     (0.0016)        (0.00051)  (0.00074)   (0.00087)
                   Obs.                                       32745          12565      20142         6016         5029             26706     11575       15105
                   2006-2010 Mean                              0.11           0.13       0.10        0.090        0.087              0.12      0.13         0.10
                   2006-2010 SD                                0.11           0.11       0.10         0.10         0.11              0.11      0.11        0.098
              P-value: joint significance of pretrend test    0.0045         0.062    0.00011        0.068       0.0057            0.0046     0.024      0.0037

                                       + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Controls for hospital size. Includes year, state, and hospital fixed effects, as well as state-specific time trends. (2) There were too few hospitals
      in Rural/Obama areas to calculate pre-trends.

                                                                    Source: Medicare Cost Reports, 2006-2013
                                      Table B18: Pre-trends: Hospital Receipt of Government Grants and Transfers

                                                                        Any Government grants, appropriations or transfers for support of hospital operations
                                                              Full Sample     Obama    Romney     Urban Urban/Obama          Urban/Romney   Rural  Rural/Romney
                 Unins2013× 2006                                 0.0020       0.0051*  0.00082   -0.0018  -0.0070+              0.0036*    0.0041+    0.0050*
                                                               (0.0013)      (0.0021)  (0.0020) (0.0027)   (0.0041)             (0.0015)  (0.0023)    (0.0022)
                 ...× 2007                                       0.0020       0.0053*  0.00082   -0.0016  -0.0070+              0.0036*    0.0042+    0.0050*
                                                               (0.0013)      (0.0021)  (0.0020) (0.0027)   (0.0041)             (0.0015)  (0.0023)    (0.0022)
                 ...× 2008                                     0.0021+        0.0054*  0.00099   -0.0015    -0.0066             0.0037*    0.0044+    0.0051*
                                                               (0.0013)      (0.0021)  (0.0020) (0.0027)   (0.0042)             (0.0015)  (0.0023)    (0.0022)
                 ...× 2009                                       0.0021      0.0055**   0.0010   -0.0018  -0.0072+              0.0038*    0.0045+    0.0053*
                                                               (0.0013)      (0.0021)  (0.0020) (0.0027)   (0.0041)             (0.0015)  (0.0023)    (0.0022)
                 ...× 2010                                      0.0029*     0.0073*** 0.00089   0.00037     -0.0029             0.0045**   0.0059*    0.0039+
                                                               (0.0014)      (0.0022)  (0.0022) (0.0030)   (0.0050)             (0.0016)  (0.0024)    (0.0024)
                 ...× 2011                                     0.0029+        0.0062*   0.0014    0.0046     0.0044              0.0027    0.0064*    0.00072
                                                               (0.0016)      (0.0025)  (0.0025) (0.0036)   (0.0056)             (0.0018)  (0.0027)    (0.0027)
                 ...× 2012                                     0.000043      -0.00035  0.00030   0.0048      0.0073              -0.0015  -0.00089     -0.0024
                                                               (0.0016)      (0.0026)  (0.0025) (0.0034)   (0.0053)             (0.0018)  (0.0029)    (0.0027)
                 Unins2013× Expansion × 2006                   -0.00073       -0.0045 -0.000048 0.0048      0.0091              -0.00069   -0.0012     -0.0033
                                                               (0.0019)      (0.0028)  (0.0032) (0.0037)   (0.0069)             (0.0023)  (0.0033)    (0.0037)
                 ...× 2007                                     -0.00078     -0.0046+ 0.000037     0.0047     0.0089             -0.00072   -0.0013     -0.0032
68




                                                               (0.0019)      (0.0028)  (0.0032) (0.0037)   (0.0069)             (0.0023)  (0.0033)    (0.0037)
                 ...× 2008                                     -0.00088     -0.0046+ -0.00019     0.0045     0.0082             -0.00081   -0.0014     -0.0033
                                                               (0.0019)      (0.0028)  (0.0032) (0.0037)   (0.0069)             (0.0023)  (0.0033)    (0.0037)
                 ...× 2009                                     -0.00088     -0.0048+ -0.00024     0.0047     0.0088             -0.00088   -0.0016     -0.0035
                                                               (0.0019)      (0.0028)  (0.0032) (0.0037)   (0.0069)             (0.0023)  (0.0033)    (0.0037)
                 ...× 2010                                     -0.0035+     -0.0090**   -0.0014 0.00054     0.0042               -0.0042  -0.0063+     -0.0040
                                                               (0.0020)      (0.0029)  (0.0036) (0.0040)   (0.0082)             (0.0026)  (0.0036)    (0.0042)
                 ...× 2011                                      -0.0014       -0.0049  0.00044 -0.00090     -0.0057             -0.00054   -0.0056      0.0036
                                                               (0.0024)      (0.0034)  (0.0042) (0.0053)   (0.0092)             (0.0029)  (0.0041)    (0.0049)
                 ...× 2012                                      0.00019     -0.000014 0.000055 -0.0037      -0.0062              0.0016   -0.00057      0.0036
                                                               (0.0023)      (0.0035)  (0.0040) (0.0046)   (0.0087)             (0.0029)  (0.0042)    (0.0046)
                      Obs.                                       32781         12584     20159     6017       5030                26741     11594       15121
                      2006-2010 Mean                              0.082        0.085     0.079     0.11       0.11                 0.076     0.085       0.069
                      2006-2010 SD                                 0.27         0.28      0.27     0.31       0.31                 0.26      0.28        0.25
                 P-value: joint significance of pretrend test     0.53         0.032      1.00     0.29      0.093                0.0054     0.073       0.040

                                        + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Controls for hospital size. Includes year, state, and hospital fixed effects, as well as state-specific time trends. (2) There were too few hospitals
      in Rural/Obama areas to calculate pre-trends.

                                                                    Source: Medicare Cost Reports, 2006-2013
     Table B19: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Selected Outcomes Among Local Governments Reporting Hospital Expenditures,
     Excluding States that Expanded Prior to 2014

                                                Operating margin
                                              Full Sample Obama        Romney    Urban      Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney       Rural     Rural/Obama Rural/Romney
                             Post × Unins2013     0.11      0.71        0.057*     0.14          0.83        0.060+         0.0064         0.050      -0.0024
                                                (0.081)   (0.69)       (0.024)   (0.11)        (0.79)        (0.032)        (0.018)       (0.043)     (0.033)
                             ..× Expansion       -0.12     -0.71        -0.031    -0.15         -0.83        -0.0053         -0.11                     -0.096
                                                (0.084)   (0.69)       (0.067)   (0.11)        (0.79)        (0.071)        (0.087)                   (0.094)
                                                Profit Margin
                             Post × Unins2013     0.19*       0.33     0.20*   0.28**          0.43+         0.27*           -0.058       -0.37*       -0.052
                                                (0.081)      (0.21)   (0.084)   (0.11)         (0.24)        (0.12)         (0.064)       (0.16)      (0.062)
                             ..× Expansion       -0.098       -0.32     0.20     -0.22          -0.41        0.013            0.14                      0.15
                                                 (0.22)      (0.38)    (0.28)   (0.25)         (0.40)        (0.38)          (0.14)                    (0.15)
                                                Bad debt    ratio to receivables
                             Post × Unins2013    0.35        0.078    0.086     0.47      0.053              -0.094          0.032         -0.18       0.030
                                                (0.38)      (0.066)  (0.78)    (0.52)    (0.063)             (0.93)         (0.038)       (0.16)      (0.049)
                             ..× Expansion       0.25         0.93   -0.045     0.19       0.98               0.11           0.094                      0.10
                                                (0.60)       (0.82)  (0.79)    (0.73)     (0.84)             (0.93)         (0.091)                   (0.098)
                                                Medicaid    Outpatient Visits (% Hospital-level)
                             Post × Unins2013    0.0032      0.016   -0.0018  0.0044       0.018            0.00055          -0.0017     0.0058        -0.015*
                                                (0.0054)    (0.015) (0.0054) (0.0067)     (0.017)           (0.0070)        (0.0085)     (0.031)      (0.0071)
69




                             ..× Expansion       0.0074      -0.014   0.022   0.0070       -0.017             0.021          -0.0092                  0.00085
                                                 (0.011)    (0.018) (0.015)   (0.012)     (0.020)            (0.017)         (0.013)                   (0.011)
                                                 Medicaid   Inpatient Stays (% Hospital-level)
                             Post × Unins2013    -0.0032  -0.014       -0.00053 -0.0034       -0.014         -0.00070        -0.010     0.030          -0.0032
                                                (0.0059) (0.015)       (0.0062) (0.0070)     (0.017)         (0.0077)       (0.011)    (0.036)        (0.0097)
                             ..× Expansion       0.020+    0.027        0.046*   0.022+       0.026           0.050*         -0.013                     -0.020
                                                 (0.011) (0.018)        (0.020)  (0.012)     (0.020)          (0.023)       (0.017)                    (0.016)
                                                 Any Government        grants, appropriations or transfers for support of   hospital opera
                             Post × Unins2013   -0.049*      -0.047     0.024    -0.047+       -0.045         0.021          -0.074        0.19        0.083
                                                (0.024)     (0.073)    (0.027)    (0.027)     (0.081)        (0.032)        (0.049)       (0.13)      (0.058)
                             ..× Expansion       0.064        0.065     -0.051     0.071       0.075         -0.0041          0.12                    0.0052
                                                (0.041)     (0.083)    (0.078)    (0.045)     (0.090)        (0.099)        (0.099)                    (0.10)

                                    + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

      Note: (1) Excludes states that adopted Medicaid expansion after 2014: AK, IN, PA, MT and LA, and before 2014: CA, CT, DC, MN, NJ, and WA. (2)
       Controls for hospital size. Includes year, state, and hospital fixed effects, as well as state-specific time trends.

                                                                      Source: Medicare Cost Reports, 2006-2015
     Appendix. 4.1   Hospital Analysis using Hospital Referral Regions
70
                                                  Table B20: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Hospital Outcomes

                          Operating margin
                        Full Sample Obama     Romney    Urban     Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney    Rural Rural/Obama   Rural/Romney
     Post × Unins2013      0.051      0.21     0.031      0.057        0.21         0.044*     -0.0072    0.31           -0.10
                          (0.035)   (0.20)    (0.020)   (0.041)      (0.21)        (0.020)     (0.019)   (0.19)         (0.10)
     ..× Expansion         -0.034    -0.21     0.018     -0.039       -0.21         0.017      0.0088                   0.052
                          (0.037)   (0.20)    (0.027)   (0.043)      (0.21)        (0.027)     (0.051)                  (0.11)
                          Profit Margin
     Post × Unins2013      0.12*     0.077    0.18***    0.15*       0.077         0.22**       -0.067    -0.16         -0.10*
                         (0.052)     (0.13)   (0.053) (0.064)        (0.14)        (0.068)     (0.049)   (0.23)        (0.049)
     ..× Expansion        -0.010     -0.069    -0.038   -0.067       -0.086          -0.14      0.078                   0.082
                          (0.13)     (0.25)    (0.14)   (0.14)       (0.26)         (0.16)     (0.098)                  (0.10)
                         Bad debt   ratio to receivables
     Post × Unins2013    -0.0072     -0.011   -0.068  -0.040        -0.0037         -0.11      0.038+    -0.17+        0.0064
                         (0.053)    (0.043)  (0.057) (0.075)        (0.047)        (0.087)     (0.021)    (0.10)       (0.022)
     ..× Expansion         0.28       0.46    -0.018   0.32           0.44          0.011       0.021                   0.041
                          (0.33)     (0.45)  (0.068)  (0.36)         (0.44)        (0.097)     (0.057)                 (0.048)
                         Medicaid   Outpatient Visits
     Post × Unins2013     18.5        699.9    92.7      -126.5       748.7          96.9        61.7     337.9          46.2
                         (456.7)    (1516.4) (396.9)    (605.6)     (1581.8)       (503.1)      (50.9)   (206.6)        (47.1)
     ..× Expansion        765.6      -1247.4  789.9       996.5      -1302.2        923.0       103.4                   124.5
71




                         (720.3)    (1705.2) (787.7)    (853.2)     (1772.0)       (913.7)     (116.2)                 (102.6)
                         Medicaid   Inpatient Stays
     Post × Unins2013      19.0    53.4     40.0    -8.36       59.5            47.5        5.45      72.8+             6.36
                          (75.6)  (261.8)  (65.1)  (99.3)     (273.0)          (82.6)      (13.4)     (43.8)           (11.3)
     ..× Expansion        132.8    -51.8    58.7   170.3       -70.1            56.3       66.4*                       72.0+
                         (130.7)  (293.3) (155.5) (152.4)     (304.6)         (179.6)      (33.7)                      (39.0)
                         Any Government grants, appropriations or transfers for support of hospital operations
     Post × Unins2013    -0.0062    0.0030     0.037*    0.013      -0.0041        0.046*      -0.089*    0.21*         0.012
                         (0.016)    (0.035)   (0.018)   (0.018)     (0.037)        (0.021)     (0.037)   (0.091)       (0.041)
     ..× Expansion        0.0055    0.0028    -0.11**   -0.0045      0.021          -0.11*      0.021                   -0.014
                         (0.029)    (0.046)   (0.040)   (0.031)     (0.048)        (0.043)     (0.076)                 (0.077)
         Obs.             18395      6402      11970     14906       6020            8863       3435      347            3065

                                          + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

     Note: (1) Post period begins on 1/1/2014. (2) Include hospital fixed effects, year fixed effects, and state-specific time trends. (3) The sample of hospitals
      are in any part of the included HRRs of the COGS sample. (4) All but 33 hospital-years mapped to an HRR; those that did not match were omitted.

                                                                        Source: Medicare Cost Reports, 2006-2015
     Table B21: Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Hospital Outcomes Among Hospitals that Reported State/Local Program Costs
     Pre-2014

                           Operating margin
                         Full Sample   Obama     Romney    Urban       Urban/Obama   Urban/Romney      Rural    Rural/Obama   Rural/Romney
      Post × Unins2013       0.022   0.052**       0.013   0.027+        0.053**         0.0079        -0.023      -0.061         -0.032
                           (0.015)   (0.018)     (0.021)   (0.016)       (0.018)         (0.023)      (0.039)     (0.054)        (0.069)
      ..× Expansion         -0.026    -0.041      -0.017    -0.019        -0.051          0.026         -0.14                      -0.20
                           (0.028)   (0.038)     (0.051)   (0.024)       (0.039)         (0.031)       (0.36)                     (0.45)
                           Profit Margin
      Post × Unins2013      0.15*       -0.0031   0.17*     0.18*         -0.0079         0.19+        -0.048     -0.75**        -0.18+
                           (0.067)       (0.11)  (0.080)   (0.077)         (0.12)        (0.098)      (0.064)      (0.23)        (0.094)
      ..× Expansion          -0.13       0.037     -0.24     -0.18        -0.0015        -0.34+         0.25                     0.55**
                            (0.18)       (0.32)   (0.18)    (0.20)         (0.35)         (0.20)       (0.16)                     (0.19)
                           Bad debt    ratio to receivables
      Post × Unins2013      -1.43      -0.0040   -1.16       -2.56         -0.033          1.58        0.058       0.77+        -0.088+
                           (1.71)      (0.078)  (3.24)      (2.58)        (0.078)         (1.99)      (0.052)      (0.44)       (0.050)
      ..× Expansion          1.41       0.087    1.06         2.54          0.12           -1.67      -0.0044                    0.087
72




                           (1.71)      (0.085)  (3.24)      (2.58)        (0.086)         (1.99)       (0.12)                    (0.14)
                           Medicaid    Outpatient Visits
      Post × Unins2013      -790.9      -2163.0  257.3       -934.4       -2177.9          329.5     414.4***     506.5+         214.8*
                           (747.9)     (1975.6) (367.5)     (856.8)      (2044.4)         (437.8)     (106.5)     (279.8)        (100.8)
      ..× Expansion        1679.9        -892.0 1608.0+    1960.1+         -497.2        1816.1+       -293.0                     -71.2
                          (1063.1)     (2291.3) (923.4)    (1170.4)      (2365.8)        (1036.9)     (216.2)                    (253.2)
                           Medicaid    Inpatient Stays
      Post × Unins2013      -49.9    -141.9   30.7    -72.1                -131.6           25.5       64.4*        14.2           44.0
                           (117.0)  (324.0)  (76.1)  (133.1)              (335.1)          (91.7)      (26.6)      (53.7)        (27.3)
      ..× Expansion         209.5    -166.5  129.6    245.4                -121.8          146.5        -77.4                     -61.2
                           (171.8)  (367.9) (169.3)  (188.5)              (379.2)         (196.0)      (64.9)                    (78.0)
                           Any Government grants, appropriations          or transfers for support of hospital operations
      Post × Unins2013     0.035+        0.020   0.0084    0.063**         0.017           0.045      -0.16+        -0.27         -0.16*
                           (0.021)     (0.043)   (0.027)   (0.022)        (0.043)        (0.031)      (0.096)      (0.26)        (0.081)
      ..× Expansion         -0.018      -0.030    -0.037    -0.041         -0.028         -0.071        -0.12                     -0.033
                           (0.037)     (0.059)   (0.051)   (0.038)        (0.059)        (0.054)       (0.16)                     (0.14)
          Obs.              11709        5006      6653     10568           4849           5685          984        91             844

                                       + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Robust standard errors in parentheses.

      Note: (1) Post period begins on 1/1/2014. (2) Include hospital fixed effects, year fixed effects, and state-specific time trends. (3) The sample of hospitals
       are in any part of the included HRRs of the COGS sample. (4) All but 33 hospital-years mapped to an HRR; those that did not match were omitted.

                                                                     Source: Medicare Cost Reports, 2006-2015
