                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



THE IMPACTS OF PHYSICIAN PAYMENTS ON PATIENT ACCESS, USE, AND HEALTH

                                        Diane Alexander
                                         Molly Schnell

                                      Working Paper 26095
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26095


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019


We thank Marguerite Burns, Janet Currie, Victor Fuchs, Pinar Karaca-Mandic, Anthony Keats,
Ilyana Kuziemko, Helen Levy, Nicole Maestas, Melissa McInerney, Matthew Notowidigdo,
Hannes Schwandt, Jonathan Skinner, Jessica Van Parys, Laura Wherry, and participants in
seminars at the Bank of Mexico, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, Harris School of Public
Policy, the Ifo Institute for Economic Research, Indiana University, the Institute for Policy
Research (Northwestern), ITAM, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law, Ohio State University,
Stanford University, University of Illinois at Chicago, University of Kansas, University of
Wisconsin­Milwaukee, University of Zurich, the 2017 CSWEP CeMENT workshop, the 2017
Society of Labor Economists Annual Meeting, the 2017 Midwest Health Economics Conference,
the 2017 Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, the 2017 International Health Economics Association
Congress, the 2018 NBER Program on Children Meeting, the 2018 and 2019 American Society
of Health Economists Annual Conferences, and the 2019 NBER Program on Health Care
Meeting. Leah Plachinski provided outstanding research assistance. Generous financial support
from the Griswold Center for Economic Policy Studies and the Center for Health and Wellbeing
at Princeton University is gratefully acknowledged. This paper was previously circulated under
the title "Closing the Gap: The Impact of the Medicaid Primary Care Rate Increase on Access and
Health." Any views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All
errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Diane Alexander and Molly Schnell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impacts of Physician Payments on Patient Access, Use, and Health
Diane Alexander and Molly Schnell
NBER Working Paper No. 26095
July 2019
JEL No. H51,H75,I13,I14,I18,I24

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine how supply-side health insurance generosity affects patient access, use, and health.
Exploiting large, exogenous changes in Medicaid reimbursement rates for physicians, we find
that increasing payments for new patient office visits reduces reports of providers turning away
beneficiaries: closing the gap in payments between Medicaid and private insurers would reduce
more than two-thirds of disparities in access among adults and would eliminate such disparities
entirely among children. These improvements in access lead to more office visits, better self-
reported health, and reduced school absenteeism. While attention is often focused on the role of
demand-side insurance generosity, such as program eligibility and patient cost-sharing, our
results demonstrate that financial incentives for physicians drive access to care and have
important implications for patient health.


Diane Alexander
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
dalexander@frbchi.org

Molly Schnell
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
schnell@northwestern.edu
I    Introduction

Expanding access to health care has long been a primary goal of health policy in the United
States. To this end, substantial political and financial resources have been directed toward
increasing affordable health insurance coverage, including the recent Medicaid expansions
and the formation of new health insurance exchanges under the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

This focus has both led to and is motivated by a comprehensive literature documenting the
important role of demand-side insurance generosity--including program eligibility and plan
characteristics such as copayments--on patient access, use, and health.1 But in a system
with many health insurance providers, the benefits of having health insurance should be

mediated by the willingness of providers to accept a given type of insurance (McGuire and
Pauly, 1991). To what extent supply-side insurance generosity affects who physicians are

willing to see--and whether these decisions affect the health of patients--remains an open
question.
    This question is particularly important in light of significant disparities in access to care
between the publicly and privately insured: in 2009, office-based physicians were 35 percent

less likely to accept new patients covered by Medicaid than those covered by private insurance

(MACPAC, 2011; Decker, 2012, 2013). Since Medicaid historically pays physicians less than
two-thirds of what Medicare and private insurers pay for the same services, these disparities
in access could be driven by differences in payment generosity (Zuckerman and Goin, 2012).
Alternatively, this preference for the privately insured could be driven by complex patient

needs, payment delays, and high denial rates that are known to plague the Medicaid system
(Sloan et al., 1978; Cunningham and O'Malley, 2009; Long, 2013; Gottlieb et al., 2018; Niess
et al., 2018). Faced with little causal evidence that low payment levels are to blame for
   1
     Using both randomized controlled trials (Finkelstein et al., 2012; Baicker et al., 2013; Goldin et al.,
2019) and natural experiments (Currie and Gruber, 1996b,a; Card et al., 2008, 2009; Sommers et al., 2012;
Goodman-Bacon, 2018; Miller et al., 2019; Goodman-Bacon, 2020), researchers have documented that having
health insurance increases the use of health care services and can improve health. Studies further indicate
that demand for health care is sensitive to price, making patient cost-sharing an appealing tool to steer the
level and type of service use among those with health insurance (Manning et al., 1987; Baicker et al., 2015;
Brot-Goldberg et al., 2017; Han et al., 2020).


                                                     1
disparities in access to care, policy makers often lower Medicaid payments in response to
economic downturns and budgetary shortfalls (Smith et al., 2004; MACPAC, 2015).
       In this paper, we exploit exogenous variation in reimbursement rates to estimate the

effects of physician payment levels on patient access, use, and health. Most of our identifying
variation comes from a federal mandate that required states to increase their Medicaid
payments to match federally regulated Medicare levels for select primary care services in
2013 and 2014.2 As states traditionally had wide latitude in setting their Medicaid payments,
reimbursement rates varied dramatically across states before the primary care rate increase
went into effect. While Medicaid payments for select primary care services increased by an

average of 60 percent as a result of the mandate, rates more than doubled in eleven states

and were unchanged in two.3
       We find that increased physician reimbursement causes statistically and economically
significant improvements in access to care. Combining a new database of state-level Medicaid

reimbursement rates for new patient evaluation and management services from 2009 to 2014
with measures of access from the restricted-access National Health Interview Survey (NHIS)
files, we estimate that a $10 increase in Medicaid payments reduces reports of doctors telling

adult Medicaid beneficiaries that they are not accepting new patients or their insurance by
13 and 11 percent, respectively.4 , 5 Among children covered by Medicaid, a $10 increase in
Medicaid payments leads to a 25 percent decrease in parents reporting having trouble finding

a doctor for their children. Notably, we find little evidence that these improvements in access
among Medicaid beneficiaries are offset by negative spillovers to the privately insured. Our
   2
      Designated in Section 1202 of the ACA, the rate increase was federally funded and was intended to ease
the absorption of new Medicaid enrollees entering through the ACA's Medicaid expansions by encouraging
primary care physicians to participate in Medicaid (Blumenthal and Collins, 2014). The primary care services
covered by the mandate included evaluation and management services and vaccine administration provided
by physicians in family medicine, general internal medicine, and pediatric medicine.
    3
      Balancing regressions demonstrate that these changes in Medicaid payments are orthogonal to changes in
Medicaid enrollment, Medicaid managed care penetration, and local economic and demographic conditions.
    4
      Depending on the organization of a given practice, physicians themselves may not have full control over
the types of patients that they see. Our results should therefore be interpreted as the joint responses of
physicians and the organizations in which they work.
    5
      Compared to the average baseline payment of $76, these improvements in access imply payment elastic-
ities of physician willingness to accept new adult Medicaid beneficiaries of 0.83 to 1.01.


                                                     2
results indicate that closing the gap in payments between private insurance and Medicaid--
a $45 increase in Medicaid payments for the median state--would close over two-thirds of
disparities in access for adults and would eliminate such disparities entirely among children.

       If Medicaid beneficiaries eventually receive treatment despite difficulties accessing care,
increased payments could reduce search costs but have no impact on the use of services
or health among patients. However, we find that increased reimbursement rates lead to
greater usage and improved health among beneficiaries. Again using data from the NHIS,
we find that a $10 increase in Medicaid payments leads to a 1.4 percent increase in the prob-
ability that beneficiaries visited a doctor in the past two weeks and a 1.1 percent increase

in the probability that beneficiaries report being in very good or excellent health. Using
self-reported data on school absences from the NHIS and administrative data on school at-
tendance from the restricted-access National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP)
files, we further find that a $10 increase in Medicaid payments leads to a 14 percent decrease

in chronic absenteeism due to illness or injury and a 2.6 percent decrease in chronic absen-
teeism overall. These improvements come at the cost of only moderate increases in Medicaid

budgets: taking into account increases in physician reimbursement for both marginal and
inframarginal visits, a $10 increase in Medicaid payments for office visits increases state-level
Medicaid spending by less than 1 percent on average.
       When the federally mandated rate increase expired at the end of 2014, 34 states chose to
return to their previous payment levels (MACPAC, 2015). This provides us with a second

round of changes in reimbursement to exploit.6 Using data from 2013 to 2015, we find
that the reduction in reimbursement rates following the expiration of the federal mandate

had effects of similar magnitudes--but opposite signs--as the primary care rate increase
itself. This suggests that many of the improvements in access, use, and health that Medicaid
beneficiaries experienced when payments increased were lost when payments returned to
   6
     The decision not to extend the augmented payments may have depended on a state's experience during
the federal mandate. However, we find that states that ultimately did and did not extend the higher payments
experienced similar improvements in outcomes as a result of the primary care rate increase.



                                                     3
their previous levels.
       Of course, changes in Medicaid payments stemming from the primary care rate increase
did not occur in isolation. The U.S. health care system in general, and Medicaid in particular,

experienced many other changes over our sample period. Most relevant for our analysis, 27
states and the District of Columbia expanded their Medicaid programs in 2014 to include
coverage for low-income, childless adults. While we control for Medicaid expansions in all
analyses, four additional sets of results confirm that our findings are not confounded by
the 2014 Medicaid expansions. First, balancing regressions demonstrate that our identifying
variation neither predicts state-level Medicaid expansions nor is associated with changes in

Medicaid enrollment, Medicaid managed care penetration, or patient socio-demographics.
Second, we find similar effects of changing reimbursement rates in states that did and did
not expand their Medicaid programs under the ACA. Third, we estimate similar effects
when we truncate the sample period to exclude the 2014 Medicaid expansions. Finally, as

noted above, we estimate similar effects of reimbursement rates using variation in payments
stemming from the expiration of the federal mandate in 2015, a year after the majority of

Medicaid expansions had gone into effect.
       While economists, public health researchers, and policy makers have long been interested
in the effects of program generosity on access, use, and health among beneficiaries, causal
analyses have been hampered by two important data limitations. First, before the primary
care rate increase, most states had not made large changes to their Medicaid reimbursement

rates in the last decades, and those that had chose to do so voluntarily.7 Previous research on
program generosity has therefore had to rely on cross-sectional associations that likely suffer

from omitted variable bias, case studies of single fee changes that may be confounded by time
trends, and difference-in-difference models in which treatment is potentially endogenous.8 In
   7
     Physician reimbursement rates in Medicare offer even less variation, as changes are made to a single,
nationwide fee schedule. Furthermore, Medicare reimbursement rates for physicians have remained essentially
the same for the past decade and will remain largely unchanged until at least 2025 under the Medicare Access
and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015.
   8
     Cross-sectional studies: Sloan et al. (1978); Hadley (1979); Long et al. (1986); Mitchell (1991); Cohen
(1993); Cohen and Cunningham (1995); Showalter (1997). Case studies: Fox et al. (1992); Fanning and


                                                     4
contrast, we exploit a federal mandate that induced large, exogenous changes in Medicaid
reimbursement rates across the United States.
    Second, the rise of Medicaid managed care that began in the early 1990s has made it

difficult to know how much physicians are actually reimbursed through Medicaid. In a fee-for-
service system, state Medicaid programs pay providers a fixed amount for each service they
provide. Although time consuming, these payment rates can be hand-collected by contacting
each state (as we do in this study). Under managed care, in contrast, states typically pay
managed care organizations (MCOs) a fixed amount per beneficiary to provide all covered
services, and MCOs pay providers. While over 60 percent of Medicaid beneficiaries are

enrolled in comprehensive risk-based managed care plans, states--and in turn researchers--
know little about how or how much MCOs actually pay physicians for the services that they
provide. As the primary care rate increase required states to raise their Medicaid payments to
achieve parity with Medicare levels for both their fee-for-service and managed care programs,

we are able to examine the effects of changing physician payments on the entire Medicaid
system.9
    Our work contributes to an ongoing debate on the effects of the Medicaid primary care
rate increase on access to care. An early audit study found that the federal mandate was

associated with increases in appointment availability among Medicaid patients in ten states
(Polsky et al., 2015).10 In contrast, recent work by Decker (2018) found that Medicaid
acceptance rates in an annual survey of 1,500 physicians did not increase during the primary
care rate increase. Using claims data on office visits among a convenience sample of 11
percent of primary care physicians, Mulcahy et al. (2018) also found no association between
the rate increase and office visits among Medicaid beneficiaries. In contrast to this previous
work, which relied on small, selected samples and included limited--if any--information on
de Alteriis (1993); Adams (1994); Gruber et al. (1997); Coburn et al. (1999). Difference-in-difference models:
Baker and Royalty (2000); Shen and Zuckerman (2005); Decker (2007, 2009); Atherly and Mortensen (2014);
Chen (2014); Buchmueller et al. (2015); Callison and Nguyen (2017).
   9
     Section II.A and Appendix A.3 outline how the primary care rate increase was applied to managed care.
  10
     Candon et al. (2018) replicate the analysis following the end of the mandate in 2015 and find that
appointment availability declined in the sampled states that did not extend the increased payments.


                                                      5
the size of the rate increase in given states, we use comprehensive data covering every state
and exploit continuous variation in the magnitude of the payment increases. Notably, we
demonstrate that the effects of the federal mandate scale linearly with the size of the payment

increase. This highlights that simple before-after designs--which average treatment effects
across states that experienced payment increases of 0 to over 200 percent as a result of the
mandate--lead to estimates that mask the true relationship between reimbursement rates
and access to care. Additionally, we look beyond access alone and find that improvements in
access resulting from increased payments lead to increased use and improvements in health.11
   Our paper also adds to a growing literature documenting the importance of financial
incentives in driving physician behavior. Prior work illustrates the impact of physician

payment levels on treatment choices, decisions over treatment intensity, and adoption of new
technologies, suggesting that higher fees lead providers to do more once a patient is through

their door (Rice, 1983; Yip, 1998; Gruber et al., 1999; Clemens and Joshua, 2014; Coey,
2015). Our work complements these findings by demonstrating that financial incentives
further drive extensive margin decisions governing who physicians are willing to see. This
calls into question the common belief that demand-side incentives, via their influence on the

initiation of visits, are the predominant dimension of insurance generosity that affects access

to care (Cutler and Zeckhauser, 2000).
   More broadly, our work relates to the literature that studies the effects of insurance
coverage itself on the use of medical services and health outcomes. The health effects of health
insurance have long been debated in the literature, with large-scale randomized controlled

trials finding that health insurance improves self-reported health (Finkelstein et al., 2012)
but has no widespread effects on clinical measures (Brook et al., 1984; Baicker et al., 2013).
  11
     The studies by Decker (2018) and Mulcahy et al. (2018) further incorporate implementation delays
that were associated with the rate increase. Since increased payments were made retroactively in states
that experienced such delays, we would expect the behavior of physicians to respond when the augmented
payments went into effect on January 1, 2013. In fact, even though some states took until May 2013 to
release the increased payments (MACPAC, 2015), our event studies demonstrate that physician behavior
responded equally in 2013 and 2014. Incorporating payment delays therefore biases the results towards zero
because some of the "pre-period" in such specifications was actually treated.



                                                    6
However, mounting evidence using both randomized controlled trials (Goldin et al., 2019)
and natural experiments (Card et al., 2009; Sommers et al., 2012; Goodman-Bacon, 2018;
Miller et al., 2019) documents that having health insurance reduces mortality. We add to this

literature by documenting that improvements in health care access resulting from increased
payments for physicians lead to improvements in both self-reported health and reductions
in school absenteeism due to illness and injury.12 This highlights that any positive health
effects of health insurance will be mediated by supply-side insurance generosity.
       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. We provide an overview of our data in Section

II. Section III introduces our empirical strategy and examines the impacts of increased pay-
ments on access to care, use of services, and health. Section IV probes the robustness of these
findings. Section V examines the effects of the reduction in reimbursement rates resulting
from the end of the federal mandate. Section VI concludes by discussing mechanisms and
implications for state Medicaid budgets.



II       Data

We use three main data sources to document how physician reimbursement rates affect
access to primary care, frequency of office visits, and health among patients. To measure

physician reimbursement, we construct a new dataset containing Medicaid payments for new
patient evaluation and management services for all states from 2009 to 2015. To measure
patient access, use, and health, we use the NHIS. Finally, to corroborate the NHIS outcomes
related to schooling, we use data on school absences and test scores from the NAEP. These
datasets are supplemented with (1) information from the Health Resources and Services

Administration's (HRSA) Area Resource Files (ARF) to control for spatial and temporal
differences in socio-demographics and health care resources and (2) information from the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services's (CMS) Medicaid Managed Care Enrollment
  12
    The reductions in illness-related school absenteeism that we document provide a plausible mechanism for
work showing that public health insurance expansions among children have long-run effects on educational
attainment (Brown et al., 2015; Cohodes et al., 2016).

                                                    7
Reports and National Health Expenditure Data (NHED) to examine changes in Medicaid
enrollment and spending.13


II.A       Medicaid Reimbursement Rates

Our primary explanatory variable is the amount that Medicaid pays physicians for new pa-
tient evaluation and management services across states and over time. Under a fee-for-service
system, there are five Medicaid reimbursement rates for these services, each corresponding
to a specific length and complexity of visit (current procedural terminology (CPT) codes

99201­99205).14 We obtained historical payment data for these five codes by contacting
the Medicaid offices of all 50 states and the District of Columbia.15 Our main results use
reimbursement rates associated with the most commonly billed new patient evaluation and

management code over our sample period: new patient office visits of mid-level complexity
(CPT code 99203).16 Given the strong correlation between Medicaid payments for CPT
codes 99201­99205 within states over time (see Figures A1 and A2), all of our results are

robust to using payments for these alternative CPT codes.
       The amount physicians are paid under fee-for-service Medicaid does not tell the full
story, however, as over half of Medicaid beneficiaries are enrolled in managed care. While

the primary care rate increase applied to both fee-for-service and managed care Medicaid

programs, it was not immediately clear how states would adjust their capitation payments
made to MCOs--or how MCOs would pass these increased payments through to providers--
  13
      State-level information on the fraction of Medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in managed care is missing
from the 2012 Medicaid Managed Care Enrollment Reports. We therefore use data from a CMS report titled
"Medicaid Managed Care Trends and Snapshots 2000­2013" for 2012.
   14
      Some states have modifier codes that allow for different payment rates depending on patient character-
istics, such as age. Ideally we would incorporate modifier codes for children, although in practice this is
difficult due to varying age group carve-outs across states (e.g., "pediatric only" or under age 15, 20, or 21)
and restrictions on the level of aggregation allowed for merging variables within the NHIS. We therefore use
base rates in all states but note that Medicaid payments for children will on average be slightly higher.
   15
      We have complete payment data for 44 states and the District of Columbia. Appendix A.2 outlines the
methodologies used to impute payment rates for the six states with partial payment histories.
   16
      Of new patient visits billed to Medicare in 2009, the relative billing frequencies across CPT codes 99201­
99205 were 3 percent, 19 percent, 43 percent, 27 percent, and 8 percent, respectively (Levinson, 2012). Our
results are robust to using a billing frequency­weighted average across the five reimbursement rates for new
patient visits. Unfortunately, analogous reports are not available for Medicaid.

                                                       8
to comply with the federal mandate. In light of these complications, CMS required states to
submit information on the fraction of capitation payments made to MCOs that were used to
reimburse qualified providers for the primary care services targeted by the primary care rate

increase. Combined with data on utilization, these cost estimates were then used to generate
implied fee-for-service rates to which the payment increases could be applied.17 According
to the federal mandate, these additional payments were required to be passed through to
qualified physicians regardless of the payment scheme used by MCOs for provider reimburse-
ment.18 Combining our payment variation with administrative tax records, Gottlieb et al.
(2020) demonstrate that the primary care rate increase indeed led to increases in take-home

pay for primary care physicians.
    We take managed care into account by creating an expected Medicaid payment measure

that combines the state-level fee-for-service data with (1) state-level managed care to fee-
for-service payment ratios and (2) state-level Medicaid managed care enrollment shares.
In particular, we first use Medicaid managed care to fee-for-service payment ratios from
the Government Accountability Office (GAO) for office-based evaluation and management

services to calculate Medicaid managed care payments from the fee-for-service rates.19 Using
data from CMS on the percentage of Medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in managed care annually

in each state (shown in Figure A3), we then define expected Medicaid payments at the state-
quarter level as the enrollment-weighted average of Medicaid fee-for-service and managed care
  17
     As outlined in Appendix A.3, states either used the utilization and implied rate information from 2009
to adjust their 2013 and 2014 capitation payments or maintained their original capitation rates and made
supplemental payments following a pre-specified period based on realized utilization and cost data.
  18
     If MCOs did not pass-through the increased payments to providers due to limited scope for enforcement,
then the primary care rate increase would have created incentives for MCOs to attract additional enrollees.
However, as shown in Table 1, we find no evidence that our identifying variation is correlated with Medicaid
managed care enrollment.
  19
     These payment ratios come from a GAO report documenting the difference between managed care and
fee-for-service payments under Medicaid at the state level in 2010 (GAO, 2014). The report provides payment
ratios for two de-identified states and eighteen identified states (Arizona, California, Connecticut, Florida,
Georgia, Indiana, Michigan, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South
Carolina, Texas, Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin). We use the recorded ratio for states in the report and
the median of 5 percent more under managed care for missing states. As shown in Section IV, our results
are robust to only using states in the GAO report and to imputing missing states with the mean (14 percent
more under managed care).



                                                      9
payments.20
       Both the initial geographic variation in Medicaid payment rates and the changes over
our sample period are substantial. Figure 1 plots our constructed measure of Medicaid
payments at the state-quarter level from 2009 to 2015.21 In the first quarter of 2009, the
expected Medicaid payment for a new patient office visit of mid-level complexity ranged
from $37 in Minnesota to $160 in Alaska. Few states made meaningful changes to their
reimbursement rates in the next three years: between 2009 and 2012, Medicaid payments for

new patient office visits increased by an average of only $4.27 across states, with more than
half of states making no changes to their payment schedules for evaluation and management
services. When the primary care rate increase went into effect in 2013, the range tightened,
with states paying physicians between $101 (Alabama) to $171 (Alaska).22 As shown in
Figure 2, the primary care rate increase was sufficient to push all states into the top quintile

of reimbursement rates as defined in 2009.
       While the federal mandate removed state control over the timing and nature of the pay-

ment increases, the magnitudes of the payment increases within states depended on their
baseline level of payments. Estimates that leverage within-state variation in payments stem-
ming from the federal mandate will therefore be biased if states with different payment rates
in the pre-period were on systematically different trends. In Section III.B, we estimate event
study specifications to demonstrate that states with differing payment increases were on
  20
    That is, letting Rsqy
                      FFS
                           denote the Medicaid fee-for-service reimbursement rate in state s in quarter q of
         MC 
year y , R
         R
           FFS        denote the managed care to fee-for-service payment ratio under Medicaid in state s in
                s,2010
2010, and %Bsy MC
                   denote the fraction of Medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in a managed care plan in state s in
year y , the expected Medicaid reimbursement rate in each state-quarter before and after the primary care
rate increase is approximated by
                                                                         MC 
                         ~              MC     FFS        MC      FFS      R
                       Rsqy = (1 %Bsy ) · Rsqy + %Bsy · Rsqy ·
                                                                          RF F S s,2010
  21
     Figure A2 plots quarterly fee-for-service Medicaid payment rates for CPT codes 99201­99205 in each
state from 2009 to 2015.
  22
     The remaining variation across states comes from two sources. First, Medicare payment levels vary
across locations due to adjustments for geographic and market area differences. Second, Alaska and North
Dakota maintained Medicaid payment rates that exceeded federally mandated Medicare levels over the
sample period.


                                                     10
similar trends in terms of access, use, and health before the federal mandate. To further
examine whether within-state variation in Medicaid payments is orthogonal to changes in
Medicaid enrollment and local socio-demographics, we run balancing regressions in which

we use potential confounders as dependent variables (Pei et al., 2019).23 As shown in Table
1, we find no evidence that our identifying variation is correlated with changes in Medi-
caid enrollment, Medicaid managed care penetration, or local economic and demographic
conditions.

      When the primary care rate increase was initially passed, it was unclear whether federal
funding for the increased payments would extend beyond 2014. In the end, the funding
was not extended, and in 2015, 34 states chose to return to their previous payment levels
(see Figure A4). While this provides another large change in payment rates, states may

have made this decision based on their experience during the primary care rate increase

(MACPAC, 2015). Thus, in our main analysis we do not use variation in Medicaid payments
stemming from the expiration of the federal mandate. Instead, we examine the effects of this
reverse experiment on outcomes separately and explore the potential endogeneity concerns.
      Although the federal government mandated that states increase select Medicaid payments

to primary care providers starting on January 1, 2013, many states experienced implementa-
tion delays (MACPAC, 2015). We do not incorporate state-level variation in the implemen-

tation of the primary care rate increase into our Medicaid payment variable; that is, we use
the payment rates reported by the state as effective in each month and year. Because states
with implementation delays were required to retroactively pay physicians the difference be-

tween the amount paid and the enhanced Medicaid rate, the behavior of physicians--who
are largely not credit constrained--should respond at the start of the rate increase rather
than when the higher payments were actually released. This is confirmed in our event study
designs, which show that physician behavior responded equally in 2013 and 2014.
      Finally, we can only expect physician behavior to respond to increased payments if
 23
      In particular, we estimate analogs of Equation (2) introduced in Section III.C.



                                                      11
providers are aware of changes in reimbursement. We note that the primary care rate in-
crease was covered widely by news outlets: for example, The Washington Post published
an article on December 21, 2012--before the federal mandate went into effect--titled "Oba-

macare is about to give Medicaid docs a 73 percent raise" (The Washington Post, 2012).
As Medicaid payments for select primary care services more than doubled in some states,
it is reasonable that physicians would take notice of the change, and thus there is scope for
physician behavior to respond.


II.B      National Health Interview Survey

The NHIS is the largest in-person household survey that tracks health care access, health
care utilization, and health outcomes across the United States. While many data sets mea-

sure health patterns, the NHIS is well-suited for our study for a number of reasons. First,
while health insurance claims data sets provide information on the use of health care services,

they provide no information on the difficulties that patients face accessing care. Further-
more, as the United States does not have a national all-payer claims database, nearly all
claims data cover only a subset of patients with a specific insurance type in often limited
geographic areas.24 Finally, most other surveys only collect information on insurance status,
not insurance provider, and are not large enough to be used for state-level estimates.25 In
contrast, the NHIS allows us to exploit state-level variation in Medicaid reimbursement rates

over time to measure the effects of changing payments on access, use, and health separately
  24
      We applied for the Medicaid Analytic eXtract (MAX) data to corroborate our findings surrounding use
of health care services and to provide additional information on potential mechanisms. While having these
additional outcomes will help expand the scope of our analysis in future work, we stress that the MAX data
is not a substitute for the NHIS. In addition to providing no information on access or outcomes for patients
with private insurance, the MAX data does not cover the entire United States. According to CMS, only
28 (17) states submitted sufficient information to be included in data extracts for 2013 (2014), which will
substantially limit our identifying variation.
   25
      The NHIS is very thorough with eliciting and coding insurance type. Rather than relying solely on
patient reports of insurance type, which would lead to misclassification if Medicaid beneficiaries with private,
managed care plans do not recognize that they are covered by Medicaid, the NHIS asks patients to report
the actual name of their health insurance plan (e.g., Aetna Better Health of Illinois). The NHIS then uses
this information to code insurance type based on their own categorization of over 4,000 plans. Additional
details are provided on the NHIS website: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/health_insurance/hi_eval.htm.



                                                      12
among patients with private insurance and Medicaid beneficiaries.
       We use outcomes from three NHIS sample components in our analysis: the family file,
the sample child file, and the sample adult file. The family component collects demographic

information and answers to basic questions (e.g., health status) for all members of a family.
The sample child and sample adult components each sample one child and one adult in the
family and ask a longer list of more detailed questions (e.g., days of school or work missed
in the past year). Sample sizes are thus more limited when working with questions asked in
the sample child or sample adult files relative to the full family sample.
       To measure access to health care services, we consider whether respondents report diffi-

culty with doctors either not accepting new patients or not accepting their insurance.26 For
children, we further consider indicators denoting whether parents report having difficulty

finding a doctor to see their child and whether their child has a usual place of care. To
measure use of health care services, we consider whether respondents report having had an

office visit in the past two weeks.
       Policies targeting health care access do so with the hope that improving access will
improve health. To examine whether higher reimbursement rates lead to better health,
we consider indicators denoting whether people rate their health as excellent/very good or

fair/poor. We further consider the number of work days adults report having missed and the

number of school days parents report their child having missed in the past year. Notably, the
NHIS asks specifically about school absences due to illness or injury, allowing us to focus on
the category of absences most likely to be sensitive to changes in access to primary care. We
focus on chronic absenteeism when considering school absences, which we define as missing
fourteen or more days of school in the past year.27
  26
     The exact survey questions used are outlined in Appendix A.1. All questions were asked throughout
our full sample period except those asking whether children and adults had trouble finding a doctor, which
started in 2011.
  27
     Chronic absenteeism is linked to low academic achievement, including test scores, test score growth,
and on-time graduation rates (Buehler et al., 2012; Connolly and Olson, 2012; Spradlin et al., 2012; Utah
Education Policy Center, 2012; Schanzenbach et al., 2016). Unlike average absenteeism, rates of chronic
absenteeism vary widely across schools, and all but thirteen states use chronic absenteeism in their account-
ability system under the Every Student Succeeds Act (Bauer et al., 2018).


                                                     13
   As shown in Table 2, Medicaid beneficiaries and the privately insured have a similar
likelihood of visiting a doctor in the past two weeks. However, those covered by Medicaid
are more than twice as likely to report difficulties finding physicians who are willing to accept

them as new patients. Baseline differences in health between Medicaid beneficiaries and the
privately insured are also large: compared to respondents with private insurance, Medicaid
beneficiaries are almost three times more likely to report being in fair or poor health, and
children covered by Medicaid are twice as likely to be chronically absent.
   To account for differences in demographics and the availability of medical resources across
locations and over time, we control for individual demographics from the NHIS and county-

level characteristics from the ARF. Table 3 reports summary statistics for individual and
county-level characteristics by insurer. Relative to the privately insured, Medicaid benefi-
ciaries have lower income and education levels, live in larger families, are less likely to be
married, and are more likely to be black or Hispanic. Respondents covered by Medicaid also

live in poorer, more densely populated areas.
   Although much of the NHIS data is publicly available, geographic identifiers for ar-

eas smaller than Census regions are restricted. In order to link our outcome measures to
state-level variation in Medicaid reimbursement rates and county-level health resources, we
obtained access to confidential state and county identifiers. All of our analyses using the
NHIS are therefore conducted in a Census Research Data Center.


II.C     National Assessment of Educational Progress

To examine whether increased payments to physicians lead to better educational outcomes
among low-income children, we supplement self-reported days of missed school from the
NHIS with administrative data from the NAEP. The NAEP is a congressionally mandated

assessment that provides information on reading and mathematics performance in grades 4
and 8 every other year in all states. Not all schools are tested in each wave, although the
schools and students participating in NAEP are selected to be representative of all schools


                                               14
nationally and of public schools at the district level. We use data from both the publicly
available, state-level files and the restricted-access, individual-level files for 2009, 2011, and
2013.

   Importantly for our work, the NAEP reports whether a child missed 0, 1­2, 3­4, 5­
10, and 11 or more days of school (for any reason) in the month preceding their national
assessment exam. While the NAEP data does not include information on absences due
specifically to illness or injury (as in the NHIS), most school absences--particularly among
young children--are attributable to either acute illnesses such as respiratory infections and
gastroenteritis or chronic childhood diseases such as asthma (Neuzil et al., 2002; Ehrlich

et al., 2014; Wiseman and Dawson, 2015). As these conditions are commonly treated in a
primary care setting, overall school absenteeism may be responsive to changes in access to
primary care.
   As in the NHIS, we focus on the fraction of chronically absent children. When consid-

ering absences over the period of a month (rather than over the course of a year, as in the
NHIS), chronic absenteeism is commonly defined as three or more days of missed school

(KewalRamani et al., 2007; Ginsburg et al., 2014; Schanzenbach et al., 2016). Figure A5
shows the distribution of absences averaged over math and reading assessments in grades 4
and 8. There are large differences by grade, with a larger fraction of students reporting zero
absences in the past month in grade 4 than in grade 8.
   As was seen in the NHIS data, there are large differences in the number of absences by

socioeconomic status. Although we do not observe whether children are covered by Medicaid
in the NAEP data, we can identify children that are eligible to receive free school meals.
Like Medicaid, free school lunch is a means-tested program; according to income eligibility
limits for each program, all children who are eligible for free school meals are also eligible for
Medicaid (but not vice versa).28 In grade 4, 54 percent of children ineligible for free lunch
  28
     Across the United States, children in households with income at or below 130 percent of the federal
poverty level are eligible to receive free meals at school (FRAC, 2018). Medicaid eligibility requirements
vary by state, although the federal minimum income limit for children's health coverage is 138 percent of
the federal poverty level with a median income limit of 149 percent across states (KFF, 2018).


                                                   15
missed zero days in the past month compared to 44 percent among students eligible for free
lunch (Figure A5). The discrepancy in school absences by free lunch eligibility is similar in
grade 8, though fewer children report zero absences in both groups.

   In all grades and subjects, average test scores are monotonically decreasing in the number
of school days missed in the past month (see Figure A6). Given the negative correlation
between absences and test scores, it is possible that test scores could be affected by changes
in access to primary care. We therefore also look at the effects of physician reimbursement
on average state-level performance on national math and reading assessments.



III     Physician Payments and Access, Use, and Health

The summary statistics in Table 2 demonstrate that those covered by Medicaid face greater
difficulty accessing health care services and have worse health than the privately insured. To

investigate whether differences in physician reimbursement contribute to these differences
in outcomes, we examine the effects of changes in physician payments under Medicaid on
patient access, use, and health. Sections III.A through III.C consider a range of outcomes

from the NHIS, while Section III.D turns to educational outcomes from the NAEP. We
focus on the impacts of the increase in Medicaid payments stemming from the onset of the

primary care rate increase in 2013 throughout Section III; Section V considers the effects of
the reduction in Medicaid payments following the expiration of the federal mandate in 2015.


III.A     Raw Data

We begin by examining patterns in the raw data. To do so, we divide states into deciles based

on the size of the payment increase that they experienced under the Medicaid primary care
rate increase. Figure 3 plots the average change in various outcomes in the two years after the
payment increase (2013­2014) versus the two years before (2011­2012) against the average
payment increase in each decile. We plot two lines for each outcome--one for Medicaid


                                              16
beneficiaries and one for privately insured patients--that depict the best fit line through
these points. We adjust the outcomes such that higher values denote better outcomes; an
increasing slope therefore indicates that larger payment increases are associated with larger

improvements in a given outcome.
       Across a range of measures, we see that Medicaid beneficiaries in states with larger
increases in Medicaid payments saw greater improvements in access, frequency of office
visits, and health.29 For example, in the upper left subplot of Figure 3 we see that Medicaid
beneficiaries in states in the lowest decile of payment increases (average increase of $17.43)
experienced little change in the probability of having an office visit in the past two weeks

following the payment increase, whereas Medicaid beneficiaries in states in the highest decile

of payment increases (average of $88.41) experienced an average increase of nearly 6 percent.
Notably, across most outcomes there is no association between changes in Medicaid payments
and changes in outcomes among privately insured patients; that is, the line is flat.


III.B       Event Studies

To examine the timing of the effects and to control for differences across individuals and
locations, we estimate event study specifications. In particular, letting                   P ayments =
P ayments,2013Q1     P ayments,2012Q4 denote the change in Medicaid payments resulting from
the primary care rate increase in state s, we estimate the following equation:


                Outcomeicsy =      0   +   y   P ayments    y   + Xi + Zcy +   s   + icsy           (1)


where Outcomeicsy denotes an outcome for Medicaid beneficiary i living in county c in state
s in year y ; Xi and Zcy are vectors of individual and county characteristics (listed in Table
3), respectively; and    s   and   y   are state and year fixed effects, respectively. By scaling the
  29
    Many of the subfigures in Figure 3 show a slight worsening of outcomes over time among Medicaid
beneficiaries in states whose reimbursement rates were largely unaffected by the federal mandate. This
highlights the importance of an empirical design that controls for Medicaid-specific time trends.



                                                    17
association between time and the outcome by the extent of the treatment, this specification
exploits the full variation in Medicaid payments induced by the primary care rate increase.
As in the raw data analysis, we adjust the outcomes such that higher values are indicative

of better outcomes. We use the sample weights provided in the NHIS and cluster standard
errors by state.
       Figure 4 plots the   ys   from Equation (1). The coefficients before the primary care rate
increase-- ^2009 through ^2012 --are statistically indistinguishable from zero, indicating that
the outcomes were stable before the federal mandate. Following the rate increase, however,
there are persistent, significant increases in many of the outcomes. For example, the bottom

left subplot indicates that Medicaid beneficiaries saw improvements in physicians' willingness

to accept new patients when Medicaid reimbursement rates increased in 2013 and 2014.
The effects are immediate for most outcomes, although there is some evidence that health
effects--such as patients reporting their health as excellent or very good--accrue over time.30
As shown in Figure A7, we observe no effects among patients with private insurance.


III.C        Regression Analysis

Figure 4 demonstrates that increased Medicaid payments lead to improved outcomes among
Medicaid beneficiaries. To quantify the effects of physician reimbursement on access, use,
and health, we estimate the following specification:


               Outcomeicsqy =      0   +   1 P aymentsqy   + Xi + Zcy +     s   +   qy   + icsqy        (2)


where Outcomeicsqy denotes an outcome for respondent i living in county c in state s in
quarter q of year y , P aymentsqy denotes Medicaid payments in state s in quarter q of year
  30
    Coefficients for 2013 may also be smaller because the reference periods for some questions include part
of the pre-period. For example, when respondents are asked about difficulty finding a doctor over the past
twelve months, respondents who were interviewed before the end of 2013 will include some of their experience
from before the rate increase. Table A1 lists the reference window for each outcome.




                                                     18
y,        qy   are quarter-year fixed effects, and all other variables are defined as in Equation (1).31
We divide payments by $10 such that               1   represents the effect of a $10 increase in Medicaid
payments.32 For the outcomes covering a retrospective time period of twelve months, the
payment variable is the average Medicaid payment over the past four quarters; for all other
outcomes we use the average payment in the quarter of the interview. Since we include
state and quarter-year fixed effects, the coefficient of interest,             1,   is identified by changes
in Medicaid payments within states over time. As before, all regressions use the sampling
weights provided in the NHIS, and standard errors are clustered by state.

          Results from estimation of Equation (2) are presented in Table 4. The first three columns
of each panel show the effects of changes in Medicaid payments on survey respondents covered
by Medicaid. Looking first to columns (1) and (2) of Panel B, we see that a $10 increase in
Medicaid payments leads to a 0.54 percentage point decrease in the probability that parents
report difficulty finding a doctor to see their child covered by Medicaid and a 0.36 percentage

point decrease in the likelihood that the child has no usual place of care (reflecting decreases

relative to the mean of 25 and 11 percent, respectively). Among adult Medicaid beneficiaries,
a $10 increase in Medicaid payments causes both a 0.82 percentage point reduction in the
probability of being told that a physician is not accepting new patients and a 0.89 percentage
point reduction in the probability of being told that one's insurance is not accepted (decreases

of 13 and 11 percent of the mean, respectively; see columns (1) and (2) of Panel C). Notably,
these improvements in access lead to more use: in the full sample, a $10 increase in Medicaid
payments increases the probability that respondents covered by Medicaid had an office visit
in the past two weeks by 0.28 percentage points (1.4 percent relative to the mean; column
     31
      Recall from Figure 1 that some states made minor adjustments to their Medicaid payments between 2009
and 2012 (over our sample window but before the federally mandated primary care rate increase). Most of
our estimates of Equation (2) include these changes, although we confirm in Section IV that our results are
robust to excluding variation in payments from before the federal mandate.
   32
      As shown in Figure 3, the relationship between increases in Medicaid payments and changes in our
outcome variables is approximately linear. We therefore prefer a linear specification both because it is
suggested by the data and because it allows for the coefficients to be easily interpreted as the effect of a $10
increase in payments. We can, however, use a specification in which we consider log (P aymentsqy ) on the
right-hand side. The elasticities implied from both specifications are quantitatively similar.



                                                         19
(1) of Panel A).33
    In addition to improved access and use, increases in Medicaid payments lead to better
health among the program's beneficiaries. A $10 increase in physician reimbursement reduces
the probability that beneficiaries report being in fair or poor health by 0.31 percentage
points (1.8 percent of the mean; column (2) of Panel A) and increases the probability that

beneficiaries report being in excellent or very good health by 0.62 percentage points (1.1
percent of the mean; column (3) of Panel A). Among young children covered by Medicaid, a
$10 increase in Medicaid payments reduces the probability of being chronically absent due
to illness or injury by 0.65 percentage points (a decrease of 14 percent of the mean; column

(3) of Panel B).34 There is no reduction in illness-related chronic absenteeism among older
children covered by Medicaid (column (4) of Panel B); this is likely due to the fact that

absences among older children are less closely tied to health (Neuzil et al., 2002; Ehrlich
et al., 2014; Wiseman and Dawson, 2015).35 We further find no reduction in days of work
missed among adult Medicaid beneficiaries (column (3) of Panel C).

    To get a sense of what these effects imply for the typical state under the primary care rate
increase, we consider the effects of an increase in Medicaid payments of $35--the median
increase in Medicaid payments across states from the fourth quarter of 2012 to the first

quarter of 2013. Multiplying the point estimates in Table 4 by 3.5, we see that an increase

of $35 in physician reimbursement under Medicaid leads to a 5.0 percent increase in the
   33
      Using information on respondent age, we can examine effects of increased Medicaid reimbursement rates
on office visits among children and adults separately. Although imprecise, the effects are very similar for
children and adults: we find that a $10 increase in Medicaid reimbursement leads to a 1.0 (1.5) percent
increase in the probability that a child (adult) had an office visit in the past two weeks.
   34
      We find similar results when we consider a continuous measure of school absences rather than an indicator
for chronic absenteeism. As shown in Table A2, a $10 increase in Medicaid payments leads to an average
reduction of 0.23 days of school missed due to illness or injury per year among young children covered
by Medicaid, a 6.4 percent reduction relative to the mean. We find no effects of Medicaid payments on
illness-related school absences for older children covered by Medicaid or for children with private insurance.
   35
      Acute illnesses such as respiratory infections and gastroenteritis and chronic childhood diseases such as
asthma are among the most common reasons for school absenteeism among young children (Neuzil et al., 2002;
Ehrlich et al., 2014; Wiseman and Dawson, 2015). Improved access to timely primary care could therefore
lead to contemporaneous improvements in school attendance by allowing children to access antibiotics for
bacterial infections, increasing the prevalence of influenza vaccinations, or improving the management of
chronic diseases. We plan to explore the importance of these mechanisms using the Medicaid MAX data in
future work (see Footnote 24).


                                                      20
probability of having visited a doctor's office in the past two weeks, a 6.2 percent decrease in
the probability of being in fair or poor health, and a 3.9 percent increase in the probability of
being in very good or excellent health among beneficiaries. Applying the same calculations

to the access measures further indicates that the Medicaid primary care rate increase nearly
eliminated parents having trouble finding doctors for their Medicaid-covered children and
approximately halved these difficulties for adult beneficiaries in the median state.
       We can compute elasticities by comparing the effects of a $10 increase in Medicaid pay-
ments in percentage terms to the corresponding percent change in Medicaid payments implied
by a $10 increase.36 , 37 As reported in column (4) of Table 5, our results imply elasticities
with respect to Medicaid payments of physician willingness to accept new adult Medicaid

patients of 0.83, office visits among beneficiaries of 0.11, and self-reported good health among
beneficiaries of 0.08. The implied elasticities for access among children are even more pro-

nounced, suggesting that physicians are more responsive to payments for children. Although
billing difficulties known to plague the Medicaid system should not depend on beneficiary
age (Cunningham and O'Malley, 2009; Gottlieb et al., 2018), providers report that adult
Medicaid beneficiaries have a wider breadth of needs, which makes managing their cases

more difficult than those of children or patients with private insurance (Long, 2013; Niess et

al., 2018).38 It is therefore reasonable that physician behavior would be more responsive to
Medicaid payments for children.

       While we find strong evidence that increasing physician reimbursement under Medicaid
improves access and health among the program's beneficiaries, there is little evidence of
spillovers to the privately insured. The last three columns of Table 4 present analogous

estimates for privately insured respondents, who may be indirectly affected by Medicaid
  36
     Compared to the average baseline Medicaid payment of $76 for a new patient office visit of mid-level
complexity, a $10 increase in payments corresponds to a 13.2 percent increase.
  37
     Alternatively, we can calculate elasticities by including payments in logs instead of in levels in Equation
(2). The elasticities from this alternative specification are very similar to those reported in Table 5.
  38
     Niess et al. (2018) surveyed 806 physicians in Colorado to assess their beliefs and attitudes about adult
Medicaid patients. Eighty-six percent of respondents had an unfavorable attitude toward adult Medicaid
beneficiaries, with respondents most likely to agree that "socially complicated" and "medically complicated"
described a typical adult Medicaid patient.


                                                      21
patients becoming relatively more attractive to physicians. However, we find no change in
access, use, or health among the privately insured when Medicaid payments increase, with
the exception of parents having slightly more trouble finding a doctor for their children

(an increase of 0.13 percentage points, significant at the 10 percent level). Not only are
the coefficients nearly all statistically insignificant despite large sample sizes, but across
all outcomes the point estimates are much smaller than those observed among respondents
covered by Medicaid.39
       These effects have large implications for disparities in access to care between the publicly
and privately insured. Column (3) of Table 5 reports baseline disparities in our outcome

measures between Medicaid beneficiaries and patients with private insurance. Columns (6)
through (8) show how much of this disparity is reduced by increasing Medicaid payments by

$10, $35, and $45, respectively. As shown in column (7), increasing Medicaid payments by
$35--the median increase under the primary care rate increase--reduces disparities in reports
of doctors telling adult patients that they are not taking new patients or their insurance by
64 and 55 percent, respectively. Closing the gap in payments between private insurance and

Medicaid--a $45 increase in Medicaid payments for the median state at baseline40 --closes
over 80 percent of the gap in reports of doctors not taking new adult patients and over

two-thirds of the gap in reports of doctors not taking an adult patient's insurance. Because
providers are more elastic to payments for children, it is easier to close gaps in access: as
shown in column (9) of Table 5, it would take an increase in Medicaid payments of about
  39
     Although statistically insignificant, the point estimate for the effect of increased Medicaid reimbursement
rates on office visits among the privately insured could be consistent with some spillovers. Column (1) of Panel
A in Table 4 shows that a $10 increase in Medicaid payments leads to a 0.28 percentage point increase in the
probability that a Medicaid beneficiary had an office visit in the past two weeks. Assuming that this increase
amounts to a single visit per marginal patient, this estimate translates to about 150,000 additional visits by
Medicaid beneficiaries every two weeks (0.0028 times the approximately 54 million Medicaid beneficiaries
in 2012). Among the 165 million Americans with private insurance in 2012, a reduction of 150,000 visits
among 150,000 unique patients in a two-week period would lead to a 0.09 percentage point reduction in the
probability that a privately insured patient had an office visit in the past two weeks. This is well within the
confidence interval for the estimate in column (4) of Panel A in Table 4.
  40
     We calculate the median difference in reimbursement rates between private insurance and Medicaid at
baseline by combining private insurance to Medicaid payment ratios for office-based evaluation and manage-
ment services from the GAO with our data on Medicaid payments. The GAO data documents the difference
between private insurance and Medicaid payments for 32 states in 2010 (GAO, 2014).


                                                      22
$26 on average to eliminate disparities in access between children with private insurance and
children with Medicaid.41


III.D        Educational Outcomes in the NAEP

All of the measures in the NHIS, including days of school missed, are self reported. To
corroborate our finding that increased reimbursement rates for physicians reduce school
absenteeism among children--and to examine whether these reductions in absenteeism lead
to improvements in test scores--we use administrative data from the NAEP. We begin by

estimating a specification similar to Equation (2) using individual-level data:


                     Outcomeisy =        0   +   1 P aymentsy   + Xi +   s   +   y   + isy               (3)


where Outcomeisy denotes an attendance outcome for student i in state s in year y ; Xi is a
vector of individual-level demographics included in the NAEP (indicators denoting age, sex,

race, and ethnicity); and      s   and   y   are state and year fixed effects, respectively. As all state
assessments take place between January and March, P aymentsy is the expected Medicaid
payment in state s in the first quarter of year y . We use the sample weights provided by the

NAEP and cluster standard errors by state.
       Results from estimation of Equation (3) are presented in Table 6. Panel A shows the

effects of changes in Medicaid payments on outcomes among students who qualify for free
lunch, our proxy for Medicaid eligibility in the NAEP. For low-income children in the 4th
  41
    As shown in column (7) of Table 5, the median increase in Medicaid payments of $35 under the federal
mandate was sufficient to close more than the disparity in outcomes between children with private insurance
and children with Medicaid; this suggests that children on Medicaid were more attractive to physicians than
children with private insurance after the rate increase. As noted in footnote 14, state Medicaid programs
often pay slightly more for children than for adults. The median payment increase of $35 will therefore
close more of--or may even go beyond--the gap in payments between Medicaid and private insurance for
children. Furthermore, we note that we do find some, albeit weak, evidence of negative spillovers to children
with private insurance as a result of the Medicaid primary care rate increase: as shown in Table 4, a $10
increase in Medicaid payments increases reports of parents having trouble finding a doctor to see their child
with private insurance by 0.13 percentage points, or 16 percent relative to the mean (significant at the 10
percent level).



                                                      23
grade, a $10 increase in Medicaid payments reduces the fraction of students who missed
three or more days in the past month for any reason by 0.34 percentage points (2.6 percent
relative to the mean; column (3)) and increases the fraction of students with zero absences

by 0.28 percentage points (0.6 percent relative to the mean; column (1)).42 Columns (2) and
(4) in Panel A show a similar pattern for children in grade 8, although the point estimates
are much smaller and less precise. The larger effects in grade 4 relative to grade 8 likely
reflect the fact that absences for younger children are closely tied to health status whereas

absences for older children are more likely to be for reasons unrelated to health care access,
such as truancy (Neuzil et al., 2002; Ehrlich et al., 2014; Wiseman and Dawson, 2015). As
shown in Panel B, we find no effects among children who do not qualify for free lunch.
       As school absenteeism is closely linked to test scores, it is possible that these reductions

in absenteeism among disadvantaged children lead to improvements in their performance.

To examine the effects of increased Medicaid payments on test scores, we estimate an analog
of Equation (2) at the state-year level:


                      Outcomesy =       0   +   1 P aymentsy   + Xsy +        s   +   y   + sy                (4)


where Outcomesy denotes an average schooling outcome in state s in year y ; Xsy is a vector
of state-level analogs of the controls listed in Table 3; and            s   and      y   are state and year fixed
effects, respectively. As in Equation (3), P aymentsy is the expected Medicaid payment in
state s in the first quarter of year y . We weight the regressions by state population and
cluster standard errors by state.
       As shown in Panel B of Table A3, we find no effects of increased physician reimbursement
under Medicaid on average state-level scores on national math and reading assessments.43
  42
     Recall that the NAEP covers absences for any reason whereas the NHIS asks specifically about school
absences due to illness or injury. It is therefore not surprising that we find larger effects in percentage terms
when considering school absenteeism in the NHIS than in the NAEP.
  43
     Panel A of Table A3 shows effects of Medicaid payments on average state-level absences. As in Table
6, we find significant reductions in absenteeism only for children who qualify for free school lunch. When
aggregating to the state level, however, we find evidence of significant improvements in attendance among
disadvantaged children in both grades 4 and 8.


                                                       24
It is possible that more prolonged improvements in attendance are necessary to cause im-
provements in student performance.



IV         Robustness

IV.A         2014 Medicaid Expansions

In 2014, 27 states and the District of Columbia expanded their Medicaid programs to extend
coverage to low-income, childless adults (see Figure A8). If states that saw larger payment

increases under the primary care rate increase were also more likely to expand their Medicaid
programs, then our results could be confounded by changes in program eligibility. Although

the timing of the Medicaid expansions and the Medicaid primary care rate increase were
similar, we are confident that our results are not confounded by the Medicaid expansions
for several reasons. First, we control for state-year level Medicaid expansions in all of our
analyses, thereby absorbing any direct effects of the expansions. Second, recall that states

were required to raise their Medicaid payments to match Medicare levels for select primary

care services beginning in January 2013, a year before most of the expansions. As shown
in Figure 4, most of the effects of the rate increase were realized before 2014. Third, we
find the largest effects on access and health among children, whose eligibility was largely
unaffected by the expansions.44 Finally, as shown in Section V below, we estimate similar
effects of physician reimbursement rates on patient outcomes using variation in payments
stemming only from the federal mandate expiring in 2015, a year after the majority of
Medicaid expansions had gone into effect.
       Nevertheless, we conduct four additional analyses to further verify that our results are

not confounded by the Medicaid expansions. As first introduced in Section II.A, we run
  44
     Recent work demonstrates that children's use of preventive services increases when Medicaid eligibility
is extended among adults (Venkataramani et al., 2017). While such spillovers could influence our estimates
of child health, it is unlikely that an improvement in coverage among adults would make it easier for parents
to find physicians willing to see their children.




                                                     25
balancing regressions to directly examine whether our identifying variation is correlated
with changes in Medicaid enrollment and composition. As shown in Table 1, we find no
evidence that within-state changes in Medicaid payments predict Medicaid expansions or

are associated with changes in Medicaid enrollment or managed care penetration. We also
re-estimate Equation (2) including only: (1) the years before the 2014 Medicaid expansions
(2009­2013), (2) states that did not expand their Medicaid programs in 2014, and (3) families
with children. The top rows of each subfigure in Figure 5 compare the estimates from our
main sample with the results from these subsample analyses. Looking first to the results
using data from 2009­2013 only, we see that our estimates are remarkably consistent when

we exclude 2014. While some of our estimates lose precision when we only consider states
that did not expand Medicaid, the general pattern of results is consistent with our main
findings. Finally, we see that--if anything--our results are often stronger among households
with children.

       Taken together, these results provide strong evidence that we are identifying changes in
access, use, and health driven by changes in supply-side program generosity, not demand-side

program eligibility.


IV.B         Medicaid Payment Variable

As outlined in Section II.A, we create expected Medicaid payment rates by combining: (1)

state-level reimbursement rates under fee-for-service Medicaid collected directly from state
Medicaid offices, (2) state-level Medicaid fee-for-service to managed care payment ratios from
the GAO, and (3) state-level Medicaid managed care enrollment shares from CMS. While
we have Medicaid fee-for-service rates and Medicaid managed care enrollment shares for all

states, the GAO report only provides payment ratios for 20 states.45
       In our main analysis, we use the median payment ratio among states in the GAO report
  45
    As previously noted, we have complete payment information for 44 states and the District of Columbia.
Appendix A.2 outlines the methodologies used to impute payment rates for the six states with incomplete
payment histories. Given that only a few imputations are required, our results are robust to only using
non-imputed data and to using alternative imputation strategies.

                                                   26
(5 percent more under Medicaid managed care) for states that are not in the GAO data.
To probe the robustness of our results to this imputation, we replicate our main results: (1)
imputing states that are not in the GAO report with the mean payment ratio of 14 percent

more under Medicaid managed care, (2) only using states in the GAO report, and (3) only
using variation stemming from Medicaid fee-for-service payment rates.
       Results from these additional analyses are presented in Figure 5. Across all outcomes,
imputing missing states with the mean payment ratio instead of the median has very little
impact on the results. Narrowing the sample to only the 20 states in the GAO report tends
to decrease the precision of our estimates, but the magnitudes of the effects are very similar

to our primary specification. Finally, despite the fact that nearly 60 percent of Medicaid
beneficiaries are enrolled in managed care, our results are very similar if we only consider
fee-for-service reimbursement rates. This is not surprising given that most of the residual
variation in our measure of Medicaid payments when controlling for state and time fixed

effects comes from changes in fee-for-service payments within states over time.46
       Recall that our primary payment variable includes all variation in state-level Medicaid
payments for new patient office visits of mid-level complexity between 2009 and 2014. As

previously noted, states that adjusted their reimbursement rates before the federal mandate
chose to do so voluntarily, and thus the payment changes may be endogenous. The final
row in each subfigure in Figure 5 replicates our main results using variation in Medicaid

reimbursement rates stemming only from the federally mandated primary care rate increase.
To do so, we impute state-level reimbursement rates from 2009 through the third quarter of
2012 with the relevant payment rate from the fourth quarter of 2012. As the overwhelming
majority of variation in Medicaid reimbursement rates between 2009 and 2014 was driven
  46
     Recall that variation in our Medicaid payment variable comes from three sources: (1) time-series variation
in state-level fee-for-service payments, (2) cross-sectional variation in state-level Medicaid managed care to
fee-for-service payment ratios, and (3) time-series variation in the fraction of Medicaid beneficiaries enrolled
in managed care in each state. With the inclusion of state fixed effects, residual variation in payments
comes only from (1) and (3). While the fraction of Medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in managed care varies
within a state over time (Figure A3), the vast majority of our identifying variation comes from changes in
fee-for-service payments (Figure 1).



                                                      27
by the federal mandate in 2013 (see Figure 1), our results are nearly identical if we ignore
variation in payments between 2009 and 2012.


IV.C         Triple Difference Model

In our preferred empirical specification, we conduct analyses separately among Medicaid
beneficiaries and patients covered by private insurance. We look separately at these two
groups, rather than using the privately insured as a control group, as changes in relative
reimbursement rates could influence the treatment of individuals with private insurance.

If, for example, increases in Medicaid payments lead physicians to see fewer patients with
private insurance, then a triple difference strategy using patients with private insurance as
a control group would overestimate improvements among Medicaid beneficiaries.
       However, as this strategy has been used previously when examining the impacts of

changing reimbursement rates (see, for example, Shen and Zuckerman, 2005; Atherly and

Mortensen, 2014; and Callison and Nguyen, 2017), we provide estimates from triple differ-
ence models for comparison. In particular, we estimate analogs of Equation (2) that include
main effects for all independent variables in addition to interactions between each indepen-
dent variable and an indicator denoting whether respondent i is a Medicaid beneficiary. We

only include patients with private insurance and Medicaid beneficiaries; that is, we exclude
those without insurance and those covered by Medicare.

       Table 7 presents results from this fully interacted specification.47 The pattern of results
is very similar to that found using only Medicaid beneficiaries in a difference-in-difference
framework. The similarity is not surprising given the minimal evidence of spillovers to the

privately insured that we saw in Table 4.
  47
     Table A4 shows results from an alternative specification in which we allow the constant and the effect
of changing Medicaid reimbursement rates to differ for Medicaid beneficiaries but restrict the time trends
and the associations between individual-level demographics and the outcome to be the same across insur-
ance types. Results from this alternative specification are similar but generally smaller. We prefer the
fully interacted specification since it controls for differential time trends, age profiles, and impacts of other
demographics between patients with private insurance and Medicaid beneficiaries.




                                                       28
V         Expiration of the Primary Care Rate Increase

Both the federally mandated Medicaid primary care rate increase and the accompanying
federal funding expired at the end of 2014.                Beginning in 2015, states could therefore
choose either to maintain the payments at higher levels--and pay for the higher payments
themselves--or revert to their original payments. As shown in Figure A4, 34 states chose not

to extend the increased payments; in these states, Medicaid reimbursement rates returned
to their December 2012 levels in January 2015.
       While the reduction in Medicaid reimbursement rates resulting from the end of the federal
mandate provides a second round of changes in reimbursement, the decision not to maintain

the higher payments could be endogenous. Notably, states that experienced greater success

under the federally mandated rate increase--that is, states in which the rate increase led
to larger improvements in access, use, and health among Medicaid beneficiaries--may have
been more likely to extend the increased rates.48 To examine whether the primary care rate
increase had smaller impacts in states that chose not to maintain the higher payments, we

replicate our analysis using only the subset of states that did not extend the increased rates
beyond 2014.49 Although we divide the sample by a decision made at the end of 2014, we
only use variation in Medicaid payments stemming from the onset of the primary care rate

increase in 2013; that is, we consider the effects of the primary care rate increase switching
on in states that ultimately decided to switch it off.
       As shown in the top two rows of each subfigure in Figure 6, states that chose not to extend
  48
     Alternatively, states that did not extend the increased payments could have had less pronounced ef-
fects because providers in those states knew that the payments would be temporary (and physician-patient
relationships tend to last for many years). However, it was difficult to forecast whether the rates would
ultimately be extended. Notably, it was not announced until late 2014 that the increased payments would
not receive federal funding in 2015; if the federal funding were to have persisted, it seems likely that all
states would have maintained the higher rates. Furthermore, the states that chose to extend the increased
payments show diversity in geography, demographics, and political affiliations, so it is unlikely that providers
could have predicted whether the payments would be extended based on state-level characteristics alone.
  49
     We further estimate an augmented version of Equation (2) that includes a state-level indicator denoting
whether a state extended the increased payments beyond 2014 and an interaction between the payment
variable and this indicator. As shown in Table A5, the interaction is not significant for any outcome other
than days of work missed, demonstrating that states that did and did not ultimately extend the increased
payments experienced similar effects from the mandated rate increase.


                                                      29
the higher payments saw improvements in outcomes during the federal mandate that were
similar in magnitude to those experienced by the average state. While there is some evidence
that states that did not extend the increased payments experienced smaller improvements in

access, the point estimates for effects on use and health suggest that these states experienced
similar--and if anything larger--improvements in downstream outcomes during the primary
care rate increase. This suggests that states chose to return their reimbursement rates to
previous levels despite significant improvements in outcomes resulting from the increased
payments.
   There are a number of reasons a state's decision over whether to extend the payments

may have been unrelated to its experience during the federally mandated rate increase.
First, federal funding for the increased payments expired with the mandate. Budgetary
considerations could therefore have led states to lower payments even if they were aware of
the implications for the health care of Medicaid beneficiaries. Second, until this point, little

comprehensive evidence has existed to demonstrate that the primary care rate increase had
significant impacts on access, use, and health among Medicaid beneficiaries. Notably, a small

survey of Medicaid officials, plan administrators, and provider organizations conducted by
the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission in the summer of 2014 suggests
that states believed that the primary care rate increase had little impact on access to primary
care (MACPAC, 2015).
   We therefore consider the effects of the primary care rate increase expiring in 2015 on

access, use, and health among Medicaid beneficiaries. To do so, we estimate a specification
analogous to Equation (2) that instead exploits variation in payments stemming only from
the federal mandate expiring in 2015. Although the variation comes from payment decreases,
the estimated coefficients again represent the effects of a $10 increase in Medicaid payments.
As shown in the bottom row of each subfigure in Figure 6, the effects of reimbursement

rates using variation stemming from the expiration of the primary care rate increase look
similar, although slightly smaller, than the effects of reimbursement rates using variation


                                              30
stemming from the onset of the primary care rate increase. While we lose precision when
considering a subset of states and years, comparing the point estimates between the final
two rows in each subfigure--which hold the sample of states constant--suggests that the

rate increase switching off had effects of similar magnitudes on access and use but smaller
effects on health than the rate increase switching on. This could be because there is more
persistence in health than physician and patient behavior.
   It is notable that we find similar effects of physician payments using variation stemming
from a payment increase and a payment decrease. One could imagine that providers would
adjust their practice in response to a payment increase in ways that would persist in the

face of subsequent payment decreases. For example, providers might pay the fixed cost to
enroll as a Medicaid provider or invest in learning to deal with the complexities of Medicaid
billing. Additionally, providers might establish relationships with Medicaid patients that
would be difficult to abandon if payments were to subsequently decline. Although limited

in precision, our results instead suggest that many of the improvements in access, use, and
health that Medicaid beneficiaries experienced when payments increased were lost when

payments returned to their previous levels.



VI     Discussion and Conclusion

While it is known that financial incentives matter in health care, increasing reimbursement
rates may not make physicians more willing to accept new patients for at least two reasons.
First, factors other than low payments may lead providers to restrict access for certain
patients. In the case of Medicaid, for example, payment delays, high denial rates, and
complex patient needs may make treating beneficiaries unattractive regardless of relative
payment levels (Sloan et al., 1978; Cunningham and O'Malley, 2009; Long, 2013; Gottlieb
et al., 2018; Niess et al., 2018). Second, capacity constraints limit the number of patients

that providers can see. With a fixed number of hours in the day, access to health care will



                                              31
necessarily be rationed when the supply of providers has not kept pace with growing demand.
   In contrast, we find that changes in physician reimbursement have meaningful effects on
access to care for patients. Exploiting large, exogenous changes in physician reimbursement

rates for primary care visits under Medicaid, we estimate that an increase in Medicaid
payments of $35--the median increase across states over the federally mandated primary
care rate increase--reduced the probability that adult Medicaid beneficiaries were told that
a physician was not accepting their insurance by 3.1 percentage points, or 38 percent of the
mean. Compared to the average Medicaid payment of $76 for a new patient office visit of
mid-level complexity before the rate increase, our estimates imply an elasticity of physician

willingness to accept adult Medicaid patients with respect to reimbursement of 0.83.
   These improvements in access among Medicaid beneficiaries have large implications for
disparities in access to care. Before the primary care rate increase, 8.2 percent of adult
Medicaid beneficiaries reported being told that a provider was not accepting their insurance

compared to only 2.5 percent among adults with private insurance. Our results demonstrate
that increasing Medicaid reimbursement rates by $45--enough to close the median gap in

payments between Medicaid and private insurers--would reduce disparities in access to care
by at least 70 percent. Our results are even more pronounced among children, for whom we
find that closing the gap in physician payment rates between Medicaid and private insurance
would eliminate disparities in access entirely.
   We further find that improving access leads to increased use and better health among

Medicaid beneficiaries. Increasing Medicaid payments by $35 increases the probability that
program beneficiaries had an office visit in the past two weeks by 5.0 percent and increases
the probability that they report being in excellent or very good health by 3.9 percent. The
implied elasticity of self-reported health with respect to outpatient care is consistent with
the literature using exogenous variation in health insurance coverage itself: when Medicaid

was extended to low-income adults using a lottery in Oregon, those who gained insurance
saw a 50 percent increase in office visits and were 25 percent more likely to report being in


                                              32
excellent or very good health (Finkelstein et al., 2012; Baicker et al., 2013). We further find
that increased access to primary care reduces school absenteeism among young children: a
$35 increase in Medicaid payments leads to an average reduction of 0.79 days missed per

year due to illness or injury, or 22 percent of the mean, and reduces illness-related chronic
absenteeism by nearly 50 percent.
    The improvements in access, use, and health that we document come at the cost of
increased Medicaid spending. Taking into account increases in physician reimbursement for
both marginal and inframarginal visits, back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that a $10
increase in Medicaid payments for office visits increases average state-level Medicaid spending

by approximately $150 million annually, or less than 1 percent of average state-year Medicaid
spending of over $16 billion.50 In line with this calculation, we replicate our analysis using
data on annual state-level Medicaid spending from the NHED and find that a $10 increase

in Medicaid payments for office visits leads to a statistically insignificant increase of $141
million in Medicaid spending per state-year (Table A6). Although the monetary value of the

sizable increases in access, use, and health among Medicaid beneficiaries that we document
are difficult to quantify, the limited impacts of changes in Medicaid reimbursement for office
visits on government budgets suggest that the policy may have been cost effective.
    An outstanding question is how physicians are able to absorb new patients when reim-
bursement rates increase. If physicians are capacity constrained, they could increase the

number of Medicaid patients they see either by substituting away from patients with private
  50
     Table 2 shows that Medicaid beneficiaries had an average of 0.197 office visits over a two-week period,
or 5.12 visits per year, before the primary care rate increase. Multiplied by the average number of Medicaid
beneficiaries per state in the pre-period (2.66 million; Table 1), there were an average of 13.62 million office
visits among Medicaid beneficiaries per state-year before the primary care rate increase. Increasing payments
per visit by $10 should therefore lead to $136.19 million in additional spending on inframarginal visits, or
0.008 percent of average annual state-level Medicaid spending ($16.68 billion; Table A6). In terms of marginal
visits, Table 4 shows that a $10 increase in Medicaid payments leads to an increase of 0.0028 office visits
per Medicaid beneficiary in a two-week period, or 0.0728 visits per year. Again multiplied by the average
number of Medicaid beneficiaries, and taking into account the total physician payment for an office visit in
the average state ($76 in the pre-period plus a $10 increase), increasing payments per visit by $10 should
lead to $16.65 million in additional spending on marginal visits, or less than 0.001 percent. Combined, a
$10 increase in Medicaid payments for office visits should therefore increase state-level Medicaid spending
by approximately $150 million annually, or less than 1 percent.



                                                      33
insurance or by decreasing their appointment length per patient. We find little evidence
that increasing Medicaid payments negatively impacts access among patients with private
insurance, suggesting that physicians do not respond to increased Medicaid payments by

substituting away from the privately insured on the extensive margin. Furthermore, we find
no health effects among the privately insured, whereas decreased appointment length may
result in worse provision of care.
   If physicians are not capacity constrained, they could increase the number of Medi-
caid patients they see by increasing their total hours worked. Although we cannot look at
physician labor supply directly in our data, we can divide counties by whether they have a

shortage of primary care providers as defined by the HRSA. If some physicians are capacity
constrained, we would expect increased Medicaid payments to have smaller effects in areas
where providers have little scope to take on new patients. However, as shown in Table A7,
we find no evidence of differential effects between counties that are and are not primary care

shortage areas. This suggests that some providers in areas with and without an adequate
supply of providers have scope to increase the number of patients they see. Understanding

how physicians accommodate more patients when payments increase is an important area
for future work.
   The difficulties that Medicaid patients face accessing care is commonly attributed to a
combination of complex patient needs, billing complications, and low reimbursement rates.
This has led policy makers, practitioners, and researchers alike to argue that increasing re-

imbursement rates alone will not be enough to improve the provision of care to Medicaid
beneficiaries (Goroll, 2018). In turn, efforts to promote health care access and use have
largely focussed on dimensions of demand-side insurance generosity, such as program eligi-
bility and patient cost-sharing. In contrast, we find that the majority of differences in access
between Medicaid beneficiaries and privately insured patients are driven by differences in

physician reimbursement. Not only does increasing Medicaid reimbursement rates improve
access, but these improvements in access lead to meaningful improvements in self-reported


                                              34
health and school absenteeism among the program's beneficiaries. While it is well-known that
financial incentives matter in health care, they appear to matter even more than previously
thought.




                                            35
References
Adams, Kathleen, "Effect of Increased Medicaid Fees on Physician Participation and En-
 rollee Service Utilization in Tennessee, 1985-1988," Inquiry, 1994, 31 (2), 173­187.
Atherly, Adam and Karoline Mortensen, "Medicaid Primary Care Physician Fees and
 the Use of Preventive Services Among Medicaid Enrollees," Health Services Research, 2014,
 49 (4), 1306­1328.
Baicker, Katherine, Sarah Taubman, Heidi Allen, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan
 Gruber, Joseph Newhouse, Eric Schneider, Bill Wright, Alan Zaslavsky, and
 Amy Finkelstein, "The Oregon Experiment -- Effects of Medicaid on Clinical Out-
 comes," New England Journal of Medicine, 2013, 368 (18), 1713­1722.

  , Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein, "Behavioral Hazard in Health
  Insurance," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (4), 1623­1667.

Baker, Laurence and Anne Beeson Royalty, "Medicaid Policy, Physician Behavior, and
 Health Care for the Low-Income Population," Journal of Human Resources, 2000, 35 (3),
 480­502.

Bauer, Lauren, Patrick Liu, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Jay Sham-
 baugh, "Reducing Chronic Absenteeism under the Every Student Succeeds Act," Techni-
 cal Report, The Hamilton Project 2018.
Blumenthal, David and Sara Collins, "Health Care Coverage under the Affordable Care
  Act - A Progress Report," New England Journal of Medicine, 2014, 371, 275­281.
Brook, Robert, John Ware, William Rogers, Emmett Keeler, Allyson Davies,
 Cathy Sherbourne, George Goldberg, Kathleen Lohr, Patricia Camp, and
 Joseph Newhouse, "The Effect of Coinsurance on the Health of Adults," RAND Re-
 port No. R-3055-HHS 1984.

Brot-Goldberg, Zarek, Amitabh Chandra, Benjamin Handel, and Jonathan Kol-
 stad, "What Does a Deductible Do? The Impact of Cost-Sharing on Health Care Prices,
 Quantities, and Spending Dynamics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (3),
 1261­1318.
Brown, David, Amanda Kowalski, and Ithai Lurie, "Medicaid as an Investment in
 Children: What is the Long-Term Impact on Tax Receipts?," NBER Working Paper No.
 20835, 2015.

Buchmueller, Thomas, Sean Orzol, and Lara Shore-Sheppard, "The Effect of Med-
 icaid Payment Rates on Access to Dental Care Among Children," American Journal of
 Health Economics, 2015, 1 (2), 194­223.

Buehler, Melanie H., John Tapogna, and Hedy N. Chang, "Why Being in School
 Matters: Chronic Absenteeism in Oregon Public Schools," Technical Report, Attendance
 Works 2012.

                                           36
Callison, Kevin and Binh Nguyen, "The Effect of Medicaid Physician Fee Increases on
 Health Care Access, Utilization, and Expenditures," Health Services Research, 2017, 53
 (2), 690­710.
Candon, Molly, Stephen Zuckerman, Douglas Wissoker, Brendan Saloner,
 Genevieve Kenney, Karin Rhodes, and Daniel Polsky, "Declining Medicaid Fees
 and Primary Care Appointment Availability for New Medicaid Patients," JAMA Internal
 Medicine, 2018, 178 (1), 145­146.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas, "The Impact of Nearly Univer-
 sal Insurance Coverage on Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Medicare," American
 Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 2242­2258.
  , , and , "Does Medicare Save Lives?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124
  (2), 597­636.
Chen, Alice, "Do the Poor Benefit from More Generous Medicaid Physician Payments?,"
 SSRN Working Paper No. 2444286, 2014.
Clemens, Jeffrey and Joshua, "Do Physicians' Financial Incentives Affect Medical Treat-
  ment and Patient Health?," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (4), 1320­1349.
Coburn, Andrew, Stephen Long, and M. Susan Marquis, "Effects of Changing Medi-
 caid Fees on Physician Participation and Enrollee Access," Inquiry, 1999, 36 (3), 265­279.
Coey, Dominic, "Physicians' Financial Incentives and Treatment Choices in Heart Attack
 Management," Quantitative Economics, 2015, 6 (3), 703­748.
Cohen, Joel, "Medicaid Physician Fees and Use of Physician and Hospital Services," In-
 quiry, 1993, 30 (3), 281­292.
   and Peter Cunningham, "Medicaid Physician Fee Levels and Children's Access to
  Care," Health Affairs, 1995, 14 (1), 225­262.
Cohodes, Sarah, Daniel Grossman, Samuel Kleiner, and Michael Lovenheim, "The
 Effect of Child Health Insurance Access on Schooling: Evidence from Public Insurance
 Expansions," Journal of Human Resources, 2016, 51 (3), 727­759.
Connolly, Faith and Linda Olson, "Early Elementary Performance and Attendance in
 Baltimore City Schools' Pre-Kindergarten and Kindergarten," Technical Report, Balti-
 more Education Research Consortium 2012.
Cunningham, Peter and Ann O'Malley, "Do Reimbursement Delays Discourage Medi-
 caid Participation by Physicians?," Health Affairs, Web Exclusive, 2009, 28 (1), w17­w28.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber, "Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
 Care, and Child Health," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (2), 431­466.
   and , "Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Expansions of Medicaid Eligi-
  bility for Pregnant Women," Journal of Political Economy, 1996, 104 (6), 1263­1296.

                                            37
Cutler, David and Richard Zeckhauser, "The Anatomy of Health Insurance," in An-
 thony Culyer and Joseph Newhouse, eds., Handbook of Health Economics, 1 ed., Vol. 1,
 Elsevier, 2000, chapter 11, pp. 563­643.
Decker, Sandra, "Medicaid Physician Fees and the Quality of Medical Care of Medicaid
 Patients in the USA," Review of Economics of the Household, 2007, 5 (1), 95­112.
  , "Changes in Medicaid Physician Fees and Patterns of Ambulatory Care," Inquiry, 2009,
  46, 291­304.
  , "In 2011 Nearly One-Third of Physicians Said They Would Not Accept New Medicaid
  Patients, but Rising Fees May Help," Health Affairs, 2012, 31 (8), 1673­1679.
  , "Two-Thirds of Primary Care Physicians Accepted New Medicaid Patients in 2011-2012:
  A Baseline to Measure Future Acceptance Rates," Health Affairs, 2013, 32 (7).
  , "No Association Found Between the Medicaid Primary Care Fee Bump and Physician-
  Reported Participation in Medicaid," Health Affairs, 2018, 37 (7).
Ehrlich, Stacy B., Julia A. Gwynne, Amber Stitziel Pareja, and Elaine M. Al-
 lensworth, "Preschool Attendance in Chicago Public Schools: Relationships with Learn-
 ing Outcomes and Reasons for Absences," Technical Report, The University of Chicago
 Consortium on Chicago School Research 2014.
Fanning, Thomas and Martin de Alteriis, "The Limits of Marginal Economic Incentives
  in the Medicaid Program: Concerns and Cautions," Journal of Health Politics, Policy, and
  Law, 1993, 18 (1), 27­42.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gru-
  ber, Joseph Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and the Oregon Health
  Study Group, "The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First
  Year," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1057­1106.
Food Research and Action Center, "School Meal Eligibility and Reimbursements,"
  http://frac.org/school-meal-eligibility-reimbursements. Accessed: December 2018.
Fox, Michael, Jonathan Weiner, and Kai Phua, "Effect of Medicaid Payment Levels
  on Access to Obstetrical Care," Health Affairs, 1992, 11 (4), 150­161.
Ginsburg, Alan, Phyllis Jordan, and Hedy Chang, "Absences Add Up: How School
 Attendance Influences Student Success," Attendance Works, 2014.
Goldin, Jacob, Ithai Lurie, and Janet McCubbin, "Health Insurance and Mortality:
 Experimental Evidence from Taxpayer Outreach," NBER Working Paper No. 26533 2019.
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew, "Public Insurance and Mortality: Evidence from Medicaid
 Implementation," Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126 (1), 216­262.
  , "The Long-Run Effects of Childhood Insurance Coverage: Medicaid Implementation,
  Adult Health, and Labor Market Outcomes," NBER Working Paper No. 22899 2020.

                                           38
Goroll, Allan, "Reforming Payment for Primary Care - It's Not Just the Money, It's the
 Payment System," JAMA Internal Medicine, 2018, 178 (8), 1049­1050.

Gottlieb, Joshua, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Abe Dunn, "The Complexity of Billing
 and Paying for Physician Care," Health Affairs, 2018, 37 (4).

  , Maria Polyakova, Kevin Rinz, and Victoria Udalova, "Who Values Human Cap-
  italists' Human Capital? Healthcare Spending and Physician Earnings," Working Paper
  2020.

Government Accountability Office, "Medicaid Payment: Comparisons of Selected Ser-
 vices under Fee-for-Service, Managed Care, and Private Insurance," GAO-14-533, 2014.

Gruber, Jonathan, John Kim, and Dina Mayzlin, "Physician Fees and Procedure
 Intensity: The Case of Cesarean Delivery," Journal of Health Economics, 1999, 18 (4),
 473­490.

  , Kathleen Adams, and Joseph Newhouse, "Physician Fee Policy and Medicaid
  Program Costs," Journal of Human Resources, 1997, 32 (4), 611­634.

Hadley, Jack, "Physician Participation in Medicaid: Evidence from California," Health
 Services Research, 1979, 14 (4), 266­280.

Han, Hsing-Wen, Hsien-Ming Lien, and Tzu-Ting Yang, "Patient Cost-Sharing and
 Healthcare Utilization in Early Childhood: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity
 Design," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2020, 12 (3), 238­278.

Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, "Where are States Today?                      Medi-
 caid and CHIP Eligibility Levels for Children, Pregnant Women, and Adults,"
 https://www.kff.org/medicaid/fact-sheet/where-are-states-today-medicaid-and-chip/
 2018. Accessed: December 2018.

KewalRamani, Angelina, Lauren Gilbertson, Mary Ann Fox, and Stephen
 Provasnik, "Status and Trends in the Education of Racial and Ethnic Minorities," Na-
 tional Center for Education Statistics, U.S. Department of Education, 2007.

Leung, Pauline and Alexander Mas, "Employment Effects of the Affordable Care Act
  Medicaid Expansions," Industrial Relations, 2018, 57 (2), 206­234.

Levinson, Daniel, "Coding Trends of Medicare Evaluation and Management Services,"
  Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Inspector General, 2012.

Long, Sharon, "Physicians May Need More than Higher Reimbursements to Expand Med-
  icaid Participation: Findings from Washington State," Health Affairs, 2013, 32 (9), 1560­
  1567.

Long, Stephen, Russell Settle, and Bruce Stuart, "Reimbursement and Access to
  Physicians' Services Under Medicaid," Journal of Health Economics, 1986, 5 (3), 236­251.


                                            39
Manning, Willard, Joseph Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett Keeler, Arleen
 Leibowitz, and Susan Marquis, "Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care:
 Evidence from a Randomized Experiment," American Economic Review, 1987, 77 (3),
 251­277.

McGuire, Thomas and Mark Pauly, "Physician Response to Fee Changes with Multiple
 Payers," Journal of Health Economics, 1991, 10, 385­410.

Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission, "Examining Access to Care
 in Medicaid and CHIP," in "Report to Congress on Medicaid and Chip" 2011.

  , "An Update on the Medicaid Primary Care Rate Increase," in "Report to Congress on
  Medicaid and Chip" 2015.

Miller, Sarah, Sean Altekruse, Norman Johnson, and Laura Wherry, "Medicaid
 and Mortality: New Evidence from Linked Survey and Administrative Data," NBER
 Working Paper No. 26081 2019.

Mitchell, Janet, "Physician Participation in Medicaid Revisited," Medical Care, 1991, 29
 (7), 645­653.

Mulcahy, Andrew, Tadeja Gracner, and Kenneth Finegold, "Associations Between
 the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act Medicaid Primary Care Payment Increase
 and Physician Participation in Medicaid," JAMA Internal Medicine, 2018, 178 (8), 1042­
 1048.

Neuzil, Kathleen M., Cynthia Hohlbein, and Yuwei Zhu, "Illness Among Schoolchil-
 dren During Influenza Season: Effect on School Absenteeism, Parental Absenteeism From
 Work, and Secondary Illness in Families," Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,
 2002, 156 (10), 986­991.

Niess, MA, IV Blair, A Furniss, and AJ Davidson, "Specialty Physician Attitudes
 and Beliefs about Medicaid Patients," Journal of Family Medicine, 2018, 5 (3), 1­9.

Pei, Zhuan, Jorn-Steffen Pischke, and Hannes Schwandt, "Poorly Measured Con-
 founders are More Useful on the Left than on the Right," Journal of Business and Eco-
 nomic Statistics, 2019, 37 (2), 205­216.

Polsky, Daniel, Michael Richards, Simon Basseyn, Douglas Wissoker, Genevieve
 Kenney, Stephen Zuckerman, and Karin Rhodes, "Appointment Availability After
 Increases in Medicaid Payments for Primary Care," New England Journal of Medicine,
 2015, 372, 537­545.

Rice, Thomas, "The Impact of Changing Medicare Reimbursement Rates on Physician-
 Induced Demand," Medical Care, 1983, 21 (8), 803­815.

Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore, Lauren Bauer, and Megan Mumford, "Lessons for
  Broadening School Accountability Under the Every Student Succeeds Act," The Hamilton
  Project 2016.

                                           40
Shen, Yu-Chu and Stephen Zuckerman, "The Effect of Medicaid Payment Generosity
  on Access and Use Among Beneficiaries," Health Services Research, 2005, 40 (3), 723­744.

Showalter, Mark, "Physicians' Cost Shifting Behavior: Medicaid Versus Other Patients,"
  Contemporary Economic Policy, 1997, 15 (2), 74­84.

Sloan, Frank, Janet Mitchell, and Jerry Cromwell, "Physician Participation in State
  Medicaid Programs," Journal of Human Resources, 1978, 13, 211­245.

Smith, Vernon, Kathleen Gifford, Eileen Ellis, Victoria Wachino, and Molly
 O'Malley, "States Respond to Fiscal Pressure: A 50-State Update on State Medicaid
 Spending Growth and Cost Containment Actions," The Kaiser Commission on Medicaid
 and the Uninsured, 2004.

Sommers, Benjamin D., Katherine Baicker, and Arnold M. Epstein, "Mortality and
  Access to Care among Adults after State Medicaid Expansions," New England Journal of
  Medicine, 2012, 376, 1025­1034.

Spradlin, Terry, Katherine Cierniak, Dingjing Shi, and Minge Chen, "Attendance
  and Chronic Absenteeism in Indiana: The Impact on Student Achievement," Technical
  Report, Center for Evaluation and Education Policy 2012.

The Washington Post, "Obamacare Is About to Give Medicaid Docs a 73 Percent Raise,"
 2012.

Utah Education Policy Center, "Research Brief: Chronic Absenteeism," Technical Re-
 port, University of Utah 2012.

Venkataramani, Maya, Craig Evan Pollack, and Eric Roberts, "Spillover Effects of
 Adult Medicaid Expansions on Children's Use of Preventive Services," Pediatrics, 2017,
 140 (6).

Wiseman, Amy and Susan Dawson, "Why Do Students Miss School? The Central Texas
 Absence Reasons Study," Technical Report 2015.

Yip, Winnie, "Physician Responses to Medical Fee Reductions: Changes in the Volume
 and Intensity of Supply of Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) Surgeries in Medicare
 and Private Sectors," Journal of Health Economics, 1998, 17 (6), 675­699.

Zuckerman, Stephan and Dana Goin, "How Much Will Medicaid Physician Fees for
 Primary Care Rise in 2013? Evidence from a 2012 Survey of Medicaid Physician Fees,"
 The Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, 2012.




                                           41
VII       Figures

                                         Figure 1: State-Level Medicaid Payments over Time

                                   200
                                   150
               Medicaid Payments
                                   100
                                   50
                                   0




                                    2009      2010    2011     2012    2013    2014     2015

Notes: The above figure depicts Medicaid payments at the state-quarter level from 2009 to 2015. As defined
in footnote 20, the payments are beneficiary-weighted averages of Medicaid fee-for-service and managed care
payments for new patient office visits of mid-level complexity; patterns are qualitatively robust to using
Medicaid payment rates for alternative billing codes. The top two lines are Alaska (1) and North Dakota
(2); the bottom two lines in 2009 are New Hampshire (50) and Minnesota (51).




                                                                42
                        Figure 2: Maps of State-Level Medicaid Payments


                                           2009




                                           2012




                                           2013




Notes: The above maps depict Medicaid payments for each state in 2009 (first year in sample period), 2012
(year before rate increase), and 2013 (first year of rate increase). As defined in footnote 20, the payments
are beneficiary-weighted averages of Medicaid fee-for-service and managed care payments for new patient
office visits of mid-level complexity; patterns are qualitatively robust to using Medicaid payment rates for
alternative billing codes. The colors reflect quintiles of reimbursement levels in 2009; following the primary
care rate increase, all states had Medicaid payments that were in the highest 2009 quintile.




                                                     43
                                                                             Figure 3: Changes in Access, Use, and Health by Size of Payment Increase
                                                                                                                                    A. Full Sample
                                                                             Office Visit in Past Two Weeks                              Health: Not Poor or Fair                                  Health: Excellent or Very Good




                                                                                                                                                                              .1




                                                          .06
                                                                                                                      .04




                                                          .04
                                                                                                                                                                              .05




                                                                                                                      .02




                                                          .02
                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                      0




                                                          0
                                                          -.02
                                                                                                                      -.02
                                                                                                                                                                              -.05
                                                                        15    30        45       60         75   90          15     30         45       60          75   90                 15      30      45       60      75     90


                                                                                                                                  B. Child Subsample
                                                                                   No Trouble Finding MD                                   Usual Place of Care                                   <14 School Days Missed (Age  10)




                                                                                                                      .02




                                                          .01 .02
                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                              .01 .02 .03




                                                                                                                      -.02
                                                                                                                                                                              -.01 0




                                                          -.02 -.01 0
                                                                        15    30        45       60         75   90          15     30         45       60          75   90                 15      30      45       60      75     90




44
                                                                                                                                  C. Adult Subsample




                      Change Following Payment Increase
                                                                                   Accepting New Patients                           Accepts Patient's Insurance                                             Work Days
                                                                                                                                                                              5




                                                          .1
                                                                                                                      .04
                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                          .05
                                                                                                                      .02




                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                              -5




                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                              -10




                                                          -.05
                                                                                                                      -.02
                                                                        15    30        45       60         75   90          15     30         45       60          75   90                 15      30      45       60      75     90


                                                                                                                      Increase in Medicaid Payments



     Notes: The above figures plot the average change in each outcome between 2011­2012 and 2013­2014 across deciles of state-level Medicaid payment
     increases. The dots represent changes among Medicaid patients; the solid black line is the best fit line through these points. The dashed line depicts
     the best fit line for changes among patients with private insurance. Outcomes are adjusted such that higher values denote better outcomes. School
     days missed reflect absenteeism due to illness or injury over the previous year; the exact survey questions and the corresponding reference windows
     for all outcomes are outlined in Appendix A.1.
             Figure 4: Event Study: Effects of Medicaid Payments on Access, Use, and Health Among Medicaid Beneficiaries
                                                                                                                            A. Full Sample
                                                              Office Visit in Past Two Weeks                                  Health: Not Poor or Fair                                         Health: Excellent or Very Good




                                               .01
                                                                                                      .01
                                                                                                      .005




                                               .005
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                      .005 .01 .015




                                               0
                                               -.005
                                                                                                                                                                      -.005 0




                                                                                                      -.01 -.005
                                                       2009   2010    2011     2012    2013    2014                2009    2010     2011     2012       2013   2014                   2009     2010    2011     2012    2013    2014


                                                                                                                          B. Child Subsample
                                                                 No Trouble Finding MD                                            Usual Place of Care                                        <14 School Days Missed (Age  10)




                                               .01
                                                                                                      .01
                                                                                                                                                                      .02




                                                                                                      .005
                                                                                                                                                                      .01




                                               .005
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                               0




45
                                                                                                                                                                      -.01




                                                                                                      -.01 -.005




                                               -.005


                       Estimated Coefficient
                                                       2009   2010    2011     2012    2013    2014                2009    2010     2011     2012       2013   2014                   2009     2010    2011     2012    2013    2014


                                                                                                                          C. Adult Subsample
                                                                 Accepting New Patients                                     Accepts Patient's Insurance                                                 Work Days




                                                                                                      .02
                                                                                                                                                                      2




                                               .01
                                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                      .01
                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                               0
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                                      -2




                                               -.01
                                                                                                      -.01
                                                       2009   2010    2011     2012    2013    2014                2009    2010     2011     2012       2013   2014                   2009     2010    2011     2012    2013    2014




     Notes: The above figures plot the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals on year indicators interacted with state-level changes in Medicaid payments
     induced by the primary care rate increase from estimation of Equation (1). The above figures show results for Medicaid beneficiaries; refer to Figure
     A7 for analogous results for individuals with private insurance. Outcomes are adjusted such that higher values denote better outcomes. Outcomes
     with missing coefficients in 2009 and 2010 were added to the NHIS in 2011. School days missed reflect absenteeism due to illness or injury over the
     previous year; the exact survey questions and the corresponding reference windows for all outcomes are outlined in Appendix A.1.
             Figure 5: Robustness: Effects of Medicaid Payments on Access, Use, and Health Among Medicaid Beneficiaries
                                     Blank                                      Blank                               A. Full Sample                                   Blank
                                                                    Office Visit in Past Two Weeks                   Health: Poor or Fair                  Health: Excellent or Very Good
                                                 Main sample
                               Truncated sample: 2009-2013
                                       Non-expansion states
                                       Families with children
                      Missing MMC ratios imputed with mean
                                   Only states in GAO report
                              Only fee-for-service payments
                         Only variation from federal mandate
                                                                -.005         0         .005         .01    -.01    -.005     0         .005   .01    -.005      0     .005     .01       .015

                                     Blank                                      Blank                         B. Child Subsample                                     Blank
                                                                           Trouble Finding MD                       No Usual Place of Care             14+ School Days Missed (Age  10)
                                                 Main sample
                               Truncated sample: 2009-2013
                                       Non-expansion states
                      Missing MMC ratios imputed with mean
                                   Only states in GAO report
                              Only fee-for-service payments




46
                         Only variation from federal mandate
                                                                  -.01 -.008-.006-.004-.002 0               -.015   -.01    -.005        0     .005   -.02 -.015 -.01 -.005           0    .005

                                     Blank                                      Blank                         C. Adult Subsample                                     Blank
                                                                        Not Accepting New Patients             Not Accepting Patient's Insurance                Work Days Missed
                                                 Main sample
                               Truncated sample: 2009-2013
                                       Non-expansion states
                                       Families with children
                      Missing MMC ratios imputed with mean
                                   Only states in GAO report
                              Only fee-for-service payments
                         Only variation from federal mandate
                                                                 -.015      -.01   -.005       0     .005    -.02      -.01         0          .01    -2        -1       0       1          2



     Notes: Each dot in the above figures depicts the estimated effect of a $10 increase in Medicaid payments for the subsample listed on the y-axis
     from estimation of Equation (2). Each coefficient comes from a separate regression. The horizontal bars depict 95% confidence intervals for each
     coefficient. The dashed vertical line in each subplot displays the coefficient estimate from the main sample (as reported in Table 4), which includes
     years 2009­2014 and imputes missing payment ratios with the median across all states in the GAO report. School days missed reflect absenteeism
     due to illness or injury over the previous year; the exact survey questions and the corresponding reference windows for all outcomes are outlined in
     Appendix A.1.
                                              Figure 6: Effects of Payment Increases versus Payment Decreases
                            Blank                                      Blank                            A. Full Sample                                       Blank
                                                         Office Visit in Past Two Weeks                    Health: Poor or Fair                    Health: Excellent or Very Good

                            Turning on: 2012-2014

                            Turning on: 2012-2014

                            Turning off: 2013-2015


                                                     -.002     0      .002 .004 .006 .008        -.01       -.005           0         .005   -.005      0      .005     .01      .015

                            Blank                                      Blank                        B. Child Subsample                                       Blank
                                                                   Trouble Finding MD                     No Usual Place of Care               14+ School Days Missed (Age  10)

                            Turning on: 2012-2014

                            Turning on: 2012-2014

                            Turning off: 2013-2015


                                                      -.008 -.006 -.004 -.002             0      -.006 -.004 -.002     0        .002 .004    -.02 -.015 -.01 -.005           0   .005




47
                            Blank                                      Blank                        C. Adult Subsample                                       Blank
                                                             Not Accepting New Patients             Not Accepting Patient's Insurance                   Work Days Missed

                            Turning on: 2012-2014

                            Turning on: 2012-2014

                            Turning off: 2013-2015


                                                     -.015     -.01      -.005     0      .005    -.015    -.01     -.005        0    .005    -2        -1       0       1          2




     Notes: Each dot in the above figures depicts the estimated effect of a $10 increase in Medicaid payments for the subsample listed on the y-axis from
     estimation of Equation (2). Although the third row in each subfigure exploits payment decreases, the estimated coefficients still represent the effects of
     a $10 increase in Medicaid payments. Each coefficient comes from a separate regression. The horizontal bars depict 95% confidence intervals for each
     coefficient. The dashed vertical line in each subplot displays the coefficient estimate from the main sample (as reported in Table 4), which includes
     years 2009­2014 and imputes missing payment ratios with the median across all states in the GAO report. School days missed reflect absenteeism
     due to illness or injury over the previous year; the exact survey questions and the corresponding reference windows for all outcomes are outlined in
     Appendix A.1.
                                                                                                                                                         VIII


              Table 1: Balancing Regressions of Medicaid Enrollment and Socio-demographics on Medicaid Payments

      A. Medicaid Enrollment                                        Medicaid Enrollment                    Medicaid Managed Care Enrollment
                                                                                                                                                         Tables




                                          (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)
                                                                                                                                         Share of
                                      {Expansion}        Millions          Logs         Per Capita       Millions       Per Capita       Medicaid
      Medicaid payments ($10s)          0.027            -0.0056          -0.0040         -0.00093        -0.0021         -0.0021         -0.0092
                                       (0.019)           (0.018)         (0.0062)         (0.0012)        (0.014)        (0.0022)         (0.012)
      Observations                       306               306              306             306             306             306             306
      R2                                0.639             0.997            0.998           0.974           0.993           0.937           0.914
      Baseline mean                     0.48              2.66             14.3             0.18            1.45           0.089            0.50

      B. Socio-demographics                                                                 Share of Population




48
                                         (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)
                                    Median Income
                                      (10,000s)       Impoverished       Under 19         Over 65         White            Black         Hispanic
      Medicaid payments ($10s)         0.0081            0.00012          -0.00017         -0.00018       -0.00019       -0.000040        0.00032
                                      (0.0055)          (0.00037)        (0.00011)        (0.00015)      (0.00022)       (0.00027)       (0.00030)
      Observations                       306               306              306             306             306             306             306
      R2                                0.997             0.992            0.997           0.998           0.999           1.000           1.000
      Baseline mean                     5.25              0.15             0.25             0.13            0.79            0.13            0.16

     Notes: Observations are at the state level-year; standard errors are clustered by state. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and
     state-level analogs of the controls listed in Table 3. Regressions are weighted by state population. Total Medicaid enrollment comes from
     CMS's National Health Expenditure Data, Medicaid managed care enrollment comes from CMS's Medicaid Managed Care Enrollment Re-
     ports, and socio-demographics come from the HRSA's Area Resource Files. Results using individual-level data from the NHIS (our primary
     sample) reveal no changes in Medicaid enrollment or composition; release of results delayed due to COVID-19 disruptions.
                                        Table 2: Summary Statistics: NHIS Outcome Measures

                                               Entire Sample (2009­2014)         Baseline (2009­2012)       Rate Increase (2013­2014)
                                              Medicaid          Private        Medicaid       Private      Medicaid         Private
                                                (1)               (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)              (6)

     A. Full Sample
       Office visit in past two weeks           0.196            0.174           0.197         0.175         0.194           0.172
       Health: poor or fair                     0.174            0.061           0.176         0.062         0.169           0.059
       Health: excellent or very good           0.566            0.729           0.562         0.726         0.573           0.734
     B. Child Subsample
       Trouble finding a doctor                 0.021            0.008           0.022         0.008         0.020           0.008




49
       No usual place of care                   0.031            0.021           0.034         0.022         0.026           0.019
       School days missed (age  10)             3.433            2.887           3.516         2.933         3.292           2.792
       School days missed (age > 10)            4.428            3.221           4.745         3.302         3.895           3.058
       14+ school days missed (age  10)         0.044            0.022           0.046         0.023         0.042           0.021
       14+ school days missed (age > 10)        0.064            0.032           0.070         0.034         0.053           0.028
     C. Adult Subsample
       Not accepting new patients               0.055            0.016           0.062         0.017         0.049           0.015
       Not accepting patient's insurance        0.075            0.022           0.082         0.025         0.069           0.020
       Work days missed                         4.929            3.730           5.010         3.711         4.798           3.767

     Notes: The reported statistics are weighted using the sample weights provided in the NHIS. School days missed reflect absenteeism
     due to illness or injury over the previous year; the exact survey questions and the corresponding reference windows for all outcomes
     are outlined in Appendix A.1.
            Table 3: Summary Statistics: Individual and County Controls

                                                      All           Medicaid            Private

    Individual-level controls
    Demographics
      Male                                         0.489              0.439              0.489
      Average age                                  0.373              0.242              0.384
      Black                                        0.132              0.252              0.097
      Hispanic                                     0.167              0.296              0.101
      U.S. citizen                                 0.927              0.936              0.959
    Education
      < High school                                0.135              0.307              0.058
      High school or GED                           0.255              0.307              0.218
      Some college                                 0.190              0.179              0.194
      Associate's degree                           0.107              0.079              0.120
      Bachelor's degree                            0.181              0.049              0.246
      Master's, professional, or Ph.D.             0.097              0.013              0.139
    Family structure
      Married                                      0.582              0.400              0.666
      Live with partner                            0.055              0.049              0.045
      No children                                  0.479              0.229              0.503
      1 child                                      0.176              0.193              0.179
      2 children                                   0.191              0.243              0.197
      3 children                                   0.099              0.185              0.086
      4 children                                   0.036              0.090              0.025
      5+ children                                  0.019              0.059              0.010
    Income and wealth
      Welfare                                      0.127              0.483              0.035
      Homeowner                                    0.334              0.645              0.223
      Income to poverty   line:   <1               0.138              0.475              0.036
      Income to poverty   line:   1-1.99           0.166              0.285              0.097
      Income to poverty   line:   2-3.99           0.250              0.109              0.286
      Income to poverty   line:   4+               0.299              0.025              0.436
    County-level controls
       Population                                1,126,919          1,284,943          1,050,948
       Population density                           2,010              3,087              1,834
       Median income                               53,749             50,031             55,408
       Unemployment rate                            0.083              0.087              0.081
       Medicaid eligibles                         286,546            362,920            255,757
       Expansion state (2014)                      0.093              0.118              0.096
       Number of pediatricians                       234                265                222
       Number of primary care doctors                876                969                838
       Number of nurse practitioners                 401                447                386
       Number of hospital beds                      3,254              3,750              3,037

    Observations                                  603,074             96,128            338,174

Notes: All statistics are in percentages unless otherwise specified; some categories do not sum to one
due to missing responses. Individual-level statistics are weighted using the sample weights provided
in the NHIS. County-level controls come from the HRSA's Area Resource Files.

                                                 50
                  Table 4: Effects of Medicaid Payments on Access, Use, and Health

 A. Full Sample                            Medicaid                                                 Private
                           (1)               (2)                    (3)            (4)               (5)                     (6)
                       Office Visit         Health                Health       Office Visit         Health                 Health
                       (2 Weeks)             Fair                Very Good     (2 Weeks)             Fair                 Very Good

 Medicaid payments       0.0028*           -0.0031*              0.0062***        -0.0011            0.0002                 0.0020
 ($10s)                  (0.0017)          (0.0017)               (0.0023)       (0.0010)           (0.0006)               (0.0017)

 Observations             96,017            96,067                96,067         337,506            337,903                337,903
 R2                        0.071            0.296                 0.232           0.036              0.079                  0.138
 Baseline mean             0.197             0.176                 0.562          0.175              0.062                  0.726

 B. Child Subsample                        Medicaid                                                 Private

                         (1)             (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)             (6)           (7)        (8)
                       Trouble        No Usual      14+ School 14+ School      Trouble        No Usual      14+ School 14+ School
                       Finding        Place of       Absences   Absences       Finding        Place of       Absences   Absences
                         MD             Care         (Age10) (Age 11)            MD             Care         (Age10) (Age 11)

 Medicaid payments     -0.0054***     -0.0036*      -0.0065**        0.0019    0.0013*         0.0000         0.0012          0.0003
 ($10s)                 (0.0015)      (0.0018)       (0.0030)       (0.0038)   (0.0007)       (0.0010)       (0.0028)        (0.0026)

 Observations           16,752         21,221            6,665         6,766    26,277         33,994            10,079       14,337
 R2                      0.016          0.022            0.036         0.047     0.007          0.029             0.025        0.021
 Baseline mean           0.022          0.034            0.046         0.070     0.008          0.022             0.023        0.034

 C. Adult Subsample                        Medicaid                                                 Private
                           (1)                (2)                   (3)            (4)                (5)                    (6)
                           Not                Not                Work Days         Not                Not                 Work Days
                        Accepting          Accepting              Missed        Accepting          Accepting               Missed
                       New Patients        Patient's                           New Patients        Patient's
                                           Insurance                                               Insurance

 Medicaid payments      -0.0082***         -0.0089***              -0.1638        0.0005             -0.0007                0.1047
 ($10s)                  (0.0015)           (0.0030)              (0.3737)       (0.0006)           (0.0007)               (0.1147)

 Observations             14,806                14,805             6,298          79,812                79,802             76,971
 R2                        0.037                 0.039             0.076           0.006                 0.009              0.009
 Baseline mean             0.062                 0.082             5.010           0.017                 0.025              3.711

Notes: Observations are at the individual level; standard errors are clustered by state. All regressions in-
clude state and quarter-year fixed effects and all individual and county-level controls listed in Table 3 (with
age in five-year bins). Regressions are weighted using the sample weights provided in the NHIS. School days
missed reflect absenteeism due to illness or injury over the previous year; the exact survey questions and the
corresponding reference windows for all outcomes are outlined in Appendix A.1. Fewer children report days
of missed school in the past year relative to other child outcomes because a child must be at least five years
old to be asked this question. Similarly, only adults with employment histories are asked how many days of
work they missed in the past year.




                                                                  51
                        Table 5: Effects of Medicaid Payments on Disparities between Publicly and Privately Insured

                                             Baseline Means                                                Share of Disparity Closed by

                                                                  Disparity:     Effect of Implied                                            Increase
                                         Medicaid      Private                                             $10         $35          $45       to Erase
                                                                   (2) - (1)   $10 Increase Elasticity                                        Disparity
                                             (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)          (9)
      A. Full Sample
        Office visit (2 weeks)             0.197        0.175       -0.022      0.0028        0.11         NA          NA           NA          NA
        Health: poor or fair               0.176        0.062       -0.114      -0.0031       -0.13        0.03        0.10         0.12      $367.74
        Health: excellent or very good     0.562        0.726        0.164       0.0062        0.08        0.04        0.13         0.17      $264.52
      B. Child Subsample




52
        Trouble finding MD                 0.022        0.008       -0.014      -0.0054       -1.87        0.39        1.35         1.74       $25.93
        No usual place of care             0.034        0.022       -0.012      -0.0036       -0.81        0.30        1.05         1.35       $33.33
        14+ school days missed             0.046        0.023       -0.023      -0.0065       -1.08        0.28        0.99         1.27       $35.38
      C. Adult Subsample
        Not accepting new patients         0.062        0.017       -0.045      -0.0082       -1.01        0.18        0.64         0.82       $54.88
        Not acc. patient's insurance       0.082        0.025       -0.057      -0.0089       -0.83        0.16        0.55         0.70       $64.04

     Notes: The above table displays the effects of changes in Medicaid payments on disparities in outcomes between Medicaid beneficiaries and privately
     insured patients. Columns (1) and (2) reproduce the averages from Table 2; column (3) is the difference in these means. Column (4) reproduces our
     main estimates from Table 4. Column (5) is the implied elasticity of each outcome with respect to physician payments; this is computed using a me-
     dian baseline payment of $76 under Medicaid for an office visit of mid-level complexity ((5) = [(4)/(1)]/(10/76)]). Columns (6)­(8) show how much of
     the disparity from column (3) would be reduced by increasing Medicaid payments by $10, $35 (median payment increase from federal mandate), and
     $45 (median payment difference between Medicaid and private insurance), respectively. Column (9) shows the implied increase in Medicaid payments
     that would be required to eliminate the disparity in each outcome between Medicaid patients and patients with private insurance ((9) = [(3)/(4)]10).
     Office visits are excluded from columns (6)­(9) because Medicaid beneficiaries have more office visits than patients with private insurance.
              Table 6: Effects of Medicaid Payments on School Absences: NAEP

 A. Free Lunch Eligible                 0 days missed (%)                       3+ days missed (%)
                                     (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                   Grade 4              Grade 8             Grade 4             Grade 8

 Medicaid payments ($10s)          0.0028*               0.0013            -0.0034***            -0.0002
                                   (0.0016)             (0.0011)            (0.0006)            (0.0007)

 Observations                       750,170             686,070             750,170             686,070
 R2                                  0.020               0.026               0.006               0.013
 Baseline mean                       0.457               0.401               0.130               0.145

 B. Free Lunch Ineligible               0 days missed (%)                       3+ days missed (%)
                                     (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                   Grade 4              Grade 8             Grade 4             Grade 8

 Medicaid payments ($10s)           0.0016               -0.0002             0.0003              -0.0007
                                   (0.0013)             (0.0014)            (0.0008)            (0.0008)

 Observations                       622,070             665,060             622,070             665,060
 R2                                  0.015               0.019               0.004               0.008
 Baseline mean                       0.538               0.467               0.099               0.109

Notes: Observations are at the individual level; standard errors are clustered by state. All regressions in-
clude state and year fixed effects and individual demographic controls (sex, age, race, ethnicity). Regressions
are weighted using the sample weights provided in the NAEP. School days missed reflect absenteeism (for
any reason) in the month preceding national math and reading assessments. Data are from the 2009, 2011,
and 2013 National Assessment of Educational Progress.




                                                      53
                  Table 7: Effects of Medicaid Payments: Triple Difference Model

 A. Full Sample                              (1)                            (2)                          (3)
                                         Office Visit                     Health:                 Health: Excellent
                                         (2 Weeks)                      Poor or Fair               or Very Good

 Medicaid payments ($10s)                   -0.0012                        0.0002                      0.0022
                                           (0.0010)                       (0.0006)                    (0.0017)
  {Medicaid}                              -0.0857**                      0.1299***                   -0.2784***
                                           (0.0377)                       (0.0411)                    (0.0553)
 Medicaid payments * {Medicaid}            0.0040**                       -0.0033*                     0.0040
                                           (0.0018)                       (0.0019)                    (0.0031)

 Observations                              430,800                        431,244                     431,244
 R2                                         0.044                          0.178                       0.175
 Baseline mean                              0.179                          0.082                       0.698


 B. Child Subsample                      (1)                  (2)                     (3)                  (4)
                                       Trouble             No Usual             14+ School Days      14+ School Days
                                     Finding MD          Place of Care          Missed (Age10)       Missed (Age 11)

 Medicaid payments ($10s)               0.0014*               -0.0001                  0.0018              0.0001
                                       (0.0007)              (0.0010)                 (0.0022)            (0.0024)
  {Medicaid}                          0.1337***               -0.0491                  0.0646              -0.0361
                                       (0.0297)              (0.0455)                 (0.0683)            (0.0860)
 Medicaid payments * {Medicaid}       -0.0068***              -0.0035                -0.0083***            0.0018
                                       (0.0016)              (0.0024)                 (0.0029)            (0.0037)

 Observations                           42,541               54,602                    16,544              21,473
 R2                                      0.016                0.027                     0.036               0.037
 Baseline mean                           0.013                0.026                     0.029              0.042


 C. Adult Subsample                          (1)                          (2)                           (3)
                                        Not Accepting               Not Accepting                      Work
                                        New Patients              Patient's Insurance               Days Missed

 Medicaid payments ($10s)                  0.0007                         -0.0006                       0.0998
                                          (0.0006)                       (0.0006)                     (0.1158)
  {Medicaid}                              0.1082**                         0.0505                      -1.2433
                                          (0.0471)                       (0.0728)                     (6.5189)
 Medicaid payments * {Medicaid}          -0.0088***                     -0.0082***                     -0.2636
                                          (0.0016)                       (0.0029)                     (0.4207)

 Observations                              94,162                         94,150                       83,054
 R2                                         0.025                          0.029                        0.018
 Baseline mean                              0.022                          0.031                       3.785

Notes: Observations are at the individual level; standard errors are clustered by state. All regressions include
state and quarter-year fixed effects and all individual and county-level controls listed in Table 3 (with age
in five-year bins). We allow the associations between the controls and each outcome to differ for Medicaid
beneficiaries and patients with private insurance; refer to Table A4 for results from specifications without
interacted controls. Regressions are weighted using the sample weights provided in the NHIS. School days
missed reflect absenteeism due to illness or injury over the previous year; the exact survey questions and the
corresponding reference windows for all outcomes are outlined in Appendix A.1. Fewer children report days
of missed school in the past year relative to other child outcomes because a child must be at least five years
old to be asked this question. Similarly, only adults with employment histories are asked how many days of
work they missed in the past year.




                                                        54
Online Appendix

The Impacts of Physician Payments on Patient Access, Use, and Health

Alexander and Schnell (2020)




                                    55
A       Data Appendix

A.1       Outcomes

                  Table A1: Overview of Data Sources used for Outcome Measures

Outcome                          Data Source   Years Available    Look Back         Payment          Sample
                                                                    Period          Variable

Office visit                        NHIS         2009-2015       Past 2 weeks      Avg. rate in    Full sample
                                                                                    interview
                                                                                     quarter

Health: excellent or very good      NHIS         2009-2015       Not specified     Avg. rate in    Full sample
                                                                                    interview
                                                                                     quarter

Health: poor or fair                NHIS         2009-2015       Not specified     Avg. rate in    Full sample
                                                                                    interview
                                                                                     quarter

Trouble finding MD                  NHIS         2011-2015          Past 12       Avg. rate over     Child
                                                                    months        past 12 months   subsample

No usual place of care              NHIS         2009-2015       Not specified    Avg. rate over     Child
                                                                                  past 12 months   subsample

School days missed                  NHIS         2009-2015          Past 12       Avg. rate over     Child
                                                                    months        past 12 months   subsample

Not accepting new patients          NHIS         2011-2015          Past 12       Avg. rate over     Adult
                                                                    months        past 12 months   subsample

Not acc. patient's insurance        NHIS         2011-2015          Past 12       Avg. rate over     Adult
                                                                    months        past 12 months   subsample

Work days missed                    NHIS         2009-2015          Past 12       Avg. rate over     Adult
                                                                    months        past 12 months   subsample

School absences                    NAEP          2009, 2011,     30 days before    Avg. rate in    4th and 8th
                                                    2013              test         first quarter   grade math
                                                                                                   and reading

Test scores                        NAEP          2009, 2011,     Testing occurs    Avg. rate in    4th and 8th
                                                    2013             in Q1         first quarter   grade math
                                                                                                   and reading




                                                      56
National Health Interview Survey questions

   · Full Sample (from Family File)

        ­ During the last two weeks, did {person} see a doctor or other health care profes-
           sional at a doctor's office, a clinic, an emergency room, or some other place? (Do
           not include times during an overnight hospital stay.)

        ­ Would you say {person's} health in general is excellent, very good, good, fair, or

           poor?

   · Child Subsample

        ­ During the past 12 months, did you have any trouble finding a general doctor or
           provider who would see {sample child}?

        ­ Is there a place that {sample child} usually goes when {he/she} is sick or you
           need advice about {his/her} health?

        ­ During the past 12 months, that is, since {12-month ref. date}, about how many
           days did {sample child} miss school because of illness or injury?

   · Adult Subsample

        ­ During the past 12 months, were you told by a doctor's office or clinic that they
           would not accept {sample adult} as a new patient?

        ­ During the past 12 months, were you told by a doctor's office or clinic that they
           would not accept {sample adult}'s health care coverage?

        ­ During the past 12 months, about how many days did {sample adult} miss work?


A.2     Medicaid Payments

We collected data on fee-for-service reimbursement rates directly from state Medicaid offices.
The data have two components: (1) standard fee-for-service rates applicable in 2009­2015 for

                                             57
all providers and (2) augmented fee-for-service rates applicable in 2013­2014 (and 2015, de-
pending on the state) for qualifying physicians in family medicine, general internal medicine,
and pediatric medicine. In constructing our state-quarter panel of payments, we use standard

rates in 2009­2012, augmented rates in 2013­2014, and either the standard or augmented
rates in 2015 depending on whether a given state extended the primary care rate increase.
44 states and the District of Columbia provided us with complete, quarterly rate information
used to construct this panel. For the remaining six states, we use the following procedures
to impute missing rate information:

   · California: We only have the standard rates for 2009 and 2015. As the standard rates

     were the same in 2009 and 2015, we assume that they did not change over this period
     and pull forward the standard rates to 2012.

   · Hawaii: We only have the standard rates for 2009, 2012, and 2015. As the standard

     rates were the same in 2009 and 2012, we assume that they did not change over this
     period and pull forward the standard rates to 2011.

   · New Mexico: We are missing standard rates for January­November 2009. The rates
     changed over this period; we impute the missing months with the rate in the nearest
     month with non-missing rate information.

   · Utah: We are missing standard rates for January­May 2009 and July­December 12.
     We impute the missing months with the rate in the nearest month with non-missing
     rate information.

   · South Dakota: Standard rates are not archived, so we only have standard rates for 2015.
     We impute standard rates from 2009­2012 such that the change in reimbursement rates
     between each quarter and 2015 reflects the average change in reimbursement rates for

     neighboring states (MT, ND, MN, IA, NE, WY) over the same period.

   · Tennessee: We have no micro-data on reimbursement rates, as the state only uses

                                             58
      Medicaid managed care. However, we were told by the state that average reimburse-
      ments increased by 44 percent as a result of the primary care rate increase. We impute
      reimbursement rates for Tennessee in 2013 and 2014 by averaging the 2013 and 2014

      augmented rates for neighboring states (MO, KY, VA, NC, GA, AL, MS, AR). We
      then apply the 44 percent increase from 2012 to 2013 to impute the rates for 2012.
      For 2009­2012 and 2015, we calculate the average change in physician payments across
      neighboring states in the relevant period and apply this rate change to Tennessee over
      the same window.


A.3     Medicaid Managed Care

The primary care rate increase applied to both Medicaid fee-for-service and Medicaid man-
aged care programs. While states could just increase fee-for-service reimbursement rates

for the covered services to comply with the mandated higher rates, determining how to in-
crease reimbursement rates for physicians treating patients enrolled in Medicaid managed
care was more complicated. To ensure that Medicaid managed care programs complied with

the rate increase, each state's Medicaid program was required to submit proposals to CMS
that outlined methodologies for:

  1. Identifying the proportion of the capitation payments made by the state to its con-
      tracted MCOs in 2009 that was spent on each of the applicable primary care services,
      as well as the per-unit cost of each of these services. These baseline costs were used to

      calculate the refunds that each state's Medicaid program was eligible to receive from
      the federal government in 2013 and 2014.

  2. Developing a "model" that incorporated the increased fees for primary care services
      into the state's 2013 and 2014 capitation payments to MCOs. It was recommended
      that states implemented one of three types of models:

        · Model 1: "Full-risk prospective capitation" in which states incorporated increased

                                              59
          fees directly into their capitation payments to MCOs for 2013 and 2014.

        · Model 2: "Prospective capitation with risk-sharing that incorporates retrospective
          reconciliation" in which increased fees were built into states' capitation payments

          for 2013 and 2014 (similar to Model 1), but capitation payments were to be
          adjusted at the end of an agreed-upon time period to reflect actual utilization
          and costs (states and MCOs engage in "retrospective reconciliation").

        · Model 3: "Non-risk reconciled payments for enhanced rates" in which states' initial
          capitation payments to MCOs for 2013 and 2014 did not incorporate increased

          fees. Instead, MCOs submitted encounter data to the state at the end of the
          quarter, year, etc., and the state sent an additional payment to the MCOs to
          cover the costs of the increased fees.

CMS had to sign off on each state's methodology for determining the 2009 rates and on
its plan for implementing the rate increase for eligible physicians treating managed care
enrollees. According to CMS, at least 21 states opted to receive the increased funding in

lump-sum payments based on encounter data (Model 3). The rest of the states incorporated
the increased fees directly into their capitation payments (Models 1 and 2); most of these
states did not engage in any retrospective reconciliation based on actual utilization data.




                                             60
B      Supplementary Figures

Figure A1: Increases in Medicaid Payments from 2009 to 2013 Across New Patient Codes




                                         225
                         Percent Increase from 2009 to 2013
                                75       0       150




                                                              0                75                 150                 225
                                                                  Percent Increase from 2009 to 2013 (CPT 99203)
                                                                  CPT 99201   CPT 99202     CPT 99204     CPT 99205



Notes: The above figure displays state-level changes in Medicaid payments for CPT codes 99201, 99202,
99204, and 99205 from 2009 to 2013 versus state-level changes in Medicaid payments for CPT code 99203
(the CPT code used in the majority of our analyses) over the same period. The black line is the 45-degree
line. The figure excludes CPT codes 99204 and 99204 for New Jersey; payments for these codes increased
by 308 percent and 404 percent, respectively, while payment for CPT code 99203 increased by 169 percent.




                                                                                    61
                                                                                                                  Figure A2: Medicaid Payments Across New Patient Codes by State

                                                                                     Alabama                        Alaska                         Arizona                      Arkansas                      California                     Colorado                     Connecticut                    Delaware




                                                            0 100 200 300 400
                                                                                District of Columbia                Florida                        Georgia                       Hawaii                            Idaho                      Illinois                      Indiana                           Iowa




                                                            0 100 200 300 400
                                                                                      Kansas                       Kentucky                       Louisiana                          Maine                    Maryland                     Massachusetts                   Michigan                      Minnesota




                                                            0 100 200 300 400
                                                                                    Mississippi                     Missouri                       Montana                      Nebraska                       Nevada                     New Hampshire                    New Jersey                   New Mexico




                                                            0 100 200 300 400
                                                                                    New York                     North Carolina                  North Dakota                        Ohio                     Oklahoma                        Oregon                      Pennsylvania                  Rhode Island




62
                                                            0 100 200 300 400
                                                                                  South Carolina                  South Dakota                    Tennessee                          Texas                         Utah                      Vermont                        Virginia                    Washington




                                                            0 100 200 300 400

              Percent Increase from First Quarter of 2009
                                                                                                                                                                       2009   2011     2013   2015   2009   2011     2013   2015   2009   2011    2013     2015   2009   2011   2013     2015   2009   2011     2013   2015


                                                                                   West Virginia                   Wisconsin                      Wyoming




                                                            0 100 200 300 400
                                                                    2009         2011     2013     2015   2009   2011   2013      2015   2009   2011   2013     2015




                                                                                                       CPT 99201                                       CPT 99202                                      CPT 99203                                          CPT 99204                                     CPT 99205



     Notes: The above figure displays Medicaid payments by states for CPT codes 99201, 99202, 99203, 99204, and 99205 from 2009 to 2015. The payments
     for each CPT code in each state are normalized to their level in the first quarter of 2009.
           Figure A3: State-Level Medicaid Managed Care Penetration over Time




                                                            1
               Medicaid Beneficiaries Enrolled in MMC (%)
                                                            .8
                                                            .6
                                                            .4
                                                            .2
                                                            0




                                                             2009   2010   2011         2012          2013   2014   2015

                                                                                  Average across states


Notes: The above figure depicts the fraction of Medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in comprehensive risk-based
managed care in each state from 2009 to 2015. The black line depicts the national average. Data for 2009
through 2014 come from CMS; data for 2015 comes from the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. In 2014,
eleven states had less than one percent of their Medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in managed care plans: Al-
abama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut, Idaho, Maine, Montana, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Dakota,
and Wyoming. In the same year, nine states had more than 85 percent of their Medicaid beneficiaries enrolled
in such plans: Arizona, Delaware, Hawaii, Kansas, Kentucky, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Tennessee, and
Washington.




                                                                                     63
  Figure A4: States that Extended the Medicaid Primary Care Rate Increase Past 2014




                                                            Extended payment increase
                                                            Did not extend payment increase

Notes: The above map depicts whether states chose to maintain the primary care rate increase after the
federal mandate expired in 2014: shaded states extended higher Medicaid payment rates into 2015.




                                                 64
       Figure A5: Distribution of School Absences by Free Lunch Eligibility: NAEP

                                                                      Grade 4



                            60
                                            53.6


                                 44.4
                            40
                  Percent



                                                   31.3     30.2
                            20




                                                                      14.5
                                                                                10.4
                                                                                       5.9
                                                                                             4.2          3.9
                                                                                                                1.6
                            0




                                        0             1-2                3-4             5-10               11+
                                                                    Days missed
                                                          Free lunch eligible                Ineligible



                                                                      Grade 8
                            50




                                            46.8
                            40




                                 38.1
                                                            36.4
                                                   35.3
                       30
                  Percent
                            20




                                                                      16.7

                                                                                11.5
                            10




                                                                                       6.9
                                                                                             3.9          3.1
                                                                                                                1.3
                            0




                                        0             1-2                3-4             5-10               11+
                                                                    Days missed
                                                          Free lunch eligible                Ineligible



Notes: The above figures display the average percentage of students who missed 0, 1­2, 3­4, 5­10, or 11+
days in the month preceding their national math and reading assessments in 2009, 2011, and 2013. Data
come from the National Assessment of Educational Progress.




                                                                      65
                  Figure A6: Average Test Scores by School Absences: NAEP

                                                                                    Math



                             300
                                                      288.7           284.4
                                                                                           273.9           270.1
                                                                                                                           254.9
                                          244.5               240.4                234.9           233.5
                    Average test scores                                                                            218.3
                   100       0    200




                                                  0              1-2                    3-4           5-10            11+
                                                                                 Days missed
                                                                              Grade 4               Grade 8



                                                                                  Reading
                             300




                                                      268.6           266.1
                                                                                           258.4           254.1
                                                                                                                           235.7
                                          224.2               220.9                216.1           213.7
                    Average test scores
                                  200




                                                                                                                   192.5
                   100       0




                                                  0              1-2                    3-4           5-10            11+
                                                                                 Days missed
                                                                              Grade 4               Grade 8



Notes: The above figures display the average test scores of students who missed 0, 1­2, 3­4, 5­10, or 11+
days in the month preceding their national assessment in 2009, 2011, and 2013. Data come from the National
Assessment of Educational Progress.




                                                                                   66
                                                       Figure A7: Event Study: Effects of Medicaid Payments on Access, Use, and Health
                                                                                                                            A. Full Sample
                                                              Office Visit in Past Two Weeks                                  Health: Not Poor or Fair                                     Health: Excellent or Very Good




                                               .01
                                                                                                      .01
                                                                                                      .005




                                               .005
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                  .005 .01 .015




                                               0
                                               -.005
                                                                                                                                                                  -.005 0




                                                                                                      -.01 -.005
                                                       2009   2010   2011    2012     2013     2014                2009    2010     2011    2012    2013   2014                   2009    2010    2011    2012     2013     2014


                                                                                                                          B. Child Subsample
                                                                 No Trouble Finding MD                                            Usual Place of Care                                    <14 School Days Missed (Age  10)




                                               .01
                                                                                                      .01
                                                                                                                                                                  .02




                                                                                                      .005
                                                                                                                                                                  .01




                                               .005
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                  -.01




                                                                                                      -.01 -.005




                                               -.005




67
                       Estimated Coefficient
                                                       2009   2010   2011    2012     2013     2014                2009    2010     2011    2012    2013   2014                   2009    2010    2011    2012     2013     2014


                                                                                                                          C. Adult Subsample
                                                                 Accepting New Patients                                      Accepts Patient's Insurance                                            Work Days




                                                                                                      .02
                                                                                                                                                                  2




                                               .01
                                                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                      .01
                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                               0
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                                  -2




                                               -.01
                                                                                                      -.01
                                                       2009   2010   2011    2012     2013     2014                2009    2010     2011    2012    2013   2014                   2009    2010    2011    2012     2013     2014




     Notes: The above figures plot the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals on year indicators interacted with state-level changes in Medicaid payments
     induced by the primary care rate increase from estimation of Equation (1). We run separate regressions for patients with Medicaid and patients with
     private insurance. Outcomes are adjusted such that higher values denote better outcomes. Outcomes with missing coefficients in 2009 and 2010 were
     added to the NHIS in 2011. School days missed reflect absenteeism due to illness or injury over the previous year; the exact survey questions and the
     corresponding reference windows for all outcomes are outlined in Appendix A.1.
                           Figure A8: States that Expanded Medicaid




                                                                           Medicaid Expansion:
                                                                            None
                                                                            Before 2014
                                                                            2014

Notes: The above map depicts whether states expanded their Medicaid programs: the dark-shaded states
participated in the ACA Medicaid expansion in 2014, the light-shaded states expanded their Medicaid
program prior to the ACA, and the remaining states did not participate in any type of Medicaid expansion
by 2014. Data are from Leung and Mas (2018).




                                                  68
C      Supplementary Tables

  Table A2: Effects of Medicaid Payments on School Days Missed (Continuous Measure)

 Child Subsample                               Medicaid                                 Private
                                     (1)                  (2)                 (3)                     (4)
                                 School Days          School Days         School Days             School Days
                                   Missed               Missed              Missed                  Missed
                                  (Age10)              (Age 11)            (Age10)                 (Age 11)

 Medicaid payments ($10s)          -0.2256**               -0.0702           0.0014                 0.0649
                                    (0.1022)              (0.2251)          (0.0463)               (0.1018)

 Observations                        6,687                 6,794             10,168                 15,046
 R2                                  0.043                 0.062              0.033                  0.029
 Baseline mean                       3.516                 4.745             2.933                   3.302

Notes: Observations are at the individual level; standard errors are clustered by state. All regressions in-
clude state and quarter-year fixed effects and all individual and county-level controls listed in Table 3 (with
age in five-year bins). Regressions are weighted using the sample weights provided in the NHIS. School days
missed reflect absenteeism due to illness or injury over the previous year.




                                                      69
                       Table A3: Effects of Medicaid Payments on School Absences and Test Scores: State-level NAEP

      A. School Absences                               Free Lunch Eligible                                         Free Lunch Ineligible
                                        0 days missed (%)             3+ days missed (%)             0 days missed (%)             3+ days missed (%)
                                        (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)             (8)
                                      Grade 4        Grade 8        Grade 4        Grade 8         Grade 4        Grade 8        Grade 4         Grade 8

      Medicaid payments ($10s)       0.00315*       0.00593**      -0.00420**       -0.00249       0.00180        0.00156         0.00112       -0.000562
                                     (0.00174)      (0.00232)       (0.00157)      (0.00183)      (0.00210)      (0.00222)       (0.00163)      (0.00129)

      Observations                      150            150             150            150            150             150            150            150
      R2                               0.952          0.952           0.913          0.933          0.852           0.907          0.788          0.897
      Baseline mean                    0.444          0.381           0.243          0.267          0.536           0.468          0.162          0.168

      B. Test Scores                                   Free Lunch Eligible                                         Free Lunch Ineligible




70
                                        0 days missed (%)               3+ days missed                  0 days missed              3+ days missed (%)
                                        (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)             (8)
                                      Grade 4        Grade 8        Grade 4        Grade 8         Grade 4        Grade 8        Grade 4         Grade 8

      Medicaid payments ($10s)         -0.0551        0.0367         -0.0373        0.0150          -0.0803        0.0291        -0.0649*        -0.00418
                                      (0.0361)       (0.0491)       (0.0551)       (0.0558)        (0.0543)       (0.0423)       (0.0373)        (0.0545)

      Observations                      150            150             150            150            150             150            150            150
      R2                               0.959          0.943           0.927          0.886          0.925           0.950          0.950          0.939

     Notes: Observations are at the state-year level; standard errors are clustered by state. All regressions include state and year fixed effects and state-
     level analogs of the controls listed in Table 3. Regressions are weighted by state population. In Panel A, outcomes are the fraction of students missing
     a given amount of school (for any reason) in the month preceding their national math and reading assessments; in Panel B, outcomes are average test
     scores standardized across the population included in a given regression. Data are from the 2009, 2011, and 2013 National Assessment of Educational
     Progress.
  Table A4: Effects of Medicaid Payments: Triple Difference without Interacted Controls

 A. Full Sample                              (1)                            (2)                           (3)
                                         Office Visit                     Health:                  Health: Excellent
                                         (2 Weeks)                      Poor or Fair                or Very Good

 Medicaid payments ($10s)                   -0.0003                       0.0001                        0.0022
                                           (0.0009)                      (0.0005)                      (0.0015)
  {Medicaid}                              0.0690***                     0.1137***                     -0.1359***
                                           (0.0107)                      (0.0073)                      (0.0136)
 Medicaid payments * {Medicaid}             -0.0007                     -0.0024***                     0.0035**
                                           (0.0008)                      (0.0007)                      (0.0015)

 Observations                              430,800                        431,244                      431,244
 R2                                         0.040                          0.128                        0.163
 Baseline mean                              0.179                          0.082                        0.698


 B. Child Subsample                      (1)                  (2)                     (3)                   (4)
                                       Trouble             No Usual             14+ School Days       14+ School Days
                                     Finding MD          Place of Care          Missed (Age10)        Missed (Age 11)

 Medicaid payments ($10s)               -0.0006               -0.0011                    -0.0008            0.0018
                                       (0.0008)              (0.0008)                   (0.0023)           (0.0022)
  {Medicaid}                          0.0267***                0.0043                  0.0376***          0.0541***
                                       (0.0054)              (0.0065)                   (0.0109)           (0.0160)
 Medicaid payments * {Medicaid}       -0.0018***              -0.0009                  -0.0023**           -0.0032*
                                       (0.0005)              (0.0007)                   (0.0012)           (0.0016)

 Observations                           42,541               54,602                     16,544              21,473
 R2                                      0.010                0.021                      0.023               0.026
 Baseline mean                           0.013                0.026                      0.029              0.042


 C. Adult Subsample                          (1)                          (2)                            (3)
                                        Not Accepting               Not Accepting                       Work
                                        New Patients              Patient's Insurance                Days Missed

 Medicaid payments ($10s)                  0.0002                          -0.0010                       0.0964
                                          (0.0007)                        (0.0008)                     (0.1094)
  {Medicaid}                             0.0691***                       0.0887***                     1.9949*
                                          (0.0123)                        (0.0118)                     (1.1576)
 Medicaid payments * {Medicaid}          -0.0042***                     -0.0046***                      -0.1241
                                          (0.0011)                        (0.0011)                     (0.1108)

 Observations                              94,162                         94,150                        83,054
 R2                                         0.016                          0.020                         0.009
 Baseline mean                              0.022                          0.031                        3.785

Notes: Observations are at the individual level; standard errors are clustered by state. All regressions include
state and quarter-year fixed effects and all individual and county-level controls listed in Table 3 (with age
in five-year bins). In contrast to the specification used in Table 7, we do not interact the time fixed effects
or the demographic controls with insurance type in these regressions; that is, we assume that the associa-
tions between these variables and each outcome are the same for Medicaid beneficiaries and patients with
private insurance. Regressions are weighted using the sample weights provided in the NHIS. School days
missed reflect absenteeism due to illness or injury over the previous year; the exact survey questions and the
corresponding reference windows for all outcomes are outlined in Appendix A.1. Fewer children report days
of missed school in the past year relative to other child outcomes because a child must be at least five years
old to be asked this question. Similarly, only adults with employment histories are asked how many days of
work they missed in the past year.




                                                        71
     Table A5: Effects of Medicaid Payments: States that Extended the Rate Increase

 A. Full Sample                                Medicaid                                                Private

                               (1)                  (2)                (3)            (4)                  (5)                 (6)
                           Office Visit            Health            Health       Office Visit            Health             Health
                           (2 Weeks)                Fair            Very Good     (2 Weeks)                Fair             Very Good

 MC payments ($10s)           0.0026           -0.0028*             0.0063***        -0.0009            0.0001                0.0021
                             (0.0017)          (0.0017)              (0.0022)       (0.0010)           (0.0006)              (0.0017)
  {Extended}                -0.0991**           -0.0254             -0.2376***     -0.0487***           0.0118              -0.0587**
                             (0.0374)          (0.0395)              (0.0538)       (0.0138)           (0.0083)              (0.0236)
 Payments * {Extended}        -0.0018            0.0027               0.0008        0.0019**            -0.0003               0.0010
                             (0.0020)          (0.0023)              (0.0033)       (0.0008)           (0.0005)              (0.0014)

 Observations                96,017                96,067            96,067         337,506            337,903               337,903
 R2                           0.071                00.296             0.232          0.036              0.079                 0.138
 Baseline mean                0.197                 0.176             0.562          0.175                 0.062              0.726

 B. Child Subsample                            Medicaid                                                Private

                             (1)            (2)            (3)       (4)        (5)                (6)            (7)       (8)
                           Trouble        No Usual      14+ School 14+ School Trouble            No Usual      14+ School 14+ School
                           Finding        Place of       Absences Absences Finding               Place of       Absences Absences
                             MD             Care         (Age10) (Age 11)       MD                 Care         (Age10) (Age 11)

 MC payments ($10s)       -0.0054***      -0.0034*      -0.0074**       0.0010     0.0012*        0.0000        0.0010         0.0000
                           (0.0015)       (0.0019)       (0.0032)      (0.0040)    (0.0007)      (0.0010)      (0.0028)       (0.0027)
  {Extended}                0.0324         -0.0199        0.1609        -0.0234   -0.0259***     0.0666***      0.0581         -0.0393
                           (0.0209)       (0.0327)       (0.0974)      (0.0802)    (0.0080)      (0.0236)      (0.0371)       (0.0769)
 Payments * {Extended}      0.0002          0.0016        -0.0074      -0.0082*     -0.0002       -0.0001       -0.0017        -0.0024
                           (0.0011)       (0.0017)       (0.0053)      (0.0045)    (0.0004)      (0.0012)      (0.0019)       (0.0041)

 Observations              16,752          21,221           6,665       6,766      26,277         33,994           10,079      14,337
 R2                         0.016           0.022           0.036       0.047       0.007          0.029            0.025       0.021
 Baseline mean              0.022          0.034            0.046       0.070      0.008          0.022            0.023        0.034

 C. Adult Subsample                            Medicaid                                                Private

                              (1)                 (2)                  (3)            (4)                (5)                   (6)
                              Not                 Not               Work Days         Not                Not                Work Days
                           Accepting           Accepting             Missed        Accepting          Accepting              Missed
                          New Patients         Patient's                          New Patients        Patient's
                                               Insurance                                              Insurance

 MC payments ($10s)        -0.0084***         -0.0088***              -0.2808        0.0005             -0.0006               0.1255
                            (0.0014)           (0.0030)              (0.3704)       (0.0006)           (0.0007)              (0.1158)
  {Extended}               0.1212***            0.0322              16.5395**         0.001             -0.0093             -4.4484**
                            (0.0410)           (0.0699)              (6.0360)       (0.0133)           (0.0150)              (1.8844)
 Payments * {Extended}       -0.0022            0.0008              -0.7897**        -0.0003             0.0007              0.1825*
                            (0.0024)           (0.0037)              (0.2961)       (0.0008)           (0.0008)              (0.0972)

 Observations                14,806                14,805             6,298          79,812               79,802             76,971
 R2                           0.037                 0.039             0.076           0.006                0.009              0.009
 Baseline mean                0.062                 0.082             5.010          0.017                 0.025              3.711

Notes: Observations are at the individual level; standard errors are clustered by state. All regressions in-
clude state and quarter-year fixed effects and all individual and county-level controls listed in Table 3 (with
age in five-year bins). Regressions are weighted using the sample weights provided in the NHIS. School days
missed reflect absenteeism due to illness or injury over the previous year; the exact survey questions and the
corresponding reference windows for all outcomes are outlined in Appendix A.1. Fewer children report days
of missed school in the past year relative to other child outcomes because a child must be at least five years
old to be asked this question. Similarly, only adults with employment histories are asked how many days of
work they missed in the past year.


                                                                72
                 Table A6: Effects of Medicaid Payments on Medicaid Spending

                                              Spending                      Spending per Beneficiary
                                     (1)                   (2)              (3)                  (4)
                                   Millions               Logs             Levels               Logs
 Medicaid payments ($10s)           141.3                0.00082             14.1              0.0049
                                    (95.1)               (0.0055)           (55.0)            (0.0074)
 Observations                        306                   306               306                 306
 R2                                 0.998                 0.998             0.958               0.957
 Baseline mean                     16,677.5               23.1             6,811.3               8.80

Notes: Observations are at the state-year level; standard errors are clustered by state. All regressions in-
clude state and year fixed effects and state-level analogs of the controls listed in Table 3. Regressions are
weighted by state population and use CMS's National Health Expenditure Data.




                                                     73
            Table A7: Effects of Medicaid Payments: Primary Care Shortage Areas

 A. Full Sample                               Medicaid                                                    Private
                              (1)                  (2)                 (3)               (4)                  (5)                 (6)
                          Office Visit            Health             Health          Office Visit            Health             Health
                          (2 Weeks)                Fair             Very Good        (2 Weeks)                Fair             Very Good

 MC payments ($10)           0.0025           -0.0030*              0.0060**            -0.0008            0.0006                0.0016
                            (0.0018)          (0.0017)              (0.0027)           (0.0010)           (0.0006)              (0.0018)
  {Shortage}                 -0.0056           0.0148                -0.0242             0.0028          0.0087***              -0.0110*
                            (0.0127)          (0.0113)              (0.0183)           (0.0046)           (0.0029)              (0.0063)
 Payments * {Shortage}        0.0008           -0.0007                0.0011            -0.0005          -0.0009**               0.0008
                            (0.0017)          (0.0014)              (0.0022)           (0.0006)           (0.0004)              (0.0008)

 Observations               96,017                96,067                96,067         337,506            337,903               337,903
 R2                          0.071                00.296                 0.232          0.036              0.079                 0.138
 Baseline mean               0.197                 0.176                 0.562          0.175                 0.062              0.726

 B. Child Subsample                           Medicaid                                                    Private

                            (1)            (2)            (3)       (4)        (5)                    (6)            (7)       (8)
                          Trouble        No Usual      14+ School 14+ School Trouble                No Usual      14+ School 14+ School
                          Finding        Place of       Absences Absences Finding                   Place of       Absences Absences
                            MD             Care         (Age10) (Age 11)       MD                     Care         (Age10) (Age 11)

 MC payments ($10)       -0.0056***      -0.0036*       -0.0052            0.0005     0.0012         0.0002        0.0015          0.0000
                          (0.0017)       (0.0020)      (0.0034)           (0.0047)   (0.0008)       (0.0012)      (0.0027)        (0.0028)
  {Shortage}               -0.0081        -0.0001        0.0065            -0.0187    0.0010         0.0028        0.0095          -0.0086
                          (0.0141)       (0.0115)      (0.0266 )          (0.0309)   (0.0052)       (0.0059)      (0.0118)        (0.0110)
 Payments * {Shortage}      0.0006         0.0000       -0.0024             0.0026    0.0002         -0.0003       -0.0005          0.0007
                          (0.0015)       (0.0012)      (0.0028 )          (0.0037)   (0.0006)       (0.0007)      (0.0014)        (0.0013)

 Observations              16,752         21,221           6,665           6,766      26,277         33,994           10,079      14,337
 R2                         0.016          0.022           0.036           0.047       0.007          0.029            0.026       0.021
 Baseline mean             0.022          0.034            0.046           0.070      0.008          0.022            0.023        0.034

 C. Adult Subsample                           Medicaid                                                    Private
                             (1)                 (2)                   (3)               (4)                (5)                   (6)
                             Not                 Not                Work Days            Not                Not                Work Days
                          Accepting           Accepting              Missed           Accepting          Accepting              Missed
                         New Patients         Patient's                              New Patients        Patient's
                                              Insurance                                                  Insurance

 MC payments ($10)         -0.0084***         -0.0077**                  -0.2740        0.0004             -0.0005               0.1710
                            (0.0017)           (0.0030)                 (0.3170)       (0.0007)           (0.0008)              (0.1273)
  {Shortage}                 -0.0212            -0.0002                  -2.3331        -0.0026             0.0048               0.7920
                            (0.0128)           (0.0168)                 (2.8151)       (0.0051)           (0.0075)              (0.7211)
 Payments * {Shortage}        0.0008            -0.0020                   0.2592         0.0002            -0.0003               -0.1233
                            (0.0012)           (0.0016)                 (0.3144)       (0.0006)           (0.0008)              (0.0841)

 Observations               14,806                14,805                 6,298          79,812               79,802             76,971
 R2                          0.038                 0.040                 0.076           0.006                0.009              0.010
 Baseline mean               0.062                 0.082                 5.010          0.017                 0.025              3.711

Notes: Observations are at the individual level; standard errors are clustered by state. All regressions in-
clude state and quarter-year fixed effects and all individual and county-level controls listed in Table 3 (with
age in five-year bins). Regressions are weighted using the sample weights provided in the NHIS. School days
missed reflect absenteeism due to illness or injury over the previous year; the exact survey questions and the
corresponding reference windows for all outcomes are outlined in Appendix A.1. Fewer children report days
of missed school in the past year relative to other child outcomes because a child must be at least five years
old to be asked this question. Similarly, only adults with employment histories are asked how many days of
work they missed in the past year.



                                                                   74
