                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE IMPACT OF STATE-LEVEL R&D TAX CREDITS ON THE QUANTITY AND
                      QUALITY OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                         Catherine Fazio
                                         Jorge Guzman
                                           Scott Stern

                                       Working Paper 26099
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26099


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




We thank Evan Absher, Brian Asquith, Tim Bartik, George Erickcek, Lee Flemming, Evan Mast,
and Peter Orazem, for helpful comments, as well as participants in the UpJohn Institute
Conference on the Effects of State and Local Tax Incentives on Business Location Decisions, and
the Kauffman Uncommon Methods and Metrics meetings. Yu-Ting Cheng and Yupeng Liu did
excellent research assistantship in this project. We also acknowledge and thank the Kauffman
Foundation for their support of our research agenda, including the Uncommon Methods and
Metrics grant that supported this project, and we also thank the Jean Hammond (1986) and
Michael Krasner (1974) Entrepreneurship Fund and the Edward B. Roberts (1957)
Entrepreneurship Fund at MIT for their support. All errors and omissions are of course our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26099.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Catherine Fazio, Jorge Guzman, and Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of State-Level R&D Tax Credits on the Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship
Catherine Fazio, Jorge Guzman, and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 26099
July 2019
JEL No. H25,L26

                                           ABSTRACT

The acceleration of start-up activity is often cited as a rationale for the R&D tax credit, a key
innovation policy instrument adopted increasingly by US states over the past quarter century.
While there is a strong empirical base linking the R&D tax credit to increased R&D expenditures
and innovation, prior work has not provided causal evidence that this policy effects the rate of
formation and growth potential of new businesses. This paper combines data from the US
Startup Cartography Project with the Panel Database on Incentives and Taxes to implement a
difference-in-differences estimate of the impact of the R&D tax credit on the quantity and
quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship. Our key finding is that the R&D tax credit is
associated with a significant long-term impact on both the overall quantity and quality-adjusted
quantity of entrepreneurship, with the bulk of the effect materializing more than five years after
the policy is enacted. These findings stand in contrast to an analysis of the adoption of state-level
investment tax credits.      There, we observe no long-term impact on the quantity of
entrepreneurship but a marked decline in the rate of formation of growth-oriented startups over
time. Combined with other evidence regarding the efficacy of R&D tax credits in spurring
innovative investment, our results shed light on the potential for this fiscal policy to also
stimulate the formation of growth-oriented start-ups.

Catherine Fazio                                   Scott Stern
Massachusetts Institute of Technology             MIT Sloan School of Management
cfazio@mit.edu                                    100 Main Street, E62-476
                                                  Cambridge, MA 02142
Jorge Guzman                                      and NBER
Columbia Business School Uris Hall, 711           sstern@mit.edu
116th St & Broadway
New York, NY 10027
jag2367@gsb.columbia.edu
 I.       Introduction

         The promotion of entrepreneurship is a central priority of regional economic
development (Lerner, 2009). New firm formation plays a pivotal role in regional economic
performance: the growth of young firms is the source of nearly all net new employment
(Haltiwanger et al., 2013), and a high rate of local entrepreneurship serves to maintain the
competitiveness of local markets (Andersson & Henrekson, 2015). There is likewise increasing
appreciation for the role that start-up firms play in the overall innovation and commercialization
process (Acs et al., 2009). However, the outcomes from entrepreneurship are highly skewed,
with a small number of firms accounting for the vast bulk of economic impact (Decker et al.,
2014). Consequently, assessing the role of policy on entrepreneurship depends on evaluating not
only its impact in terms of the number of new companies founded, but also on its potential for
generating and increasing the realization of meaningful growth outcomes (Guzman & Stern,
2016).

         One of the principal instruments that policymakers use to impact entrepreneurship is tax
policy. There is considerable evidence that the incentives to start and invest in the expansion of
a business depends on the overall rate of taxation (Cullen & Gordon, 2007). Indeed, an oft-cited
justification for lower rates of taxation is the general encouragement of entrepreneurship
(Reynolds et al., 1999; Gurley-Calvez & Bruce, 2013; Holtz-Eakin, 2000). As the outsized role
of innovation-driven start-ups in harnessing local knowledge spillovers and enhancing the
comparative advantage of regions has come to the fore (Lanahan & Feldman, 2018; Delgado,
Porter & Stern, 2015), policymakers have increasingly deployed focused tax policies such as the
R&D tax credit for dual purposes: (1) to spur investment in innovation by larger and more
established companies (their original intended purpose); and (2) to encourage the formation of
growth-oriented ventures and accelerate their performance (Miller & Richard, 2010; Wu, 2008;
Bartik & Ebert, 2011).

         The primary contribution of this paper is to provide novel empirical evidence regarding
the impact of state R&D tax credits on the quantity, quality and performance of entrepreneurship
(that is, the realization of significant growth outcomes by new firms). On the one hand, an
emerging empirical literature has documented the impact of state R&D tax credits on R&D
investment, innovation and overall economic performance (Wilson, 2009; Wu, 2005; Moretti &

                                                 2
Wilson, 2014; Lucking, 2019). At the same time, since the work of Cullen and Gordon (2007)
and Gentry and Hubbard (2004), there has been attention towards the overall impact of the tax
system on the formation of new enterprises (Bruce, 2000; Gurley-Calvez & Bruce, 2013; Gentry
& Hubbard, 2004; Cullen & Gordon, 2016). And, there have been a small number of studies that
have linked the R&D tax credit to the overall growth of high-technology sectors (Wu, 2008), or
linked the adoption of such credits to the movement towards entrepreneurship for individuals
working in companies impacted by the credit (Babina & Howell, 2018). However, to date, there
has been no paper that directly examines the overall impact of the R&D tax credit on the rate,
nature and scaling of new businesses.

         At least in part, this gap in understanding arises from the fact that, among all new
business starts, the nature of growth-oriented entrepreneurship is elusive. The vast majority of
new firms are founded with the intention to remain small businesses (Hurst & Pugsley, 2011).
Only a very small fraction of startups experience the explosive growth (in terms of jobs, revenue,
or valuation) that propels the economy and motivates economic development policy (Guzman &
Stern, 2016). And, at the time a company is founded, one cannot observe whether that particular
firm will experience explosive growth (or not). Evaluating the effectiveness of fiscal incentives
such as the state R&D tax credit thus requires confronting a measurement quandary: How do we
identify whether state R&D tax credits are generating the formation and accelerating the
performance of the types of startups that have the potential for exponential growth (Fazio et al.,
2016)?

         We overcome this impasse by extending our earlier work (Guzman & Stern, 2016) to
leverage a novel dataset on tax incentives (Bartik, 2017). Building on the methodology of
Guzman and Stern (2016), we combine business registration records and predictive analytics to
leverage founding choices that signal growth intention and model the relationship of these
choices to later growth outcomes. We use this mapping to prospectively account for differences
in the growth potential (or quality) of startups at or near the time of founding and develop
systematic measures of the quantity, quality-adjusted quantity, and scaling potential of
entrepreneurship in a region (Guzman & Stern, 2015, 2016, 2017). We then consider the
respective interactions of those measures with the availability (or absence) of state-level R&D
tax credits.

                                                   3
        More specifically, we combine data from the Startup Cartography project (SCP), tracking
the quality, quantity, and performance of entrepreneurship, with data from the UpJohn Institute's
Panel Database on Incentives and Taxes (PDIT) (Bartik, 2017), tracking the availability and
effective rates of state-level tax incentives. Our resulting dataset includes entrepreneurship
measures for all counties in 25 states from 1990 to 2010. Using a difference-in-differences
approach at the county-level, with year, county and pre-trend fixed effects, our core analysis
evaluates how changes in the R&D tax credit impact the quantity, quality and performance of
entrepreneurial activity. In addition, as an exercise to consider the impact of tax credits that are
more distant from the incentives for innovation-driven entrepreneurship, we repeat our analysis
examining the impact of state-level investment tax credits using a similar difference-in-
differences framework.

        We find striking evidence for the long-term impact of the introduction of state R&D tax
credits on the quantity and quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship in a region. Accounting
for county and year fixed effects, as well as lagged state GDP, we find that the introduction of
state R&D tax credits is associated with around 7% increase in the rate of net new business
formation (both in terms of raw quantity and accounting for the heterogeneous firm potential for
growth). Moreover, this effect may underestimate the incentive's actual long-term impact.
While state-level R&D tax credits have little to no effect on the rate or composition of new firm
formation in the first few years following their introduction, these incentives lead to a 20%
increase in the quantity and quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship over a ten year period
(in the absence of any meaningful pre-adoption trend). Notably, these impacts stand in sharp
contrast to the effects of other contemporaneous state fiscal incentives supporting established
firms ­ state-level investment tax credits. 2 For the investment tax credit, we see at best a neutral
impact in terms of the overall quantity of entrepreneurship, and a longer-term decline in the
quality-adjusted quantity of new firms founded, suggesting that, by enhancing the
competitiveness of established businesses, the investment tax credit might serve to deter growth-
oriented entrepreneurship over time.

        We conclude by observing that these results are informative for policy design. Though

2
 The PDIT panel centers on "incentives that are commonly used by medium to medium-large export-base firms"
and excludes fiscal incentives geared towards incentivizing angel investment in pre-revenue startups.

                                                      4
initially aimed at fostering innovation by established enterprises, state R&D tax credits also
increase the rate of entrepreneurship, and importantly, the formation of high growth potential
startups needed to achieve economic development objectives. However, the R&D tax credit
does not offer a "quick fix" for states seeking to catalyze regional economic growth through
entrepreneurship. Importantly, increases in the formation of high potential growth firms only
materialize over time in response to R&D credits. Thus, it may take a decade or more for state
R&D tax credits to have an impact on the economy through entrepreneurship. More generally,
tax incentives might be more effectively leveraged as one part of a broader complement of
initiatives aimed at encouraging the formation and scaling of growth-oriented firms. Overall, our
findings counsel in favor of "patient" and targeted policy-- offering longstanding tax incentives
tailored towards the revenue trajectories of high-potential growth startups and encouraging
investment in initiatives, including public-private partnerships, that support this important
category of newly-founded firms.



    II.    R&D Tax Incentives And Regional Entrepreneurship: A Review Of The Evidence

          State R&D tax credits and other types of fiscal incentives have proliferated since 1981,
when their counterpart at the federal level was first introduced (Wilson, 2009). 3 Between 1981
and 2006, 32 states introduced R&D tax credits and the average effective credit rate grew four-
fold (Wilson, 2009). Though originally adopted as an economic development tool to support
existing firms already conducting R&D (Miller & Richard, 2010), many state governments
expected R&D tax credits would also help to advance their innovative capacity and industrial
competitiveness either by creating or attracting new companies (Wu, 2008; Bartik & Ebert,


3
  State-level investment tax credits have similarly proliferated over the past four decades, notwithstanding the repeal
of the federal investment tax credit upon which they were modeled. As of 2004, 40% of states offered a general,
statewide tax credit on investment in machinery and buildings with an average rate exceeding 6% (Chirinko and
Wilson, 2008 at Figure 1). Research finds positive impact from these incentives on investment (although of varying
magnitude) (Bartik, 2018). We are not aware of research that considers the impact of general investment tax credits
on entrepreneurial activity. However, in their evaluation of the federal investment tax credit prior to its repeal,
Auerbach and Summers (1979) credited such incentives with "crowding out of non -fa vored investment" at a level
sufficient "to offset a large percentage of the increase in the stock of equipment resulting from use of the credit."
Accordingly, although likewise aimed at established firms, we would not expect state investment tax credits, as
traditionally formulated, to have a positive impact on the creation of entrepreneurship. The effects of general
investment tax credits on entrepreneurship thus offer a useful counterpart against which to compare similar analysis
of the impact of state R&D tax credits.

                                                           5
2011). Today, R&D tax credits have increasingly been positioned as a catalyst of startup
activity--a mechanism to spur growth in the states' respective high-technology sectors by
directly helping pre-revenue startups--above and beyond simply supporting established firms
(Miller & Richard, 2010).

         However, in spite of the significant and growing state fiscal investment to foster
entrepreneurship through R&D credits, the empirical evidence evaluating their impact is sparse.
While an extensive literature investigates the impact of R&D tax credits on innovation, and
another complementary literature considers how taxes broadly effect entry into
entrepreneurship, there appears to be a lack of evidence on the question at the intersection of
the two: how R&D fiscal incentives change the local production of entrepreneurship in those
locations that adopt them. To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to empirically
evaluate this important issue.4

         To bridge this gap, we build on three related strands of economic literature that closely
inform our area of study. First, there is a large and productive literature on the impact of R&D
tax credits on established firms. This work has established that such tax credits have a significant
influence on R&D investment as well as wider economic effects (Mansfield, 1986; Jaffe, 1986;
Katz, 1986; Grossman & Helpman, 1991; Hall & Van Reenen, 2000; Bloom, Griffith, & Van
Reenen, 2002; Wilson, 2009; Wu 2005; Moretti & Wilson, 2014; Branstetter & Sakakibara,
2002; and Rao, 2013).5 Furthermore, at a macroeconomic level, R&D tax credits appear to
increase establishment-level dynamism among incumbent R&D-performing firms (Lucking,
2019; Acemoglu et al., 2017).

         Second, there is a body of literature considering how tax policy in general (rather than
R&D fiscal incentives specifically) impacts entry into entrepreneurship. The findings of this

4
  The closest related paper is Wu (2008), who considers how the introduction of state R&D credits changes the
number of total active firms in the high technology sector. However, Wu's data does not allow him to actually
separate between the entry and exit margin, or consider the varying quality of those firms that are marginally enticed
to enter after the introduction of R&D credits.
5
  Drawn from Mukherjee, Abhiroop, Singh, Manpreet and Zaldokas, Alminas, "Do Corporate Taxes Hinder
Innovation?", June 22, 2014 draft. See Hall and Van Reenen (2000) for a comprehensive survey on this topic.
Because firms are known to relabel other costs as R&D in an effort to claim tax credits (Griffith, 1996), it can be
difficult to ascertain whether the R&D spending response to tax changes reflects changes in productive innovative
inputs as opposed to creative accounting. Recent research establishes that firms differ widely in the productivity of
their R&D investments (Hirshleifer, Hsu, & Li, 2013) and these differences in innovative efficiency translate into
differences in future sales (Cohen, Diether, & Malloy, 2013).

                                                          6
literature are mixed, and the effects often depend on the relative level of tax rates, structure of
tax policy, risk tolerance of investors and the startups' stage of growth, though some general
patterns do emerge. Generally speaking, entry into self-employment increases in response to
lower marginal taxes (Bruce, 2000). Cuts in relative and across the board tax rates faced by
entrepreneurs would likewise increase entrepreneurial entry (Gurley-Calvez & Bruce, 2013).
Conversely, higher marginal tax rates and a more convex tax system reduce entry into self-
employment for people who were previously employed in innovative industries and occupations
(Gentry & Hubbard, 2004). Progressive tax structures have countervailing effects for high-
income agents, risk neutral investors on the one hand, and risk averse individuals, on the other.
Since graduated rates tax gains more than subsidize losses, such rates discourage individuals
from the former group from moving to the entrepreneurial sector and encourage it for the latter
(Cullen & Gordon, 2016). However, tax policy aimed at encouraging small business entry may
come at the expense of discouraging later growth as preferential treatment is phased out and the
government claims a larger share of payoffs for successful entrepreneurs (Holtz-Eakin, 1995;
Gentry & Hubbard, 2003). And, an across-the-board cut in tax rates would have a net positive
impact on entrepreneurial spell length (Gurley-Calvez & Bruce, 2007). 6

        Finally, third, there are a small number of papers that have touched more directly upon
the topic of R&D tax credits and entrepreneurship, even if not squarely looking at the impact of
the former on the latter. Babina and Howell (2018) use changes in state and federal R&D tax
credits to study varying incentives to knowledge production in large firms and their spillovers
into new startups, and Lokshin and Mohnen (2007) estimate the tax-price elasticity of R&D
spending in the Netherlands across firm sizes, finding larger elasticities for smaller firms and
hypothesizing that the credit plays a major role in helping small firms increase R&D
expenditures in the face of more pressing capital constraints. The paper that is closest to ours is
Wu (2008), which links state R&D tax credits to the growth of the high tech sector. Wu (2008)
finds that state R&D tax credits have significant and positive impacts on the number of active
high-technology establishments and as a share of business establishments overall within states.
However, Wu (2008) leaves open the question as to whether any temporal rise observed reflects


6
 Drawn from Gale and Brown's (2013) survey of the literature considering how federal tax policy affects small
business.

                                                        7
an increase in entrepreneurship, survival, or other aspects. In conclusion, while much research
has been done in adjacent areas, the empirical evidence on the impact of R&D tax credits on
entrepreneurship continues to be largely missing.

        Studying this question presents not only challenges in systematic empirical analysis, but
also the need to solve fundamental data issues at the core of entrepreneurship measurement. As
emphasized in Guzman and Stern (2017), ecosystem entrepreneurship cannot simply be
summarized by the count of new firms, but instead represents three distinct margins, each
varying independently across locations: the regional quantity, representing the number of firms
being created in a location; the regional quality, representing the heterogeneous underlying
potential of firms at founding and their regional distribution; and ecosystem effects, representing
the better or worse performance across locations for startups founded with the same quality.
State R&D tax credits could impact entrepreneurship across any one of these margins, or all of
them, potentially even with each moving in different directions. Without accounting
systematically for each of these effects, the net-impact of state R&D tax credits on
entrepreneurship (from the policy maker's perspective) cannot be assessed.

        Therefore, developing an approach to create systematic regional measures of the quantity
of entrepreneurship, its quality, and the ecosystem performance, in a way that can be done
comprehensively across the United States (or another large geography) is a central and necessary
requirement to careful study. This is the question to which we now turn.



 III.    Empirical Framework
        We now proceed to describe our empirical framework. To do so, we build on our earlier
work using business registration records and predictive analytics to measure the quality and
quantity of entrepreneurship across regions (Guzman & Stern, 2015, 2016, 2017; Fazio et al.,
2017). Then, we use these regional measures to setup a difference-in-differences empirical
specification that takes advantage of the staggered introduction of tax credits to measure their
impact on regional entrepreneurship outcomes. We review each below.




                                                 8
        A. Measuring Regional Entrepreneurship: An Entrepreneurial Quality Approach.7

        Our entrepreneurship measurement approach builds from Guzman and Stern (2016),
where we develop a way to measure the founding quality of startups using predictive analytics
and business registration records. Our approach combines three interrelated insights. First, as
the challenges to reach a growth outcome as a sole proprietorship are formidable, a practical
requirement for any entrepreneur to achieve growth is business registration (as a corporation,
partnership, or limited liability company). This practical requirement allows us to form a
population sample of entrepreneurs "at risk" of growth at a similar (and foundational) stage of
the entrepreneurial process. Second, we are able to potentially distinguish among business
registrants through the measurement of founding choices observable at or close to the time of
registration. For example, we can measure start-up characteristics (which result from the initial
entrepreneurial choices in our model) such as whether the founders name the firm after
themselves (eponymy), whether the firm is organized in order to facilitate equity financing (e.g.,
registering as a corporation or in Delaware), or whether the firm seeks intellectual property
protection (e.g., a patent or trademark). Third, though rare, we observe meaningful growth
outcomes (such as achieving an IPO or high-value acquisition) for some firms. Combining these
insights, we estimate entrepreneurial quality by estimating the relationship between observed
growth outcomes and start-up characteristics.

        That is, for a firm i born in region r at time t, with at-birth start-up characteristics ,, ,
we observe growth outcome ,,+ s years after founding and estimate:

                 ,, = (,,+ |,, ) = ( + ,, )

And use the predicted value of this regression as our measure of entrepreneurial quality.

        As long as the process by which start-up characteristics map to growth remain stable over
time (an assumption which is itself testable), this mapping allows us to form an estimate of
founding characteristics to entrepreneurial quality for any business registrant within our sample.

        We use these estimates to generate three entrepreneurship statistics capturing the level of


7
 This section draws heavily (if not verbatim) from our prior work in Guzman and Stern (2016; 2017), where we
originally introduce these measurement statistics.

                                                       9
entrepreneurial quality for a given population of start-ups, the potential for growth
entrepreneurship within a given region and start-up cohort, and the performance over time of a
regional entrepreneurial ecosystem in realizing the potential performance of firms founded
within a given location and time period.

       The Entrepreneurial Quality Index (EQI). To create an index of entrepreneurial quality
for any group of firms (e.g., all the firms within a particular cohort or a group of firms satisfying
a particular condition), we simply take the average quality within that group. Specifically, in our
regional analysis, we define the Entrepreneurial Quality Index (EQI) as an aggregate of quality at
the region-year level by simply estimating the average of ,, over that region:

                                                1
                                      , =          ,,
                                                ,
                                                      {, }


where {, } represents the set of all firms in region r and year t, and , represents the number
of firms in that region-year. To ensure that our estimate of entrepreneurial quality for region r
reflects the quality of start-ups in that location rather than simply assuming that start-ups from a
given location are associated with a given level of quality, we exclude any location-specific
measures from the vector of observable start-up characteristics.

       The Regional Entrepreneurship Cohort Potential Index (RECPI). From the perspective of
a given region, the overall inherent potential for a cohort of start-ups combines both the quality
of entrepreneurship in a region and the number of firms in such region (a measure of quantity).
To do so, we define RECPI as simply  multiplied by the number of firms in that region-year:

                                      RECPIr,t = EQIr,t × Nr,t

Since our index multiplies the average probability of a firm in a region-year to achieve growth
(quality) by the number of firms, it is, by definition, the expected number of growth events from
a region-year given the start-up characteristics of a cohort at birth. This measure of course
abstracts away from the ability of a region to realize the performance of start-ups founded within
a given cohort (i.e., its ecosystem performance), and instead can be interpreted as a measure of
the "potential" of a region given the "intrinsic" quality of firms at birth, which can then be
affected by the impact of the entrepreneurial ecosystem, or shocks to the economy and the cohort


                                                 10
between the time of founding and a growth outcome.

         The Regional Ecosystem Acceleration Index (REAI). While RECPI estimates the
expected number of growth events for a given group of firms, over time we can observe the
realized number of growth events from that cohort. This difference can be interpreted as the
relative ability of firms within a given region to grow, conditional on their initial entrepreneurial
quality. Variation in ecosystem performance could result from differences across regional
ecosystems in their ability to nurture the growth of start-up firms, or changes over time due to
financing cycles or economic conditions. We define REAI as the ratio of realized growth events
to expected growth events:

                                            #   ,
                                , =
                                               ,

A value of REAI above one indicates a region-cohort that realizes a greater than expected
number of growth events (and a value below one indicates under-performance relative to
expectations). REAI is a measure of a regional performance premium: the rate at which the
regional business ecosystem supports high potential firms in the process of becoming growth
firms.

         Together, EQI, RECPI, and REAI offer researchers and regional stakeholders the ability
to undertake detailed evaluations (over time, and at different levels of geographic and sectorial
granularity) of entrepreneurial quality and ecosystem performance.

         B. Empirical Specification.

         Building on this setup, we take advantage of the staggered introduction of tax incentives
across different states in the United States to measure the difference in the average creation of
local entrepreneurship for counties that have a tax incentive versus those that do not.
Specifically, for a measure of entrepreneurship , , estimated in county  at time , we estimate
the specification

                                 , =  +  +  +  , + ,

where , is an indicator variable equal to 1 if a tax incentive has been included and 0 otherwise,
 are individual county level fixed effects,  are year fixed effects, and , is an error term.


                                                 11
The coefficient of interest is  , which estimates the average change in entrepreneurship (either
RECPI, quality, or quantity) with and without the tax incentive. After controlling for mean
levels of county and year effects, the key identifying assumption is lack of correlation between
the imposition of the policy and the trend in county-level entrepreneurship (which is itself
testable).

        One common concern in difference-in-differences implementations for policy evaluation,
like our case, is the existence of pre-trends. Specifically, the concern is that for some
unmeasured reason counties that are already in an upward or downward trend in
entrepreneurship levels are also more likely to have R&D tax credits. For example, more urban
settings can be more conducive to R&D policies and have more startups, so that localized
changes in urbanization, rather than the availability of R&D tax credits, can be driving measured
differences in entrepreneurship between those counties that have the credit and those that do not.
If these unobserved factors exist and are not fully controlled for, then the observed impact of the
R&D tax credit will be biased. We test for the existence of pre-trends in several ways, such as
by running models that estimate pre-trends, by including additional controls that are most likely
to be correlated with these pre-trends (e.g., regional GDP), and by plotting individual
coefficients for each lag / lead to the tax incentive.

        Finally, a second concern is that the standard errors are biased downward when there
exists correlation in the unobserved component across different observations in the same county
(and which therefore are exposed to the same tax incentive), or between different counties in the
same year. To account for these concerns, we use the multi-way clustering approach (Cameron
et al., 2011) and cluster our standard errors by both county and year.




                                                   12
    IV.    Data
          To implement the empirical framework described in Section III, we need to combine
systematic measures of the quantity and quality of regional entrepreneurship with measures of tax
policy and other control variables over time. We construct a dataset including county-level
measures of entrepreneurship from the Startup Cartography Project with measures of business tax
credits from the Panel Database on Incentives and Taxes. We therefore review each of these data
sources in turn



          A. The Startup Cartography Project Dataset8

          The underlying dataset consists of all new business registrations across 34 US states
    (representing more than 80% of US GDP) from 1988 through 2012 that satisfy one of the
    following conditions: (a) a for-profit firm in the local jurisdiction or (b) a for-profit firm whose
    jurisdiction is Delaware but whose principal office address is in the local state. Our analysis
    excludes non-profit organizations as well as companies whose primary location is not in the
    state. The resulting dataset contains 18,916,895 observations.

          For each observation we construct variables related to: (i) growth outcomes (IPO or
    significant acquisition); (ii) firm characteristics based on business registration observables; and
    (iii) firm characteristics based on external data that can be directly linked to the firm (e.g.
    patents, trademarks).

          i. Growth Outcomes. The growth outcome, Growth, is a dummy variable equal
              to 1 if the firm has an initial public offering (IPO) or is acquired at a
              meaningful positive valuation within 6 years of registration as reported in the
              Thomson Reuters SDC database. 9


8
  This section draws heavily from this prior work in Guzman and Stern (2016), where we introduce business
registration records and many of the measures used in this paper.
9
  Although the coverage of IPOs is likely to be nearly comprehensive, the SDC data set excludes some acquisitions.
SDC captures their list of acquisitions by using over 200 news sources, SEC filings, trade publications, wires, and
proprietary sources of investment banks, law firms, and other advisors (Churchwell, 2016). Barnes, Harp, and Oler
(2014) compare the quality of the SDC data to acquisitions by public firms and find a 95% accuracy (Nette,
Stegemoller, and Wintoki (2011), also perform a similar review). While we know this data not to be perfect, we
believe it to have relatively good coverage of `high value' acquisitions. We also note that none of the cited studies
found significant false positives, suggesting that the only effect of the acquisitions we do not track will be an

                                                         13
        ii. Firm Characteristic Measures Based on Business Registration Data. We first
             create two binary measures that relate to how the firm is registered:
             Corporation, which captures whether the firm is a corporation rather than an
             LLC or partnership, and Delaware, equal to one if the firm is registered in
             Delaware. We then create five additional measures based directly on the name
             of the firm. Eponymous is equal to 1 if the first, middle, or last name of the top
             managers is part of the name of the firm itself. 10 Our last measure relates to
             the structure of the firm name. Based on our review of naming patterns of
             growth-oriented startups versus the full business registration database, a
             striking feature of growth-oriented firms is that the vast majority of their
             names are at most two words (plus perhaps one additional word to capture the
             organizational form, e.g. "Inc."). We define Short Name to be equal to one if
             the entire firm name has three or less words, and zero otherwise. 11 We then
             create several measures based on how the firm name reflects the industry or
             sector within which the firm is operating, taking advantage of the industry
             categorization of the US Cluster Mapping Project ("US CMP") (Delgado,
             Porter, and Stern, 2016) and a text analysis approach. We develop seven such
             measures. The first three are associated with broad industry sectors and
             include whether a firm can be identified as local (Local), traded (Traded) or
             resource intensive (Resource Intensive). The other five industry groups are
             narrowly defined high technology sectors that are typically associated with
             high growth firms, including whether the firm is within the biotech ( Biotech
             Sector), e-commerce (E-Commerce), other information technology (IT),
             medical devices (Medical Devices) or semiconductors (Semiconductor) space.




attenuation of our estimated coefficients.
10
   Belenzon, Chatterji, and Daley (2017a, 2017b) perform a more detailed analysis of the interaction between eponymy
and firm performance finding an important negative relationship between an intent to use equity financing and
eponymy.
11
   Companies such as Akamai or Biogen have sharp and distinctive names, whereas more traditional businesses often
have long and descriptive names (e.g., "New England Commercial Realty Advisors, Inc.").

                                                        14
         iii. Firm Characteristic Measures Based on External Observables. We also
             construct two measures related to quality based on data from the U.S. Patent
             and Trademark Office. Patent is equal to 1 if a firm holds a patent application
             within the first year and 0 otherwise. We include patents that are filed by the
             firm within the first year of registration and patents that are assigned to the
             firm within the first year from another entity (e.g., an inventor or another
             firm). Our second measure, Trademark, is equal to 1 if a firm applies for
             trademark protection within a year from registration.

         Entrepreneurial Quality Logit Model. We use this data to estimate a logit regression
model that allows one to examine how the presence or absence of a startup characteristic
correlates with the probability of growth (conditioning on the presence or absence of other
startup characteristics). Table 1 reports our results for all startups between 1988 and 2006. The
results are striking. We find an extremely strong (and robust) correlation between startup
characteristics and the probability of growth. Substantial changes in the predicted likelihood of a
growth outcome are associated with characteristics observable in real time from business
registration records as well as characteristics observable with a lag (e.g., patent and trademark
applications). On the one hand, startups founded as corporations are almost 390% more likely to
grow. Similarly, firms with short names, and those using biotech industry descriptors, are
(respectively) close to 90% and 130% more likely to grow. On the other, eponymous firms and
those with local industry descriptors are 74% and 57% less likely to grow, respectively. Finally,
these changes in predicted probabilities are multiplicative in nature: a startup that registers in
Delaware and applies for a patent in its first year is 210 times more likely to grow than a firm
that only registers in its home state and does not apply for intellectual property protection. 12
         Quantitative Estimates Of Entrepreneurial Quantity And Quality-Adjusted Quantity.
These findings can be used to construct, for every registered firm in the dataset, its underlying
probability of growth at founding. The probability of growth for an average firm is very low (on
the order of one in 3,500). However, for those firms with multiple startup characteristics that


12
  It is very important to emphasize that these startup characteristics are not the causal drivers of growth, but instead
are "digital signatures" that allow us to distinguish firms in terms of their entrepreneurial quality. Registering in
Delaware or filing for a patent will not guarantee a growth outcome for a new business, but the firms that
historically have engaged in those activities have been associated with skewed growth outcomes

                                                           15
positively predict growth, the probability of growth is dramatically higher (the top 1 percent of
firms have a better than one in 100 chance of achieving growth outcomes). These estimates of
entrepreneurial quality at the firm level can, in turn, be used to develop economic indices that
simultaneously account for both the quantity and the quality of entrepreneurship (and which are
outlined in the empirical framework section):

         ·   EQI--the Entrepreneurial Quality Index--the average growth potential (or
             "quality") of any given group of new firms.
         ·   RECPI--the Regional Entrepreneurship Cohort Potential Index--the number
             of startups within a particular location or region expected to later achieve a
             significant growth outcome.
         ·   REAI--the Regional Entrepreneurship Acceleration Index--the ability of a
             region to convert entrepreneurial potential into realized growth.

         Each index calculates a different quantitative measure that incorporates the quality of
entrepreneurship. The EQI, RECPI, and REAI indexes give a better indication than possible
under traditional methods about just how skewed the distributions of growth potential and likely
growth outcomes are (and whether and to what extent a greater number of small to medium-sized
businesses could be expected to catalyze the same growth outcomes as a high-potential growth
firm).13 Additionally, REAI systematically quantifies the ratio of r ealized to expected growth
events for a given cohort of new firms, providing an indication of whether the ecosystem in
which a cohort of new firms is located is conducive to growth (or not). As such, these indexes
offer policymakers and stakeholders a better view of whether and to what extent their regions are
attracting/generating startups with high-growth potential vs. helping/hampering these firms'
efforts to realize their potential.



13
   The level of skewness of entrepreneurial quality is highly informative. It indicates how much more likely a startup
at the high end of the entrepreneurial quality distribution is to grow than an average firm. If skewness were low, then
adding several average firms could have as much regional impact as one high-growth-potential firm. But, if
skewness is high (as the findings indicate), then a much larger number of firms with average growth potential is
needed to generate the expected impact of one high-potential firm. Given the level of skewness observed, almost
4,000 local limited liability companies (average firm) are needed to generate the same potential as only one new
Delaware corporation with an early patent and trademark. Put another way, initial ambition/potential for growth is a
key dimension of heterogeneity across new firms. The subset of high-potential-growth startups is very small and
fundamentally different than the vast majority of new firms

                                                          16
         Aggregating Across Locations. Finally, we aggregate our estimates for all firms in our
sample. To do so, we use the registered ZIP Code of each company to identify each county
using the HUD USPS ZIP Code crosswalk files. We then aggregate across each county and year
to estimate quality, quantity, RECPI and REAI based on the observed outcomes in each one.
Our resulting dataset is made publicly available in the Startup Cartography Project website.



         B. Measuring R&D tax credits: The Panel Database on Incentives and Taxes 14

         To incorporate the incidence and existence of R&D and investment tax credits into our
study, we take advantage of a new dataset, The Panel Database on Incentives and Taxes (PDIT),
created by Bartik (2017). The PDIT estimates, from 1990 to 2015, marginal taxes and business
incentives for an average firm in each of 47 cities in 33 states (reported in Figure 1B), and 45
industries over 26 years. It simulates average taxes and incentives by considering the following
scenario: a business in some industry i creates a new branch facility. That new facility is set up in
some particular city c, in some state s, and starts operation in some year t. Taxes and incentives
for the new facility are projected for the facility's first 20 years of operation, and the facility is
assumed to operate at the same scale during that time.15 To calculate state and local taxes for this
new facility, data based on industry averages are used for the firm's balance sheet (including for
value-added, pretax profits, mix of property assets, employment, wages, and R&D spending).
From this balance sheet information, and from information on state and local business tax rates,
and information on rules for how incentives are determined based on firm characteristics, state
and local taxes and incentives are calculated for each year of the assumed 20 years of operation
of the new facility. The present value of the 20-year stream of such taxes and incentives is
calculated using a discount rate of 12%.

         The database thus describes how business incentives vary over the term of a new business
investment (from year 1 to year 20), and it breaks down incentives into different types, including


14
  This section draws heavily (if not verbatim) from Bartik, 2017.
15
  In assigning taxes and incentives to this new facility over the 20 years, the same incentive and tax rules in place
for year t are assumed to remain unchanged through year t + 20. This assumption can be seen as taking the
perspective of a business that myopically projects current tax and incentive rules into the future. (When taxes and
incentives are calculated for the same city and state in some future year t1, the tax rules and incentives for year t1
are carried forward for 20 years.)

                                                           17
investment tax credits (ITCs) and research and development (R&D) tax credits. 16,17 It allows
these incentives to be subjected to descriptive analyses, including an examination of time trends
in different types of incentives, and analysis of how incentives vary with a state's economic
prosperity or with an industry's wage rates.

         C. Descriptive Statistics.

         Our dataset merges the Startup Cartography Project data with the PDIT, creating a
complete panel of 25 overlapping US states from 1990 to 2010 with 30,093 and 5 variables.
Table 1 reports summary statistics. Obs, represents the count of individual registrations in each
county-year. There are 397 new business registrants on average in a county and year. However,
the distribution is highly skewed, with a standard deviation of 1,948. RECPI, represents our
headline index, the quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship. It indicates the expected
number of growth events given the founding characteristics of new businesses in a specific
county and year. The mean is 0.37 with a standard deviation of 2. REAI, indicates the
ecosystem performance index, which is the ratio of realized growth events versus predicted
growth ones. The mean 0.64 with a standard deviation of 6.

         We create two measures from the PDIT reflecting the presence or absence of the
indicated tax credits in the states in question. Has R&D Tax Credit is a binary variable equal to
1 if the county has an R&D tax credit during that year and zero otherwise. 46% of the county-
year observations have an R&D tax credit, allowing well-balanced variation in our data. To
avoid issues particular to the transitioning year when the tax credit is introduced, we drop all
county-years observations when the tax credit is introduced (N= 869), therefore simply
observing the time before and after the credit. Has Investment Credit is a binary variable equal


16
   The PDIT does not include all tax incentives offered across all states. Instead, it centers on " incentives that are
commonly used by medium to medium-large export-base firms. The goal of the PDIT is to measure the "standard
deal" that would be offered to a medium-sized export-base new facility that the state and city wished to attract.
These incentives may not be offered to all firms, but they are commonly offered to many firms." As such,
Investment tax credits targeted at specific sectors (such as the biotechnology sector) or startup firms (such as angel
investment tax credits) are not included in the PDIT panel.
17
   We distinguish general state investment tax credits from ones targeted towards encouraging early stage capital
investment (which are not included in the Panel Database on Incentives and Taxes (PDIT) (Bartik, 2017) and
therefore not the subject of our analysis). Bell et al. (2013) finds that more than 30 states offered targeted angel
investment tax credits as of 2012 and that these incentives were correlated positively with an increase in the quantity
of state-level entrepreneurial activity within two years after introduction.


                                                          18
to 1 if the county has an investment credit during the year of the observation and zero otherwise.
38% of the observations in our sample have an investment credit. We drop the 721 observations
representing county-year observations in which the credit is introduced.



 V.     Empirical Results

       We now proceed to estimate the impact of R&D tax credits on the level of regional
entrepreneurship through our difference-in-differences approach. In Table 3, we report the
difference in the quantity of newly founded companies (), the difference in the quality-
adjusted quantity of companies (  ) and difference on the performance of companies
conditional on being founded (  ), for those counties that have an R&D tax credit versus
those that do not. For  and , we use the logarithm as our dependent variables to
control for skewness in the variables and to allow easier interpretation of our estimates as
elasticities. However, we do not log  as it is already a ratio that can be directly interpreted.
Standard errors are clustered two-ways by year of observation and county to account for
correlation in the error terms across either of those dimensions.

       Model 1 is a naïve model without any controls. It reports the cross-sectional differences
in the levels of entrepreneurship between locations that have R&D tax credits and those that do
not. In a way, they represent the perceived differences in entrepreneurship for the casual policy
observer, or for those who might be doing a comparative analysis between regions at a point in
time. We observe substantially more entrepreneurship in counties with R&D credits than
without. Column (1) indicates that counties with R&D credits have 48% higher total quantity of
firms. Column (2) indicates that they have 64% higher total quality-adjusted quantity of firms.
Interestingly, column (3) shows a negative relationship between REAI and the R&D credit.
Firms in counties with R&D credits are 14% less likely to achieve growth outcomes compared to
firms in counties that do not have the credit.

       Of course, cross-sectional differences like those of Model 1 are likely to suffer from
significant omitted variable bias. For example, it is likely that locations that are more urban
simply have more economic development support (which will include tax credits) and more
firms, so that R&D credits and entrepreneurship will be positively correlated due to the omitted

                                                 19
variable of urbanization. As well, variation in the business cycle would also influence the
founding and quality of new companies and policy introductions. Unless the business cycle is
accounted for, the estimates will be similarly biased.

       Model II is our preferred difference-in-differences estimate. In Model II, we control for
constant differences across counties by including county fixed-effects and for the business cycle
effects and other national shocks by including year fixed-effects. If the choice to introduce an
R&D tax credit in any state is random after controlling for these two sources of endogeneity,
then our estimate is identified.

       Highlighting the important role of omitted variables in determining which counties
eventually offer R&D credits, our estimates decrease significantly from the naïve model to the
differences in differences model. Column (1) reports an average difference in the quantity of
entrepreneurship of 7.5% between counties with R&D credits compared to those without,
conditional on the fixed-effects. Column (2) reports a difference of 7.6% for the quality adjusted
quantity of entrepreneurship. Finally, in Column (3) we report our estimate of the effect of R&D
tax credits on the ecosystem performance, which is now equivalent to zero. These results
emphasize a meaningful main effect of R&D tax credits on the rate of entrepreneurship for
counties in our sample. Notably, the introduction of R&D tax credits increases the rate of
entrepreneurship, but changes neither its composition nor its acceleration. Both the quantity and
the quality adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship increase in equal proportion. While counties
with an R&D tax credit enjoy an increase in the rate of business formation, that increase reflects
the same mix of entrepreneurial quality previously found in the region. Moreover, counties with
an R&D credit are no more effective at helping startups to realize growth outcomes (relative to
initial quality) than those without. While lowering the capital cost of R&D leads to more
employee departures for entrepreneurship (Babina & Howell, 2018), beyond potential knowledge
spillovers, it does not appear to have broader ecosystem effects.

       Robustness Tests. We now consider the potential threats to the validity of our estimate.
As in most difference in differences panel models, the main threat to validity is the potential role
of pre-trends in our treated counties. While we control for fixed characteristics of counties and
time periods, there can potentially be region-specific omitted variables that drive both
entrepreneurship levels and the introduction of R&D tax credits, making our results artificially

                                                20
higher. For example, localized economic and population growth would increase the level of
entrepreneurship in a region and might lead to legislative choices such as the introduction of tax
credits. Conversely, however, the process of policymaking is often driven by state-level
elements of politics that are more random, and might be uncorrelated with trends of
entrepreneurship. In Models III and IV, we evaluate some potential threats to validity in our
estimates by considering two obvious potential confounders, pre-trends and the state economy.

        In Model III, we control for county pre-trends by estimating the predicted value of
entrepreneurship for each county if it had not implemented the R&D tax credit. Specifically, for
all counties, we estimate a county specific trend coefficient using only the observations where
Has R&D Credit is zero, then predict the level of entrepreneurship (either quantity, quality-
adjusted quantity, or ecosystem effects) on all observations based on this trend. We include
these predicted values as individual county trends for all observations. The point estimates of the
impact of R&D tax credits are close to those of Model II (in fact, slightly higher) and the
differences are not statistically significant.

        In Model IV, we control directly for the most obvious potential bias in the policy-making
process of state legislatures, the state-specific economy, by including the state GDP as a control
directly in our regression. Once again, the point estimates are quite close to those of Model II,
and the differences are not statistically significant.

        We move to a graphical analysis of pre-trends in Figure 2, where we report the year-
specific trends in the five years preceding the introduction of the R&D tax credit. To do so, we
estimate regressions with time-specific coefficients in the years before and after the introduction
of the R&D tax credit. Consistent with our other results, we do not observe any pre-trends in
either the quantity or the quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship.

        Together, our results provide compelling evidence of a lack of pre-trends in the
introduction of state R&D tax credits. This evidence suggests the threats to validity do not hold
in our estimates and, therefore, they can be interpreted as causal.

        The Impact of State R&D Tax Credits Through Time. While we have observed a mean
difference in the effect of state R&D tax credits on regional entrepreneurship, there is reason to
believe that this effect would vary over time. In particular, we expect R&D tax credits to have

                                                   21
long-term effects on a local startup ecosystem. For example, the credit might change not only
the marginal cost of starting a company for those ideas already existing, but also the supply of
new ideas themselves as entrepreneurs and investors are motivated by the expectation of lower
capital costs, thus leading to longer-term effects on regional entrepreneurship.

        We study this possibility in Model V of Table 3. To do so, we change our core
difference-in-differences specification in Model II to include time-varying effects through two
variables. The first variable, Years Before Credit, is equal to the (negative) number of years
prior to the tax credit's introduction, and zero when the tax credit has been introduced. Its
coefficient indicates the presence of pre-trends in the data. The second variable Years After
Credit, is equal to the number of years after the tax credit is introduced, and zero when it has not
been included. We also include a level effect of R&D tax credit by keeping our main variable
Has R&D Credit. Our estimates show no pre-trends, highlighting once again that there is no
conditional endogeneity in the introduction of the tax credit. We also show no effect on the main
variable. However, we see a positive and significant coefficient of 0.023 of our time trend on the
level of entrepreneurship for both quantity and quality-adjusted quantity. These estimates
suggest that there is not an initial increase in entrepreneurship immediately following the
introduction of a tax credit. However, there is a subsequent improvement of 2% per year for
every year the credit has been active.

        We revisit these estimates with yearly coefficients after treatment in Figure 2, and
observe the same increasing pattern. There is no increase in the level of entrepreneurship
immediately following the introduction of the R&D tax credit. However, there is an upward
trend that begins after year 3 and continues up to year 14. Consistent with our average increase
of 2% per year in our regressions, we see a difference of about 20% in the level of
entrepreneurship by year 10.

        Together, our results provide evidence showing that there is a significant effect of state
R&D tax credits on the rate of entrepreneurship, but that this effect only accumulates through
time. Counties should expect to wait a few years following the introduction of a credit to see any
initial effects and up to a decade to see effects that are substantial.




                                                   22
 VI.    Investment Tax Credits

       As an additional exercise, we repeat our analysis studying the impact of a different type
of tax credit, the investment tax credit, on entrepreneurship. Table 4 repeats our estimates using
the variable Has Investment Tax Credit as the independent variable. The regressions are
otherwise the same.

       Model I reports the naïve model, representing the cross-section correlation that would be
observed by simply comparing the levels of entrepreneurship between those counties that have
investment tax credits and those that do not. As is the case with R&D tax credits, the correlation
is positive and substantial. Counties with investment tax credits have 71% higher quantity of
entrepreneurship and 35% higher quality-adjusted quantity.

       The relationship changes in Model II, where we introduce county and year fixed effects.
The relationship to entrepreneurship is now negative. Investment tax credits are associated with
a decrease of 5% in the quantity of entrepreneurship, though not statistically significant, and a
decrease of 9% in the quality-adjusted quantity, which is statistically significant. This is in sharp
contrast to R&D tax credits, which showed a positive relationship to regional entrepreneurship.

       Models III and IV perform robustness tests on our data by including county pre-trends (as
explained for Table 3) and state level GDP. The results are mostly unchanged. The coefficients
are close to the baseline estimate of Model II and are not statistically different from them. Figure
3 also shows the pre-trends for the five years prior to the introduction of the credit. While
slightly noisier than the R&D credits, we do not observe any pre-trends on the process to
introducing investment tax credits.

       Model V considers the time-specific impact of investment tax credits on
entrepreneurship. Our estimates indicate that there is no main effect from investment tax credits
on the level of entrepreneurship, but that there is a negative trend which is significant. For each
year that the investment tax credit is active, there is a decrease of 0.7% in the quantity, and 1.1%
in the quality-adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship.

       We look at these effects in more detail in Figure 3, which reports time-specific level
coefficients for each outcome. There is a negative trend in the quantity of companies following
the credit, but the pattern appears quite noisy. It is more precise when considering the quality-

                                                 23
adjusted quantity of entrepreneurship, where there is a negative trend that becomes more
significant through time.

        Generally, we conclude the effects of the investment tax credit are negative on
entrepreneurship, and more specifically high growth potential firms, suggesting a `crowding out'
effect on investment in the region as the investment tax credit is taken advantage of by large
companies. This stands in sharp contrast to the positive effects we identified for R&D credits,
painting a nuanced picture of the role of tax incentives on entrepreneurship and its subsequent
development, with both positive and negative effects being possible.



 VII.    Conclusion

        Innovation and entrepreneurship are central to economic growth and an increasing focus
of state-level economic development policy. States are offering R&D tax credits to both
encourage innovation and support high-technology clusters within regions. With the locus of
innovation shifting to startups in high-tech industries, and the majority of net new job creation
resulting from the expansion of young high-potential growth firms (Haltiwanger et al., 2013;
Guzman & Stern 2016), state-level R&D tax credits must create high growth entrepreneurship
(either directly or via spillovers) to be an effective tool for economic development.

        R&D tax credits appear particularly well suited for the creation of endogenous high-
growth entrepreneurship in a region. These incentives lower the cost of capital and the
incremental expense of research, encouraging investment in innovation and generating spillovers
strengthening high-technology sectors within regions (Wu, 2008). Historically, such tax credits
were designed for and used by established industries, leaving open the question of whether and
to what extent R&D tax credits generate the type of entrepreneurship needed for economic
growth and/or greater realization of growth outcomes. Our findings on state R&D tax credits
offer a new lens through which to understand the impact of these fiscal incentives on both the
rate of entrepreneurship and its composition, as well as the time it takes for effects to emerge.
Our results on investment tax credits present an interesting counterpart against which the impacts
of R&D tax credits may be compared and understood.

        While R&D tax credits increase the quantity and the quality-adjusted quantity of new

                                                 24
firms founded in equal proportion, investment tax credits change the mix of new firm formation,
decreasing the rate of high-growth potential entrepreneurship credited with the majority of new
job creation. The causal impact of R&D and investment tax credits on entrepreneurship take
time to emerge and build over time. Over the long term, R&D tax credits empower regions to
significantly increase both the quantity of entrepreneurship and number of expected growth
outcomes. Counties with R&D tax credits experience a rise in the rate of new firm formation
and the number of expected growth outcomes by 2% per year and 20% over a ten-year period.
Similarly, the negative impacts of investment tax credits on the quality-adjusted quantity of
entrepreneurship build over time, decreasing the incidence of expected growth outcomes by
1.2% per year and 12% in total over a ten-year period. Last, but not least, our findings dampen
expectations of achieving an indirect ecosystem effect, showing no causal relationship between
the introduction of credits and later startup performance.

         Our findings have important implications for policy design. First, and not surprisingly,
the impact of tax incentives on entrepreneurship and its subsequent development is neither
uniform nor unidirectional. Both positive and negative effects are possible. R&D tax credits
generate the form of entrepreneurship needed for economic growth, while investment tax credits
retard it. States offering both R&D and investment tax credits in an effort to stimulate high-
growth entrepreneurship may be offering incentives that work at cross purposes.

         Second, the differential impact of R&D and investment tax credits on the composition of
entrepreneurial entry ­ i.e., the rate of formation of main-street vs. high growth potential startups
-- suggests that the structure of such incentives matters to later outcomes. While R&D tax
credits do generate substantial increases in the quantity and quality-adjusted quantity of new
firms founded, they do not change the mix of main-street and innovation driven firms.
Investment tax credits offered to established firms appear to crowd out the formation of new
high-growth potential startups. Our findings do not foreclose the possibility, however, that more
targeted investment tax credits, such as those specifically tailored towards supporting the biotech
industry or angel investment, could have the opposite effect. 18 Our findings leave open the

18
  Bell et al. (2013), for example, find an increase in the quantity of entrepreneurship in the two years following the
implementation of an angel investment tax credit. Further research is needed to study the impact of more tailored
investment tax credits on the composition of new firm formation and, more specifically, the quality adjusted quality
of entrepreneurship. Similarly, consideration of whether and to what extent the level of R&D credit offered and its

                                                          25
prospect that policy experimentation with the intensity and terms of these fiscal incentives could
identify structures that better amplify the type of entrepreneurship most needed for later
economic growth.

        Third, R&D tax credits offer no universal salve for accelerating entrepreneurial
ecosystems. R&D tax credits do generate meaningful increases in the formation rates of growth-
oriented startups. Indeed, recent research confirms labor reallocation as one important
mechanism through which this effect occurs (Babina & Howell, 2018). However, counties with
R&D credits are no more effective at helping startups to realize growth outcomes than those
without. Thus, while R&D tax credits will lead to creation of more growth-oriented startups,
policymakers cannot also count on R&D tax credits to improve those startup's performance.
Policymakers should consider complementing R&D tax credits with other programs and
initiatives to support startups as they scale.

        Finally, our findings suggest a time horizon over which policy impact from R&D and
investment tax incentives may reasonably be expected. R&D tax credits do not offer a "quick
fix" for states seeking to stimulate regional economic growth through entrepreneurship (nor will
investment tax credits spark a rapid decline in the number of expected growth outcomes from
startups). Instead, our cross-sectional results suggest that regional variation, and innovation and
entrepreneurship initiatives, likely are stronger contributors to near term growth in the formation
rates of high-growth potential startups. And, the impact of R&D and investment tax incentives
compound to substantial levels (albeit in opposite directions) over a ten-year period.




terms impact the composition of entrepreneurship generated (i.e., its extensive margin), while beyond the scope of
this paper is likewise an important subject for future research.

                                                        26
References
Acemoglu, D., Akcigit, U., Alp, H., Bloom, N., & Kerr, W. (2018). Innovation, reallocation, and
   growth. American Economic Review, 108(11), 3450-3491. doi:10.1257/aer.20130470
Acs, Z. J., Braunerhjelm, P., Audretsch, D. B., & Carlsson, B. (2009). The knowledge spillover
    theory of entrepreneurship. Small Business Economics, 32(1), 15-30.
Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., & Howitt, P. (2005). Competition and
    innovation: An inverted-U relationship*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 701-
    728. doi:10.1093/qje/120.2.701
Andersson, M., & Henrekson, M. (2015). Local competitiveness fostered through local
   institutions for entrepreneurship. The Oxford Handbook of Local Competitiveness, , 145-
   190.
Arrow, K. J. (1962). Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention., 609-625.
Atanassov, J., & Liu, X. (2019). Can corporate income tax cuts stimulate innovation? Journal of
    Financial and Quantitative Analysis, , 1-88. doi:10.1017/S0022109019000152
Auerbach, A. J., & Summers, L. H. (1979). The investment tax credit: An
    evaluation. Unpublished manuscript.
Babina, T., & Howell, S. (2018). Entrepreneurial spillovers from corporate R&D. IDEAS
    Working Paper Series from RePEc,
Barnes, B. G., Harp, N. L., & Oler, D. (2014). Evaluating the SDC mergers and acquisitions
    database. The Financial Review, 49(4), 793-821. Retrieved
    from http://www.econis.eu/PPNSET?PPN=815245416
Bartik, T. J. (2017). A new panel database on business incentives for economic development
     offered by state and local governments in the united
     states. https://research.upjohn.org/reports/225: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment
     Research.
Bartik, T. J. (2018). "But for" percentages for economic development incentives: What
     percentage estimates are plausible based on the research literature?
Bartik, T. J., & Hollenbeck, K. (2012). An analysis of the employment effects of the washington
     high technology business and occupation (B&O) tax credit: Technical report. Upjohn
     Institute Working Paper, 12-187
Bartik, T., & Eberts, R. (2012). The roles of tax incentives and other business incentives in local
     economic development. The oxford handbook of urban economics and planning. 2012, pp.
     634-54 (pp. 634-654)
Belenzon, S., Chatterji, A. K., & Daley, B. (2017). Eponymous entrepreneurs. American
    Economic Review, 107(6), 1638-1655. doi:10.1257/aer.20141524



                                                27
Belenzon, S., Chatterji, A., & Daley, B. (2018). Choosing between growth and glory. ( No.
    w24901).
Bell, J. R., Wilbanks, J. E., & Hendon, J. R. (2013). Examining the effectiveness of state funded
     angel investor tax credits: Initial empirical analysis. Small Business Institute Journal, 9(2),
     23.
Bloom, N., Griffith, R., & Van Reenen, J. (2002). Do R&D tax credits work? evidence from a
    panel of countries 1979­1997.
Branstetter, L. G., & Sakakibara, M. (2002). When do research consortia work well and why?
    evidence from japanese panel data. The American Economic Review, 92(1), 143-159.
    doi:10.1257/000282802760015649
Bronzini, R., & Piselli, P. (2016). The impact of R&D subsidies on firm innovation. Research
    Policy, 45(2), 442-457. doi:10.1016/j.respol.2015.10.008
Bruce, D. (2000). Effects of the united states tax system on transitions into self-
    employment." Labour Economics, 7(5), 545-574.
Bruhn, M., Karlan, D., & Schoar, A. (2018). The impact of consulting services on small and
    medium enterprises: Evidence from a randomized trial in Mexico. Journal of Political
    Economy, 126(2), 635-687. doi:10.1086/696154
Buss, T. F. (2001). The effect of state tax incentives on economic growth and firm location
    decisions: An overview of the literature. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
    doi:10.1177/089124240101500108
Chirinko, R. S., & Wilson, D. J. (2006). State investment tax incentives: What are the
    facts? Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper Series, , 25.000.
    doi:10.24148/wp2006-49
Chirinko, R. S., & Wilson, D. J. (2008). State investment tax incentives: A zero-sum
    game? Journal of Public Economics, 92(12), 2362-2384. doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.07.005
Churchwell, C."Q. SDC: M&amp;A database". baker library ­ fast answers.&nbsp; Retrieved
    from http://asklib.library.hbs.edu/faq/47760.
Cohen, L., Diether, K., & Malloy, C. (2013). Misvaluing innovation. New York, N.Y. :
    doi:10.1093/rfs/hhs183
Cullen, J. B., & Gordon, R. (2006). Tax reform and entrepreneurial activity. Tax Policy and the
    Economy, 20, 41-71. doi:10.1086/tpe.20.20061904
Dechezlepretre, A., Einio, E., Martin, R., Nguyen, K., & Reenen, J. (2016). Do tax incentives for
    research increase firm innovation? an RD design for R&D Centre for Economic
    Performance, London School of Economics and Political Science.
Delgado, M., Porter, M. E., & Stern, S. (2016). Defining clusters of related industries. Journal of
    Economic Geography, 16(1), 1-38. doi:10.1093/jeg/lbv017


                                                 28
Douglas Holtz-Eakin, David Joulfaian, & Harvey S. Rosen. (1994). Entrepreneurial decisions
   and liquidity constraints. The RAND Journal of Economics, 25(2), 334-347.
   doi:10.2307/2555834
Fazio, C., Guzman, J., Murray, F., & Stern, S. (2016). A new view of the skew: Quantitative
    assessment of the quality of American entrepreneurship. Kauffman Foundation New
    Entrepreneurial Growth, Kansas City, MO: February,
Fehder, D. C., & Hochberg, Y. V. (2014). Accelerators and the regional supply of venture capital
    investment. Available at SSRN 2518668,
Fichtner, J. J., & Michel, A. (2015). Can a research and development tax credit be properly
    designed for economic efficiency. ().Mercatus Center. Retrieved from Social Science
    Premium Collection
Gale, W. G., & Brown, S. (2013). Small business, innovation, and tax policy: A
    review. Innovation, and Tax Policy: A Review (April 8, 2013),
Gans, J. S., & Stern, S. (2003). The product market and the market for "ideas":
    Commercialization strategies for technology entrepreneurs. Research Policy. 32 (2): 333-
    350
Gentry, W. M., & Hubbard, R. G. (2000). Tax policy and entrepreneurial entry. American
    Economic Review, 90(2), 283-287.
Gentry, W. M., & Hubbard, R. G. (2004). "Success taxes", entrepreneurial entry, and
    innovation. Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research. Retrieved
    from http://papers.nber.org/papers/w10551.pdf
Gonzalez-Uribe, J., & Paravisini, D. (2017). How sensitive is young firm investment to the cost of
   outside equity? Unpublished manuscript.
Gonzalez-Uribe, J., & Leatherbee, M. (2018). The effects of business accelerators on venture
   performance: Evidence from start-up Chile. Review of Financial Studies, 31(4), 1566-1603.
   doi:10.1093/rfs/hhx103
Goulding, C. R., Bonafé, A., & Tomiko, L. The R&D tax credit aspects of SaaS start-ups.
    Available online at: https://www.rdtaxsavers.com/articles/SaaS-Start-Ups
Grossman, G. M., & Helpman, E. (1991). Trade, knowledge spillovers, and growth. European
    Economic Review. 35 (2-3): 517-526
Gurley-Calvez, T., & Bruce, D. (2013). Do tax rate cuts encourage entrepreneurial
    entry? Journal of Entrepreneurship and Public Policy, 2(2), 178-202.
Guzman, J., & Stern, S. (2015). Where is silicon valley? Science, 347(6222), 606-609.
   doi:10.1126/science.aaa0201
Guzman, J., & Stern, S. (2016). The state of American entrepreneurship: New estimates of the
   quantity and quality of entrepreneurship for 15 US states, 1988-2014. NBER Working
   Paper No. w22095

                                               29
Guzman, J., & Stern, S. (2017). Nowcasting and placecasting entrepreneurial quality and
   performance. In Measuring entrepreneurial businesses: Current knowledge and challenges.
   Eds. John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar. University of
   Chicago Press.
Hall, B., & Van Reenen, J. (2000). How effective are fiscal incentives for R&D? A review of the
     evidence. Research Policy, 29(4-5), 449-469.
Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S., & Miranda, J. (2013). Who creates jobs? small versus large versus
     young. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 347-361.
     doi:10.1162/REST_a_00288
Hearn, J. C., Lacy, T. A., & Warshaw, J. B. (2014). State research and development tax
    credits. Economic Development Quarterly, 28(2), 166-181. doi:10.1177/0891242413517135
Hendon, J. R., Bell, J. R., Blair, B., & Martin, D. K. (2012). State-funded angel investor tax
   credits. Journal of Entrepreneurship and Public Policy, 1(1), 50-62.
   doi:10.1108/20452101211208353
Hirshleifer, D., Hsu, P., & Li, D. (2013). Innovative efficiency and stock returns. Journal of
    Financial Economics. 107 (3): 632-654.
Hochberg, Y. V. (2016). Accelerating entrepreneurs and ecosystems. Innovation Policy and the
   Economy, 16, 25-51.
Holtz-Eakin, D. (1995). Should small businesses be tax-favored? National Tax Journal, 48(3),
    387-395.
Holtz-Eakin, D. (2000). Public policy toward entrepreneurship. Small Business
    Economics, 15(4), 283-291.
Jaffe, A. B. (1986). Technological opportunity and spillovers of R&D. The American Economic
     Review. 76 (5): 984-1001.
Jeffry Netter, Mike Stegemoller, & M. Babajide Wintoki. (2011). Implications of data screens on
     merger and acquisition analysis: A large sample study of mergers and acquisitions from
     1992 to 2009. The Review of Financial Studies, 24(7), 2316-2357. doi:10.1093/rfs/hhr010
Joseph R. Bell, & Jeff B. Woodmansee. (2016). Seeding venture capital: Insights into state-by-
    state equity tax credit legislation. The Journal of Private Equity, 19(2), 34-42.
    doi:10.3905/jpe.2016.19.2.034
Katz, M. L. (1986). An analysis of cooperative research and development. The Rand Journal of
    Economics. 17 (4): 527-543.
Lanahan, L., & Feldman, M. P. (2018). Approximating exogenous variation in R&D: Evidence
    from the kentucky and north carolina SBIR state match programs. Review of Economics and
    Statistics, 100(4), 740-752. doi:10.1162/rest_a_00681
Lerner, J. (2009). Boulevard of broken dreams. Princeton: Princeton University Press.


                                                30
Lokshin, B., & Mohnen, P. (2007). Measuring the effectiveness of R&D tax credits in the
    netherlands. SSRN Working Paper #1133572.
Lucking, B. (2019). Do R&D tax credits create jobs?. Working Paper.
Mansfield, E. (1986). Patents and innovation: An empirical study. Management Science, 32(2),
   173-181. doi:10.1287/mnsc.32.2.173
Miller, C. R., & Richard, B. (2010). The policy diffusion of the state R&D investment tax
    credit. State & Local Government Review, 42(1), 22-35. doi:10.1177/0160323X10364748
Mills, K., & McCarthy, B. (2016). The state of small business lending: Innovation and
    technology and the implications for regulation. Harvard Business School Entrepreneurial
    Management Working Paper, (17-042), 17-042.
Moretti, E., & Wilson, D. J. (2013). State incentives for innovation, star scientists and jobs:
   Evidence from biotech. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper Series, , 1-
   55. doi:10.24148/wp2013-17
Moretti, E., & Wilson, D. J. (2014). State incentives for innovation, star scientists and jobs:
   Evidence from biotech. Journal of Urban Economics, 79, 20-38.
   doi:10.1016/j.jue.2013.07.002
Mukherjee, A., Singh, M., & Zaldokas, A. (2017). Do corporate taxes hinder
   innovation? Journal of Financial Economics, 124(1), 195-221.
   doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2017.01.004
Pm Romer. (1990). Endogenous technological change. Chicago]:
Pugsley, B. W., & Hurst, E. (2011). What do small businesses do? Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity, 43(2), 73-142.
Ramalho, R., Shleifer, A., Djankov, S., McLiesh, C., & Ganser, T. (2010). The effect of
   corporate taxes on investment and entrepreneurship. American Economic Journal:
   Macroeconomics, 2(3), 31-64.
Rao, N. (2013). Do tax credits stimulate R&D spending. The Effect of the R&D Tax Credit in its
    First Decade.NYU's Wagner School of Public Service,
Reynolds, P. D., Hay, M., & Camp, S. M. (1999). Global entrepreneurship monitor. Kansas City,
    Missouri: Kauffman Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership,
Richard E. Kihlstrom, & Jean-Jacques Laffont. (1979). A general equilibrium entrepreneurial
    theory of firm formation based on risk aversion. Journal of Political Economy, 87(4), 719-
    748. doi:10.1086/260790
Rosenberg, J. W., & Marron, D. B. (2015). Tax policy and investment by startups and innovative
    firms. SSRN Working Paper #2573259.




                                                 31
Ryan A. Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, & Javier Miranda. (2016). Declining
    business dynamism: What we know and the way forward. The American Economic
    Review, 106(5), 203-207. doi:10.1257/aer.p20161050
Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, & Javier Miranda. (2014). The role of
    entrepreneurship in US job creation and economic dynamism. The Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, 28(3), 3-24. doi:10.1257/jep.28.3.3
Schoar, A. (2010). The divide between subsistence and transformational
    entrepreneurship. Innovation Policy and the Economy, 10(1), 57-81.
Schumpeter, J. (1942). A.(1942) Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York,
Timothy J. Bartik. A new business incentives database
Tuomi, K., & Boxer, B. (2015). The costs and benefits of early-stage business tax credits: A case
   study of two US states. Venture Capital, 17(3), 263-270.
   doi:10.1080/13691066.2015.1051757
Weiner, J. (2009). State business tax incentives: Examining evidence of their effectiveness .
   Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Wilson, D. J. (2009). Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In-State, Out-Of-State, And Aggregate Effects
    Of R&D Tax Credits. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(2), 431-436.
    doi:10.1162/rest.91.2.431
Wilson, D. J. (2005). The rise and spread of state R&D tax credits. FRBSF Economic
    Letter, (2005)
Wu, Y. (2005). The effects of state R&D tax credits in stimulating private R&D expenditure: A
    crossstate empirical analysis. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management: The Journal of
    the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management, 24(4), 785-802.
Wu, Y. (2008). State R&D tax credits and high-technology establishments. Economic
    Development Quarterly, 22(2), 136-148. doi:10.1177/0891242408316728
Zhao, B., & Ziedonis, R. H. (2012) .State governments as financiers of technology startups:
    Implications for firm performance. SSRN Working Paper.




                                                32
                                Table 1: Entrepreneurial Quality Logit Model

                                 All Startups Founded Between 1988 to 2006
                             Dependent Variable: IPO or Acquisition within 6 Years
                                       Incidence Rate Ratios Reported
                                                                                          (1)

Eponymous                                                                             0.259***
                                                                                      (0.0257)

Short Name                                                                            1.883***
                                                                                      (0.0406)

Corporation                                                                           4.916***
                                                                                       (0.204)

Trademark                                                                             4.280***
                                                                                       (0.264)
Delaware Patent Interactions
  Delaware                                                                            33.21***
                                                                                       (1.059)

  Patent                                                                              49.44***
                                                                                       (2.970)

  Delaware and Patent                                                                 211.9***
                                                                                       (10.40)

Industry Descriptors
   Local Industries                                                                   0.465***
                                                                                      (0.0300)

   Traded Industries                                                                  1.152***
                                                                                      (0.0326)

   Biotechnology                                                                      2.354***
                                                                                       (0.197)

   E-Commerce                                                                            1.075
                                                                                       (0.0511)

   Medical Devices                                                                    1.297***
                                                                                      (0.0664)

   Semiconductor                                                                      1.862***
                                                                                       (0.337)

State FE                                                                                   Yes
N                                                                                       18916895
pseudo R-sq                                                                               0.264
We report the incidence rate-ratios of a logit model performed on all companies born between 1988 and 2008 in
34 US states. The predicted value of this regression is our measure of quality for individual firms, which we
aggregate into regional statistics. The outcome variable of the regression is Growth a binary variable equal to 1 if
the firm achieves an IPO or acquisition within 6 years and 0 otherwise. The regressors are all binary measures
observed at or near the time of firm registration. Patent and Trademark are indicators developed by matching our
data to USPTO records. They are equal to 1 of owns a patent or trademark within one year of founding (both
granted and applied). All other measures are developed directly from our business registration records. Robust
standard errors in parenthesis. The regression and data are described in further detail in Guzman and Stern (2016).
*** p < .01.
                                       Table 2: Summary Statistics


                                                                      Count            Mean          Std. Dev.
Startup Cartography Project
   Obs (Quantity of Entrepreneurship)                                 30093           397.107        1947.699
  RECPI (Quality-adjusted Quantity of
                                                                      30093            0.358            2.03
Entrepreneurship)
   REAI (Ecosystem Effects)                                           30093            0.637           6.529
Panel Database of Incentives and Taxes (PDIT)
   Has R&D Credit                                                     29224            0.461           0.499
   Has Investment Credit                                             29372            0.383           0.486




          Table 3: The Impact of R&D Tax Credits on Regional Entrepreneurship

                                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)
                                                                        Ln(Obs)      Ln(RECPI)        REAI
Model I: Naive Model (no controls)
Has R&D Credit                                                          0.477***       0.642***      -0.137**
                                                                         (0.102)        (0.104)      (0.0697)
Model II: Difference-In-Differences (county, year F.E.)
Has R&D Credit                                                          0.0745*        0.0760**       -0.0265
                                                                        (0.0389)       (0.0376)       (0.159)
Model III: Difference-In-Differences + County Level Pre-Trends
Has R&D Credit                                                          0.0927**       0.104***       -0.0973
                                                                        (0.0366)       (0.0381)       (0.139)
Model IV: Difference-In-Differences + State GDP
Has R&D Credit                                                          0.0651*        0.0641**       -0.0193
                                                                        (0.0337)       (0.0302)       (0.163)

Log(State GDP)                                                          1.016***       1.293***       -0.776
                                                                         (0.116)        (0.125)       (0.856)
Model V: Difference-In-Differences + Pre/Post Time Effects
Years Before Credit (Negative values)                                    0.00242       0.00802       -0.00246
                                                                        (0.00726)     (0.00695)      (0.0719)

Has R&D Credit                                                           -0.0281        -0.0332       -0.0252
                                                                        (0.0426)       (0.0451)       (0.173)

Has R&D Credit X Years After Credit                                     0.0230***     0.0224***      0.000648
                                                                        (0.00744)     (0.00698)      (0.0151)
County level pre-trends is the predicted value of entrepreneurship for each county based on the non-credit
years Standard errors clustered two ways by county and year.
* p <.1, ** p <.05, *** p <.01
            Table 4: The Impact of Investment Tax Credits on Regional Entrepreneurship

                                                                           (1)            (2)           (3)
                                                                         Ln(Obs)       Ln(RECPI)       REAI
Model I: Naive Model (no controls)
Has Investment Credit                                                    0.705***       0.352**       -0.0586
                                                                          (0.123)       (0.141)       (0.115)
Model II: Difference-In-Differences (county, year F.E.)
Has Investment Credit                                                     -0.0527      -0.0912**        0.104
                                                                         (0.0385)       (0.0392)       (0.150)
Model III: Difference-In-Differences + County Level Pre-Trends
Has Investment Credit                                                     -0.0465      -0.0874**        0.264
                                                                         (0.0380)       (0.0394)       (0.181)
Model IV: Difference-In-Differences + State GDP
Has Investment Credit                                                     -0.0331       -0.0661*       0.0901
                                                                         (0.0333)       (0.0348)       (0.143)

Log(State GDP)                                                           0.938***       1.199***        -0.664
                                                                          (0.140)        (0.146)       (0.812)
Model V: Difference-In-Differences + Pre/Post Time Effects
Years Before Credit (Negative values)                                     0.0154         0.0122        -0.0172
                                                                         (0.0175)       (0.0147)      (0.0617)

Has Investment Credit                                                     -0.0397        -0.0359        0.220
                                                                         (0.0565)       (0.0554)       (0.161)

Has Investment Credit X Years After Credit                              -0.00608**     -0.0114***      -0.0124
                                                                         (0.00244)      (0.00268)     (0.0141)
County level pre-trends is the predicted value of entrepreneurship for each county based on the non-credit
years Standard errors clustered two ways by county and year.
* p <.1, ** p <.05, *** p <.01
                               FIGURES

                    Figure 1: Distribution of Tax Credits


R&D Credit s By St at es at Beginning and End
                                                Year
                    1990                                    2010




Invest ment Credit s By St at es at Beginning and End
                                                Year
                    1990                                    2010




Qualit y of Ent repreneurship by Count y
                                                Year
                    1990                                    2010
Figure 2: Year-by-Year Effects of R&D Tax Credits on Entrepreneurship
Figure 3: Year-by-Year Effects of Investment Tax Credits on Entrepreneurship
                                    Appendix


               Table A1: Summary Statistics of Firm-Level Dataset
   Outcome Variable              Source                    Mean                 Std Dev
        Growth                    SDC Platinum
                                                                0.00033         0.01825
Corporate Form Observables
      Corporation               Bus. Reg. Records                 0.52            0.50
       Delaware                 Bus. Reg. Records                 0.031           0.172
Name-Based Observables
      Short Name                Bus. Reg. Records                 0.49            0.63
      Eponymous                 Bus. Reg. Records                0.0679          0.2516
Intellectual Property Observables
          Patent                    USPTO                        0.0016          0.0404
       Trademark                    USPTO                        0.0012          0.0351
US CMP Observables (1)
          Local               Estimated from name                 0.19             0.40
       Traded (2)             Estimated from name                0.135            0.341
  Traded Resource Int.        Estimated from name                0.535            0.499
     Biotech Sector           Estimated from name                0.002            0.044
   Ecommerce Sector           Estimated from name                0.052            0.222
        IT Sector             Estimated from name                0.022            0.146
  Medical Dev. Sector         Estimated from name                0.028            0.166
 Semiconductor Sector         Estimated from name                0.000            0.020
      Observations                                            29,961,838
(1) US CMP Cluster Dummies are estimated by using a sample of 10M firms and
comparing the incidence of each word in the name within and outside a cluster, then
selecting the words that have the highest relative incidence as informative of a cluster.
Firms get a value of 1 if they have any of those words in their name. The procedure is
explained in detail in our Data Appendix.
(2) Note that there are also firms that we cannot associate with local nor traded
industries.
               Table A2: The Impact of R&D Tax Credits on Regional Entrepreneurship

                                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)
                                                                        Ln(Obs)      Ln(RECPI)        REAI
Model I: Naive Model (no controls)
Has R&D Credit                                                          0.506***       0.661***      -0.142**
                                                                        (0.0898)        (0.101)      (0.0715)
Has Investment Credit                                                   0.695***        0.345**       -0.0678
                                                                         (0.119)        (0.135)       (0.113)
Model II: Difference-In-Differences (county, year F.E.)
Has R&D Credit                                                           0.0694*        0.0693*      -0.00903
                                                                         (0.0389)       (0.0374)      (0.162)
Has Investment Credit                                                    -0.0426       -0.0822**       0.106
                                                                         (0.0386)       (0.0404)      (0.150)
Model III: Difference-In-Differences + County Level Pre-Trends
Has R&D Credit                                                          0.0854**       0.0952**       -0.0854
                                                                        (0.0363)        (0.0382)      (0.146)
Has Investment Credit                                                    -0.0441       -0.0909**      -0.0306
                                                                        (0.0362)        (0.0407)      (0.154)
Model IV: Difference-In-Differences + State GDP
Has R&D Credit                                                           0.0626*       0.0605*       -0.00398
                                                                         (0.0345)      (0.0310)       (0.167)
Has Investment Credit                                                    -0.0240        -0.0583       0.0920
                                                                         (0.0345)      (0.0370)       (0.145)

Log(State GDP)                                                          0.933***       1.196***        -0.691
                                                                         (0.123)        (0.130)       (0.835)
Model V: Difference-In-Differences + Pre/Post Time Effects
Years Before R&D Credit (Negative values)                               -0.000820       0.00451      -0.00875
                                                                        (0.00877)      (0.00785)     (0.0758)
Has R&D Credit                                                           -0.0322         -0.0392      0.0108
                                                                         (0.0499)       (0.0494)      (0.179)

Has R&D Credit X Years After Credit                                     0.0228***     0.0222***      -0.00137
                                                                         (0.00786)    (0.00722)      (0.0158)

Years Before Investment Credit (Negative values)                          0.0185        0.0139        -0.0147
                                                                         (0.0165)      (0.0138)      (0.0648)
Has Investment Credit                                                    -0.0555        -0.0501        0.221
                                                                         (0.0572)      (0.0541)       (0.165)

Has Investment Credit X Years After Credit                              -0.00446*    -0.00988***      -0.0128
                                                                        (0.00262)     (0.00265)      (0.0137)
County level pre-trends is the predicted value of entrepreneurship for each county based on the non-credit
years Standard errors clustered two ways by county and year/
* p <.1, ** p <.05, *** p <.01
