                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       AIR POLLUTION AND INFANT MORTALITY:
                           EVIDENCE FROM SAHARAN DUST

                                         Sam Heft-Neal
                                        Jennifer Burney
                                         Eran Bendavid
                                           Kara Voss
                                        Marshall Burke

                                      Working Paper 26107
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26107


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




We thank the National Science Foundation (CNH Award #1715557) for funding. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sam Heft-Neal, Jennifer Burney, Eran Bendavid, Kara Voss, and Marshall Burke. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Air Pollution and Infant Mortality: Evidence from Saharan Dust
Sam Heft-Neal, Jennifer Burney, Eran Bendavid, Kara Voss, and Marshall Burke
NBER Working Paper No. 26107
July 2019
JEL No. O12,Q53

                                          ABSTRACT

Accurate estimation of air quality impacts on health outcomes is critical for guiding policy
choices to mitigate such damages. Estimation poses an empirical challenge, however, because
local economic activity can simultaneously generate changes in both air quality and in health
impacts that are independent of air quality, confounding pollution-health estimates. To address
this challenge, we leverage plausibly exogenous variation in local particulate matter exposure
across sub-Saharan Africa due to dust export from the Bodele Depression, a remote Saharan
region responsible for a substantial share of global atmospheric dust. Large scale transport of this
dust is uncorrelated with local emissions sources and allows us to isolate the causal impact of air
quality on infant mortality across Sub-Saharan Africa. Combining detailed information on nearly
1 million births with satellite measures of aerosol particulate matter, we find that a 10mg/m3
increase in local ambient PM2.5 concentration driven by distant dust emission causes a 22%
increase in infant mortality across our African sample (95% CI: 10-35%), an effect comparable to
quasi-experimental pollution-infant mortality estimates from wealthier countries. We also show
that rainfall over the Bodele is a significant control on PM2.5 export and thus child health, and
that future climate-change driven changes in Saharan rainfall could generate very large impacts
on African child health through this pathway alone. We calculate that seemingly exotic proposals
to pump and apply groundwater to the Bodele to reduce dust emission could be cost competitive
with leading interventions aimed at improving child health.

Sam Heft-Neal                                            Kara Voss
Center on Food Security and the Environment              University of California San Diego
Stanford University                                      Scripps Institution of Oceanography
473 Via Ortega                                           8622 Kennel Way
Stanford, CA 94305                                       La Jolla, CA 92037
sheftneal@stanford.edu                                   kvoss@ucsd.edu

Jennifer Burney                                          Marshall Burke
University of California San Diego                       Department of Earth System Science
9500 Gilman Dr. #0519                                    Stanford University
La Jolla, CA 92093                                       Stanford, CA 94305
jburney@ucsd.edu                                         and NBER
                                                         mburke@stanford.edu
Eran Bendavid
Department of Medicine
Stanford University
ebd@stanford.edu
1    Introduction

Poor air quality is a known determinant of poor health outcomes, with even modest im-
provements in air quality likely to save millions of premature deaths annually (Shindell
et al., 2018; Burnett et al., 2018). Children younger than 5 are particularly vulnerable,
and impacts are thought to be largest in developing regions where exposure to high levels
of ambient air pollution during childhood is estimated to reduce overall life expectancy by
4-5 years on average (Lelieveld, Haines, and Pozzer, 2018). However, while quantitative
assessment of the harms from pollution exposure has greatly improved, only recently have
researchers begun using quasi-experimental research designs that plausibly isolate vari-
ation in ambient pollution exposure from other correlated factors that also aect health
(Cesur, Tekin, and Ulker, 2017; Arceo, Hanna, and Oliva, 2016; Chay and Greenstone,
2003a; Knittel, Miller, and Sanders, 2016; Chay and Greenstone, 2003b; He, Fan, and
Zhou, 2016). Moreover, most of these estimates are concentrated in wealthy regions or lim-
ited to relatively wealthy cities in developing countries where data are available.

Direct estimation of the local health burdens of air pollution exposures requires addressing
two challenges. The first is accurately measuring both exposures and responses, which has
become easier with both advances in remote sensing of air quality (Van Donkelaar et al.,
2016) and the accumulation of geo-referenced household-survey-based health measure-
ments across broad geographies (Aliaga and Ren, 2006). The second challenge is disen-
tangling pollution exposures from other correlated variables that might also directly aect
health. In particular, many economic activities (e.g., transportation, industrial production,
biomass clearing in agriculture) produce PM2.5 locally but can also directly aect health
outcomes by changing households' economic status. These direct eects could positively
aect child health, for instance if higher incomes enable greater access or utilization of
health services, or negatively aect child health if for example economically-engaged adults
are less able to invest time in childrens' well-being (Miller and Urdinola, 2010).

To disentangle the impact of co-varying factors on infant mortality, researchers have uti-
lized study designs that leverage setting-specific sources of variation in PM2.5 likely un-
correlated with other factors that aect health outcomes (Cesur, Tekin, and Ulker, 2017;
Arceo, Hanna, and Oliva, 2016; Chay and Greenstone, 2003a; Knittel, Miller, and Sanders,
2016; Chay and Greenstone, 2003b; He, Fan, and Zhou, 2016). These approaches use, for
example, changes in environmental policy (Chay and Greenstone, 2003a; He, Fan, and
Zhou, 2016), naturally occurring local weather phenomena (Arceo, Hanna, and Oliva,


                                             2
2016), and tra c patterns (Knittel, Miller, and Sanders, 2016) as sources of plausibly ex-
ogenous variation in air quality. However, given that these approaches rely on often id-
iosyncratic local-level events for variation, they are di cult to apply across larger spatial
and temporal scales. To build a broader understanding, recent quasi-experimental studies
have used local variation in PM2.5 derived from natural sources such as dust and argued
that this approach allows for causal interpretation of PM2.5 impacts on health across broad
developing-country geographies (Heft-Neal et al., 2018; Adhvaryu et al., 2019). While us-
ing local-level variation in PM2.5 from natural sources helps mitigate some concerns of eco-
nomic activity as a confound, these studies ­ with the exception of Foreman (2018), dis-
cussed below ­ have no explicit way of distinguishing locally-sourced from distant PM2.5 .
As a result, the possibility remains that existing estimates in these developing-country set-
tings (Burnett et al., 2018; Heft-Neal et al., 2018; Adhvaryu et al., 2019), which are criti-
cal for understanding global health burdens and evaluating policy choices, could be biased
by unobserved local economic activity.

Here we combine household-survey-based data on the location and timing of nearly 1 mil-
lion births across Africa with changes in local PM2.5 levels driven by remote dust activa-
tion events in the Bod´ el´
                          e Depression in Chad. We use satellite-based observations of dust
emission over the Bod´  el´
                          e as an instrument for local variation in PM2.5 exposure, an ap-
proach that allows us to isolate the impact of poor air quality from local unobserved co-
varying factors that might also aect child health. In particular, our estimation strategy
uses the product of time-varying dust concentrations exported from the Bod´    el´
                                                                                 e Depres-
sion and spatially-varying average shares of local PM2.5 from natural sources as an instru-
ment for local-level PM2.5 exposure over the 12 months following each observed birth in
our data. We study whether instrumented PM2.5 exposure explains the likelihood a child
survives to her first birthday.

We find that relatively modest changes in dust export have large eects on infant mortal-
ity across much of Africa, with our estimates similar to quasi-experimental estimates from
wealthier countries on the impact of PM2.5 on infant health. We show that dust export
over the Sahara is controlled in part by rainfall patterns, and that these patterns could
change substantially under future climate change. Using data from 36 global climate mod-
els, we calculate that future climate-change driven changes in Saharan rainfall could gen-
erate very large impacts on African child health through this dust pathway alone, albeit
with substantial uncertainty due to varying climate model estimates of how rainfall pat-
terns might change. Finally, back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that seemingly ex-
otic proposals to use solar power to pump groundwater, dampen soil, and reduce dust ex-

                                             3
port in these remote locations ­ and thus reduce PM exposure in downwind population
centers ­ could be cost competitive with leading health interventions designed to reduce
infant mortality.

Our work is related to two recent papers. Adhvaryu et al. (2019) use re-analysis data on
local dust-based PM2.5 exposure to measure the impact of in-utero dust exposure on child
health in West Africa. Foreman (2018) uses a separate re-analysis dataset on aerosol op-
tical depth (AOD) to also study impacts of dust exposure on child health in West Africa,
and uses AOD over the Bod´    el´
                                e as an instrument for local AOD to isolate the impact of
dust from other determinants of health. Our work is similar to Foreman (2018) in that
we use dust emission in the Bod´   el´
                                     e as an exogenous source of variation in local pollution
exposure, an idea long suggested by both scientific and public health articles noting the
importance of Saharan dust for a range of downwind outcomes (Taylor, 2002; Koren et al.,
2006; Washington et al., 2009; Adhvaryu et al., 2016). We dier from both papers in us-
ing recently-developed satellite-based observations of PM2.5 , rather than re-analysis data,
to study exposures and health impacts. Re-analysis data are output from models that
rely heavily on emissions inventories to generate exposure estimates, and such inventories
are associated with large uncertainties in developing countries. Recent satellite-derived
datasets (Van Donkelaar et al., 2014), on the other hand, allow direct measurement of
PM2.5 exposures that do not depend on emissions inventories, and oer >100x higher spa-
tial resolution than these re-analysis datasets. Finally, we directly study climatic processes
that control dust export from the Sahara, allowing us to assess how future climate change
might shape child health through this specific channel, and we quantify how direct inter-
vention designed to limit dust export could benefit child health across the region.



2    Data and approach

The Bod´ el´
           e Depression is the single largest source of dust emissions in the world, including
substantial intercontinental transmission (Koren et al., 2006), and is thousands of kilome-
ters away from most of the observed births in our study (Fig. 1). Dust propagation from
the Bod´el´
          e is associated with variation in climactic and circulation conditions in the Sa-
hara (Washington et al., 2009; Wagner et al., 2016; Voss and Evan, forthcoming), includ-
ing variation in local rainfall and in strong winds created from funneling between nearby
mountain ranges. Activation events propagate dust from the Bod´     el´
                                                                      e across much of West
Africa over a matter of days (Fig. 2a- Fig. S1) (Washington and Todd, 2005). Remotely-


                                              4
sensed dust atmospheric optical depth (DAOD) data (Voss and Evan, forthcoming) indi-
cate that these activation events are a substantial driver of local DAOD levels across much
of Africa, with dissipating intensity over space and time (Fig. 2b).

While dust is transported on a daily time scale, satellite retrievals of aerosols, such as
dust, are not available under cloud cover and are available within a limited horizontal dis-
tance from the satellite track. Gaps in coverage can be partially mitigated by aggregat-
ing over longer time spans. Therefore, while we utilize daily data derived from satellite
retrievals to examine dust transport patterns, we utilize annual data derived from similar
satellite sources in our mortality analysis (Van Donkelaar et al., 2014). Dust transport is
seasonal with high levels of emissions occurring during the Harmattan season (November-
March). However, while dust export from the Bod´       el´
                                                         e Depression is highest during the
Harmattan season, the Bod´    el´
                                e is one of the only major African dust sources that is ac-
tive year-round and emissions from it contribute greatly to annual average PM2.5 concen-
trations across much of Africa, particularly in the north and west where natural sources
account for more than 75% of total PM2.5 (Fig. 3a). Annual variation in dust concentra-
tions and rainfall over the Bod´  el´
                                    e correlate strongly with temporal variation in the PM2.5
concentrations across our African study locations (Fig. 3b-c). While exported dust is one
of the many factors aecting PM2.5 concentrations in our sample, the motivation for using
natural PM2.5 from the Bod´   el´
                                e as a source of variation is that emissions from distant nat-
ural sources are less likely to be correlated with confounding local economic activity than
emissions from local anthropogenic (or natural) sources. Indeed, while we find a positive
time-series correlation in our study locations between estimates of PM2.5 concentrations
from anthropogenic sources and night-time lights (a proxy for local economic activity), the
same correlation does not exist between nightlights and PM2.5 concentrations derived from
remote natural sources (Fig. 3d).

To isolate the causal eect of PM2.5 exposure on infant health, we use an instrumental
variables strategy, where plausibly exogenous variation in local PM2.5 driven by distant
dust emission is used to identify the impact of PM2.5 exposure on health. Our specific
strategy is analogous the common shift-share IV strategy, where spatial variation in aver-
age exposure levels is combined with common time series variation in a source of exposure.
For the spatial variation, we calculate the share of PM2.5 in each of our African locations
that comes from non-anthropogenic sources, averaged over our 2001-2015 study period.
The mean share of PM2.5 from natural sources in our sample is 42% and varies from 0%
in parts of East Africa to 97% in parts of West Africa (Fig. 3a). For the time series vari-
ation, we utilize either time variation in PM2.5 emission from the Bod´el´
                                                                         e Depression, or

                                              5
cumulative seasonal or annual rainfall over the Bod´  el´e (increasing rainfall reduces dust ex-
port). The mean 12-month average PM2.5 concentration in the Bod´        el´
                                                                          e Depression is 75
      3                                                3
µg/m in our sample but varies between 65-80µg/m (Fig. 1). Mean cumulative rainfall
over the same period is 4.3 cm in our sample and varies between 2.1-8.0 cm. Our instru-
ment is then constructed by multiplying the spatially varying shares of PM2.5 from natural
sources in all locations i with either the time-varying dust concentrations or cumulative
rainfall in the Bod´el´
                      e Depression across time-periods t.

For PM2.5 data, our main analysis uses satellite-derived data on PM2.5 compiled by the At-
mospheric Composition Analysis Group at Dalhousie University. These data incorporate
retrievals from MODIS AOD as well as other satellites instruments and models (MISR,
SeaWIFS, GEOS-Chem) to estimate annual bias-corrected average surface PM2.5 con-
centrations at 0.01 x 0.01 spatial resolution with global coverage (Van Donkelaar et al.,
2016). As 0.01 is roughly 1km at the equator, the spatial resolution of this product vastly
exceeds the re-analysis data used in other studies, which typically have pixel sizes 0.5 (or
50km pixels). We utilize this data product along with an analogous product produced
by the same group that sub-divides estimates of PM2.5 into natural (i.e., dust and sea salt)
and non-natural sources. Non-natural source PM2.5 is estimated by applying simulated
compositional information following the process described in Van Donkelaar et al 2014
(Van Donkelaar et al., 2014).

High-resolution remote-sensing based gridded rainfall data come from the Climate Hazards
Group InfraRed Precipitation with station data (CHIRPS). (Funk et al., 2015) CHIRPS
incorporates satellite imagery with ground station observations to estimate monthly rain-
fall totals globally at 0.05 x 0.05 spatial resolution. We sum monthly rainfall data across
the post-birth period described above separately for where observed births occur and in
the Bod´ el´
           e Depression. Mean annual rainfall totals are 123 cm in our study locations and
4 cm in the Bod´  el´
                    e Depression.

We then link dust and PM exposure to infant health outcomes across Africa. Data on in-
fant health are taken from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), nationally rep-
resentative surveys that are conducted in many low-income and middle-income countries.
DHS have a two-stage design, whereby a number of clusters are first selected from a list
of enumeration areas created in a recent population census, and then households are ran-
domly selected in each of the clusters, and women aged 15-49 years are selected from those
households for in-depth surveys. In most survey waves, enumerators use global position-
ing system devices to collect geospatial information to identify the central point of each


                                               6
cluster's populated area (Aliaga and Ren, 2006). We used data from all 65 available geo-
referenced surveys that were carried out between 2001 and 2015 to reconstruct a village-
level birth history. Our sample covers 30 countries and includes 990,696 individual birth
outcomes (Fig. 1). The outcome of interest for this study is infant mortality, which is rep-
resented by a dummy variable equal to one when a child was reported to die within the
first 12 months following birth. Children who were alive but less than 12 months old at
the time of the survey were not included in our sample. The mean infant mortality rate in
our sample is 71 deaths per 1,000 births.

In order to assign PM2.5 exposure to individual birth outcomes we match PM2.5 concen-
trations to the post-birth period encompassing the first 12 months of life inclusive of birth
month. Given that PM2.5 exposure data are only available annually, we calculate PM2.5
exposure as the weighted averages of the annual data, where the weights represent the
share of the year that falls into the time period. For example, a child born in the third
month of year t would be assigned a post-birth exposure of (10/12)[exposure in year t] +
(2/12)[exposure in year t + 1]. The mean PM2.5 exposure level for the post-birth periods is
25.2 µg/m3 in our sample.

Our first stage regression linking distant dust export to local PM exposure is then:

                    P Mijcmt =   1 DVit   + µXjcmt +   j   +   t   + cm + "jcmt            (1)

where P Mijcmt denotes the post-birth PM2.5 exposure for individual i in cluster j , coun-
try c, born in month and year mt. DVit = ( j  Dt ) is our instrument equal to the share
of PM from dust in cluster j ( j ) times dust export from the Bod´  el´
                                                                      e in year t (Dt ). We
also include a vector of individual, household, and village-level controls X , which include:
local rainfall and temperature in time period t, nightlights in time period t, a dummy for
whether the household uses clean cook fuel, a dummy for whether mother completed pri-
mary school, mother's age and age-squared at time of child's birth, child sex, child's birth
order, and a dummy for whether the child was a twin. Fixed eects include DHS cluster
( j ), birth-year ( t ), and country-month (cm ). Our instruments are very strong, with first-
stage F-statistics >100 (Figure 4a).

We then regress infant mortality on predicted values of local PM2.5 exposure from Equa-
tion (1):
                   yijcmt = Pd M ijcmt + µXijcmt + j + t + cm + "ijcmt                 (2)

where yijcmt is a binary measure of whether individual i survived to his/her first birthday.


                                               7
Equation (2) includes the same fixed eects and controls in X as Equation (1). The fixed
eects isolate variation in PM2.5 exposure from other time-invariant, seasonally-varying,
or time-trending factors that could be correlated with mortality. In particular, inclusion
of cluster fixed eects accounts for any time invariant unobservables that could be corre-
lated with both PM2.5 exposure and mortality risk at the cluster level (e.g. any location-
specific dierences in mortality rates due to average incomes or healthcare access), inclu-
sion of country-month fixed eects accounts for any seasonal dierences across locations
within a country (e.g. if mortality rates are higher in June than January in Nigeria), and
time fixed eects account for any abrupt or trending factors common across the sample
(e.g. the overall decline in infant mortality over the last 15 years). Instead of cluster fixed
eects, we can instead include mother fixed eects in equations 1 and 2, whereby the ef-
fect of PM2.5 exposure on mortality is derived by comparing two siblings born at dierent
times to the same mother. This strategy further reduces the possibility of unobserved con-
founders, at the cost of eliminating much of the variation in exposure across the sample.

For estimates of ^ in Equation 2 to represent causal estimates of the impact of PM2.5 on
infant health, it must be the case that, conditional on controls, our instrument is uncorre-
lated with other factors beyond local PM2.5 exposure that also aect infant health. While
this restriction is untestable, we directly include a vector of controls µXijcmt meant to ad-
dress potential additional sources of confounding. In particular, one concern is that global
or regional climate phenomena could aect both dust emission over the Bod´       el´
                                                                                  e as well as
local meteorological conditions, and that these latter conditions could themselves shape
health outcomes (e.g. local drought lowering food availability). To account for this, we
control directly for both temperature and rainfall locally, as well as for the global time se-
ries of Pacific sea surface temperature anomalies, the main index used to measure ENSO.
A remaining failure of the exclusion restriction would have to involve large-scale climate
phenomena that are not picked up either by these global indices or by local meteorological
conditions, and we are unaware of any such phenomena that fit this description.

Finally, we emphasize that ^ estimates the local average treatment eect (Angrist and Im-
bens, 1995), which in our setting is the average eect of PM2.5 on child health for those in-
dividuals for whom changes in dust emission over the Bod´ el´
                                                            e cause changes in local PM2.5
exposure. Our estimates thus will not represent treatment eect estimates for other types
or sources of PM2.5 exposure, nor estimates for regions where variation in PM2.5 is not
driven by emission from the Bod´ el´
                                   e.




                                               8
3      Results

Annual variation in dust concentrations in the Bod´  el´
                                                       e Depression is strongly and positively
associated with PM2.5 variation in our study locations (Fig. 4). We find analogous rela-
tionships when we use time-varying measures of rainfall accumulation over the Bod´    el´
                                                                                        e De-
pression rather than direct measures of dust concentration as our source of temporal vari-
ation; higher rainfall is known to reduce dust emission in the region (Brooks and Legrand,
2000). These relationships are robust to the inclusion of rainfall and temperature in the
study locations and to the inclusion of global ENSO variation. Results are similar when
analysis is restricted to exposure comparisons between siblings within the same household
(Fig. S2). Consistent with the short time-scale of dust transmission, we do not find mean-
ingful associations between PM2.5 concentrations in our study locations and dust concen-
trations or rainfall in the Bod´
                               el´
                                 e Depression in the previous year. These robust estimated
relationships are consistent with existing understanding of the role the Bod´ el´
                                                                                e Depression
plays in propagating dust throughout the region. (Washington and Todd, 2005; Washing-
ton et al., 2009; Wagner et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017).

To test whether this strong relationship between remote dust emission and local PM2.5
concentrations is driven by common time trends, common year-specific shocks across dusty
locations or by average spatial dierences between dusty and less-dusty locations, we con-
duct a placebo exercise where we randomly reorder either the time series of dust emissions
over the Bod´el´
               e or the spatial shares of baseline levels of dust exposure and re-estimate the
relationship between these placebo instruments and local-level PM2.5 concentrations. In all
cases, estimates on these placebo samples (n=1000 for each type of reshuing) are close to
zero (Fig. 4b), suggesting our estimated relationships between local PM2.5 concentrations
and remote dust emission are not spurious.

We then use this predicted variation in local PM2.5 driven by remote dust emission to esti-
mate the impact of PM2.5 on local health outcomes. We estimate that a 10µg/m3 increase
in local ambient PM2.5 concentration causes a 22% rise in infant mortality across our full
sample (95% CI: 10-35%) and a 17% rise in our West Africa sample (95% CI: 2-33%; Fig.
    
      The reason that we conduct this placebo exercise for the first stage (Equation 1) and not for the full
IV estimation (Equations 1 and 2) is that manually adding uncertainty to our instruments creates an arti-
ficially weak first stage and inflates the IV estimates. For a single instrument the estimated IV coe cient
is equal to the reduced form coe cient (i.e., the coe cient associated with regressing infant mortality on
our instrument directly) divided by the first stage coe cient. Randomly reordering the elements of our in-
strument and causing the first stage coe cient to be close to zero mechanically causes the IV estimates to
be large. We therefore compare the magnitude of first stage coe cients, rather than IV coe cients, for the
placebo samples.


                                                     9
5). Our results are similar whether we use either dust emission or rainfall over the Bod´
                                                                                        el´
                                                                                          e
as our instrument, and are again robust to controlling for both local temperature and rain-
fall variation as well as global ENSO variation (Fig. S3). When we restrict analysis to
between-sibling comparisons, estimates remain large and positive but are noisier likely due
to the substantially reduced variance in our explanatory variable.

For all specifications, instrumental variables estimates are larger than analogous least squares
estimates that simply regress local health outcomes on local PM2.5 exposures, conditioning
on the same fixed eects. This downward bias in OLS estimates is consistent with unob-
served local economic activity generating pollution that harms health, but also leading to
livelihood improvements that benefit health.

We emphasize again that our IV estimates represent the eect of PM2.5 on infant health
for those individuals for whom changes in dust emission over the Bod´   el´
                                                                          e cause changes in
local PM2.5 exposure. This helps explain why we cannot reject the hypothesis that esti-
mates for West Africa and our full Sub-Saharan sample are the same (Fig. 5); even when
we estimate ^ on our full sample, results are driven by those children (many of whom are
in West Africa) whose PM2.5 exposure is aected by Bod´    el´
                                                            e dust emissions. We include
the full sample results because children unaected by Bod´  el´e dust serve as additional con-
trols and make our sample comparable to other studies.

Our estimates of the eect of PM2.5 on infant mortality are greater than previously pub-
lished empirical estimates for Africa (Heft-Neal et al., 2018). There are several potential
explanations for this dierence. First, if local economic activity worsens pollution but im-
proves health outcomes, estimation strategies that do not explicitly account for this co-
variation will underestimate the impact of pollution on health. Our instrumental variables
strategy overcomes this challenge by directly isolating variation in pollution exposure from
variation in local economic activity. Second, classical measurement error in local measures
of PM2.5 exposure will bias least squares estimates of the eect of PM2.5 on health toward
zero, a problem that is corrected by instrumental variables estimation if the instrument is
uncorrelated with the local measurement error (Angrist and Krueger, 2001). In our set-
ting, and particularly for our rainfall instrument, this condition is plausibly met, provid-
ing another reason why instrumental variables estimates are larger than least squares esti-
mates. Consistent with these explanations, our instrumental variable estimates for Africa
are comparable in magnitude to other quasi-experimental estimates from elsewhere in
the world (Fig. 5b), nearly all of which come from developed or middle-income countries
where exposures are often more precisely measured. Our results are also corroborated by


                                             10
other studies that use dierent measures of particulate exposure to examine the eect of
dust exposure on health and economic outcomes in West Africa (Adhvaryu et al., 2019).
Taken together, these estimates clearly indicate that air pollution is a critical determin-
ing factor for child health around the world, and that improvements in air quality can be
expected to cause large improvements in child health.

In our African setting, our results highlight the particular importance of air pollution that
is non-anthropogenic in origin, and suggest two broad pathways for reducing the health
burden of this exposure. A first approach would be to better understand how local inter-
ventions, ranging from personalized protective equipment to early warning systems, might
reduce individuals' dust exposure in down-wind inhabited areas. A second approach would
be to better understand the existing and potential future controls on emissions at their
Bod´el´
      e source. These could include both known climate controls as well as prospective di-
rect eorts to mitigate emissions at source locations.

Regarding the climate channel, our results, and much past work (Brooks and Legrand,
2000; Wagner et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017), suggest that climate variation is a key con-
trol on dust export from the region. Because anthropogenic climate change is projected to
have large potential influence on these patterns (Biasutti, 2013; Skinner and Dienbaugh,
2014), altering the trajectory of future climate change could have large eects on child
health across the continent through its impact on the emission and transport of Saharan
dust. To our knowledge, the potential importance of this channel has not been recognized
or explored.

To illustrate this channel's potential importance, we calculate projected changes in rainfall
under climate change over the Bod´  el´
                                      e by mid-century (2035-2065) relative to a 1995-2015
baseline, using 36 global climate models from the CMIP5 archive run under the RCP8.5
emissions scenario, a "business as usual" scenario. As has been previously characterized
(Washington et al., 2009; Biasutti, 2013; Rodr´iguez-Fonseca et al., 2015), rainfall projec-
tions over the regions are highly uncertain, with the ensemble median projected rainfall
change close to zero but with individual models drying or wetting by more than 25% dur-
ing Harmattan months (Fig 6a). Using our historical data, we then estimate that a 1 mm
increase in rainfall in the Bod´
                               el´
                                 e during the Harmattan season reduces PM2.5 on average in
                            3
West Africa by 0.71µg/m . This estimate comes from a grid-cell level regression where an-
nual PM2.5 in our West Africa study locations is regressed on season rainfall totals in the
Bod´el´
      e Depression. The regression includes cell fixed eects to control for time-invariant
dierences over space and country-specific linear and quadratic time trends to control for


                                             11
country specific trends in either rainfall or PM2.5 over time. Cells are weighted by pop-
ulation. To characterize the uncertainty associated with the rainfall-PM2.5 relationship,
we bootstrap this regression, sampling locations with replacement and re-estimating the
coe cient 1,000 times. Combining these bootstraps with rainfall projections from the 36
climate models, we get 36,000 estimated changes in PM2.5 shown in Fig. 6b. While the
median change in PM2.5 is 0, the inner 95% of projected changes range from 12 µg/m3 re-
duction to 9µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 . Finally, we use our main model for West Africa (Eq.
2) to estimate the change in infant mortality rate associated with changes in local PM2.5
concentrations, again bootstrapping this estimate 1,000 times. Combined with the boot-
strap sampling of the 36,000 changes in PM2.5 concentrations, we get 36 million estimated
changes in infant mortality (Fig. 6c).

We find a large spread in potential changes in infant mortality due to changes in dust ex-
posure (Fig 6b), ranging from a -13% decline in mortality (5th percentile estimate) for
models projecting precipitation increase to a 12% increase in mortality by mid-century
(95th percentile) for models that dry. To our knowledge, these potential impacts in the left
and right tail are substantially larger than any known projected health impact of climate
change on the continent. These findings suggest that better understanding the current and
evolving future climatic constraints on Saharan dust export remains a key scientific and
policy priority.

Because mitigating dust exposure, particularly for infants, would be extremely di cult
(many houses have open windows or permeable roofs or walls, and infants and young chil-
dren cannot or will not wear masks), direct eorts to mitigate dust emission from Bod´   el´
                                                                                          e
also warrant future evaluation. In particular, existing estimates of even small amounts of
renewable groundwater resources in the region (MacDonald et al., 2012), combined with
proven technologies currently deployed in the Sahel that use renewable power to bring this
water to the surface (Burney et al., 2010), suggest that local groundwater could poten-
tially be used to dampen the surface and mitigate lofting of dust aerosols from Bod´el´
                                                                                      e,
reducing downwind exposures and health burdens.

To explore this possibility, we calculate the costs and benefits of deploying solar-powered
central pivot irrigation in the Bod´el´
                                      e, using our estimates how a mm of additional water
reduces downwind mortality, combined with conservative estimates of recharge and flow
rates, equipment and operational costs, and very conservative assumptions of how averted
infant deaths are converted to disability-adjusted life years (DALYs; see Methods). We
calculate a cost per DALY averted of $60, which even if low by a factor of 5, is well be-


                                            12
low cost thresholds designating "priority" interventions in low-income countries. For in-
stance, the World Health Organization recommends that any intervention costing less than
per capita GDP is "very cost eective" (their highest designation) (World Health Organi-
zation, 2001), and average per capita incomes in West Africa range from $400 in Niger
to $2000 in Ghana and Nigeria. Pumping groundwater to reduce dust export also ap-
pears cost competitive with many leading health interventions currently in use, including a
range of vaccines, water and sanitation interventions, and behavioral interventions (Jami-
son et al., 2017).

While this back-of-the-envelope calculation clearly ignores other plausibly important con-
straints to project deployment, such as logistical and political impediments to operat-
ing in remote and insecure environments in the Sahara, our intent is to suggest that such
projects, if feasible, could yield enormous benefits at a modest cost. Better understanding
the technical, economic, and political constraints ­ as well as potential climate (Li et al.,
2018) and biogeochemical (Bristow, Hudson-Edwards, and Chappell, 2010) impacts ­ of
the deployment of such a system is a promising avenue for future work.



References
Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Prashant Bharadwaj, James Fenske, Anant Nyshadham, Richard
 Stanley et al. 2016. "Dust and death: evidence from the West African Harmattan."
 Tech. rep., Centre for the Study of African Economies, University of Oxford.

------. 2019. "Dust and Death: Evidence from the West African Harmattan." Tech. rep.,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working Paper No. 25937.

Aliaga, Alfredo and Ruilin Ren. 2006. "Optimal sample sizes for two-stage cluster sam-
  pling in Demographic and Health Surveys." .

Angrist, Joshua and Guido Imbens. 1995. "Identification and estimation of local average
 treatment eects."

Angrist, Joshua D and Alan B Krueger. 2001. "Instrumental variables and the search for
 identification: From supply and demand to natural experiments." Journal of Economic
 perspectives 15 (4):69­85.

Arceo, Eva, Rema Hanna, and Paulina Oliva. 2016. "Does the eect of pollution on in-



                                             13
  fant mortality dier between developing and developed countries? Evidence from Mex-
  ico City." The Economic Journal 126 (591):257­280.

Biasutti, Michela. 2013. "Forced Sahel rainfall trends in the CMIP5 archive." Journal of
  Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 118 (4):1613­1623.

Bristow, Charlie S, Karen A Hudson-Edwards, and Adrian Chappell. 2010. "Fertilizing the
  Amazon and equatorial Atlantic with West African dust." Geophysical Research Letters
  37 (14).

Brooks, Nick and Michel Legrand. 2000. "Dust variability over northern Africa and rainfall
  in the Sahel." In Linking climate change to land surface change. Springer, 1­25.

Burnett, Richard, Hong Chen, Mieczyslaw Szyszkowicz, Neal Fann, Bryan Hubbell, C Ar-
  den Pope, Joshua S Apte, Michael Brauer, Aaron Cohen, Scott Weichenthal et al. 2018.
  "Global estimates of mortality associated with long-term exposure to outdoor fine par-
  ticulate matter." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences :201803222.

Burney, Jennifer, Lennart Woltering, Marshall Burke, Rosamond Naylor, and Dov Paster-
  nak. 2010. "Solar-powered drip irrigation enhances food security in the Sudano­Sahel."
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (5):1848­1853.

Cesur, Resul, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker. 2017. "Air pollution and infant mortal-
  ity: evidence from the expansion of natural gas infrastructure." The Economic Journal
  127 (600):330­362.

Chay, Kenneth Y and Michael Greenstone. 2003a. "Air quality, infant mortality, and the
 Clean Air Act of 1970." Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

------. 2003b. "The impact of air pollution on infant mortality: evidence from geographic
  variation in pollution shocks induced by a recession." The quarterly journal of eco-
  nomics 118 (3):1121­1167.

Foreman, Tim. 2018. "The eect of dust storms on child mortality in West Africa."
  Columbia SIPA working paper CDEP-CGEG WP No. 47.

Funk, Chris, Pete Peterson, Martin Landsfeld, Diego Pedreros, James Verdin, Shrad-
  dhanand Shukla, Gregory Husak, James Rowland, Laura Harrison, Andrew Hoell et al.
  2015. "The climate hazards infrared precipitation with stations­a new environmental
  record for monitoring extremes." Scientific data 2:150066.


                                           14
He, Guojun, Maoyong Fan, and Maigeng Zhou. 2016. "The eect of air pollution on mor-
  tality in China: Evidence from the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games." Journal of Environ-
  mental Economics and Management 79:18­39.

Heft-Neal, Sam, Jennifer Burney, Eran Bendavid, and Marshall Burke. 2018. "Robust
  relationship between air quality and infant mortality in Africa." Nature 559 (7713):254.

Jamison, Dean T, Hellen Gelband, Susan Horton, Prabhat Jha, Ramanan Laxminarayan,
  Charles N Mock, and Rachel Nugent. 2017. Disease Control Priorities, (Volume 9):
  Improving Health and Reducing Poverty. The World Bank.

Knittel, Christopher R, Douglas L Miller, and Nicholas J Sanders. 2016. "Caution, drivers!
 Children present: Tra c, pollution, and infant health." Review of Economics and Statis-
 tics 98 (2):350­366.

Koren, Ilan, Yoram J Kaufman, Richard Washington, Martin C Todd, Yinon Rudich,
 J Vanderlei Martins, and Daniel Rosenfeld. 2006. "The Bod´  el´
                                                               e depression: a single spot
 in the Sahara that provides most of the mineral dust to the Amazon forest." Environ-
 mental Research Letters 1 (1):014005.

Lelieveld, Jos, Andy Haines, and Andrea Pozzer. 2018. "Age-dependent health risk from
  ambient air pollution: a modelling and data analysis of childhood mortality in middle-
  income and low-income countries." The Lancet Planetary health 2 (7):e292­e300.

Li, Yan, Eugenia Kalnay, Safa Motesharrei, Jorge Rivas, Fred Kucharski, Daniel Kirk-
  Davido, Eviatar Bach, and Ning Zeng. 2018. "Climate model shows large-scale wind
  and solar farms in the Sahara increase rain and vegetation." Science 361 (6406):1019­
  1022.

MacDonald, Alan M, Helen C Bonsor, B E´ O
                                        ´ Dochartaigh, and Richard G Taylor. 2012.
 "Quantitative maps of groundwater resources in Africa." Environmental Research Let-
 ters 7 (2):024009.

Miller, Grant and B Piedad Urdinola. 2010. "Cyclicality, mortality, and the value of time:
 The case of coee price fluctuations and child survival in Colombia." Journal of Political
 Economy 118 (1):113­155.

Rodr´iguez-Fonseca, Belen, Elsa Mohino, Carlos R Mechoso, Cyril Caminade, Michela Bi-
  asutti, Marco Gaetani, Javier Garcia-Serrano, Edward K Vizy, Kerry Cook, Yongkang
  Xue et al. 2015. "Variability and predictability of West African droughts: A review on
  the role of sea surface temperature anomalies." Journal of Climate 28 (10):4034­4060.

                                            15
Shindell, Drew, Greg Faluvegi, Karl Seltzer, and Cary Shindell. 2018. "Quantified, local-
  ized health benefits of accelerated carbon dioxide emissions reductions." Nature climate
  change 8 (4):291.

Skinner, Christopher Bryan and Noah S Dienbaugh. 2014. "Projected changes in African
  easterly wave intensity and track in response to greenhouse forcing." Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences :201319597.

Taylor, David A. 2002.   "Dust in the wind."     Environmental health perspectives
  110 (2):A80­A87.

Van Donkelaar, Aaron, Randall V Martin, Michael Brauer, and Brian L Boys. 2014. "Use
  of satellite observations for long-term exposure assessment of global concentrations of
  fine particulate matter." Environmental health perspectives 123 (2):135­143.

Van Donkelaar, Aaron, Randall V Martin, Michael Brauer, N Christina Hsu, Ralph A
  Kahn, Robert C Levy, Alexei Lyapustin, Andrew M Sayer, and David M Winker. 2016.
  "Global estimates of fine particulate matter using a combined geophysical-statistical
  method with information from satellites, models, and monitors." Environmental science
  & technology 50 (7):3762­3772.

Voss, Kara K and Amato T Evan. forthcoming. "A new satellite-based global climatology
  of dust aerosol optical depth." Journal of Applied Metereology and Climatology .

Wagner, Robert, Kerstin Schepanski, Bernd Heinold, and Ina Tegen. 2016. "Interannual
 variability in the Saharan dust source activation-Toward understanding the dierences
 between 2007 and 2008." Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 121 (9):4538­
 4562.

Wang, Weijie, Amato T Evan, Christophe Lavaysse, and Cyrille Flamant. 2017. "The
 role the Saharan Heat Low plays in dust emission and transport during summertime in
 North Africa." Aeolian Research 28:1­12.

Washington, Richard, Christel Bouet, Guy Cautenet, Elisabeth Mackenzie, Ian Ashpole,
 Sebastian Engelstaedter, Gil Lizcano, Gideon M Henderson, Kerstin Schepanski, and Ina
 Tegen. 2009. "Dust as a tipping element: the Bod´
                                                 el´
                                                   e Depression, Chad." Proceedings of
 the National Academy of Sciences 106 (49):20564­20571.

Washington, Richard and Martin C Todd. 2005. "Atmospheric controls on mineral dust
 emission from the Bod´el´
                         e Depression, Chad: The role of the low level jet." Geophysical
 Research Letters 32 (17).

                                            16
World Health Organization. 2001. Macroeconomics and health: investing in health for eco-
 nomic development. WHO.




                                           17
Figure 1: Location of observed births and their distance to the Bod´
                                                                   el´
                                                                     e Depression. (a) Each
point represents one of the 28,461 DHS clusters included in our sample. The number of observed births
in a single cluster ranges from 1 to 210. Orange points indicate the West Africa sample. The full sample
includes all points. The Bod´  el´
                                 e Depression is outlined in black. (b) Observed births are 500-5000km away
from the Bod´  el´
                 e Depression.
Figure 2: Dust is rapidly transported from the Bod´
                                                  el´
                                                    e Depression across West Africa and
beyond. (a) Daily dust propagation, measured as Dust Aerosol Optical Depth (DAOD), over eight days
during a large dust activation event illustrates the magnitude of dust concentrations as well as the time
scale and spatial extent of transmission. Dust AOD ranges from 0 to greater than 3.0 in this example. For
comparison, AOD values during the recent 2018 northern California wildfires were <1.0. (b) Detrended
time series correlation of DAOD in the Bod´   el´
                                                e Depression and DAOD at selected population centers dis-
sipate over space and time. Map shows the location of selected population centers across West Africa
as well as Nairobi, Kenya. Right panel shows the time-series correlation of detrended DAOD values be-
tween the mapped locations and the Bod´    el´
                                             e Depression. In general, as distance to the Bod´ el´
                                                                                                 e increases,
peak correlations in the detrended DAOD time series occur later and are lower in magnitude. Variation in
DAOD in Nairobi, a populated location distant and not downwind from the Bod´        el´
                                                                                      e, is uncorrelated with
dust from the Bod´  el´
                      e.
Figure 3: Local air pollution in Africa is driven by both local economic activity and remote natural sources. (a) Average annual
PM2.5 concentration 2001-2015 (Van Donkelaar et al., 2016), with the Bod´      el´
                                                                                 e Depression outlined in black. (b) The share of PM2.5 estimated to
come from natural sources (Van Donkelaar et al., 2016). (c) Higher dust concentrations over the Bod´        el´
                                                                                                              e are associated with higher local PM2.5 con-
centrations in our study locations. Annual observations of dust concentrations over the Bod´      el´
                                                                                                    e were divided into equal sized bins and the average
annual PM2.5 concentrations (points) and interquartile ranges (gray lines) over all survey locations were calculated within each of these bins. Years
with more dust in the Bod´   el´
                               e Depression are associated with higher average PM2.5 concentrations across Africa. (d) Analogous to (c) using rainfall
totals over the Bod´ el´
                       e in place of dust concentrations, showing that higher Bod´  el´
                                                                                      e rainfall totals are associated with lower local PM2.5 concentra-
tions in our study locations. (e) Binned scatterplot of nightlight intensity and PM2.5 concentrations by source in our study locations. Nightlight
intensity was assigned to 1-unit bins and average PM2.5 concentrations were calculated within each bin separately for anthropogenic and natu-
rally sourced (i.e., dust and sea salt) PM2.5 . Higher nightlight intensity is associated with higher local concentrations of PM2.5 from anthropogenic
sources (solid line), but not with higher PM2.5 from natural sources (dotted line).
Figure 4: Variation in dust and rainfall over the Bod´
                                                     el´
                                                       e Depression are strong predictors of
variation in PM2.5 concentrations elsewhere in Africa. (a) First stage estimates corresponding to
Equation (1) show the eect of dust and rainfall instruments on PM2.5 concentrations across our study
locations. Eects are larger in West Africa, closer to and downwind from the Bod´ el´
                                                                                   e Depression. (b) In
a placebo test, we find no eect of Bod´ el´
                                          e dust on local PM when randomly re-order the time series of
Bod´el´
      e dust (light grey histogram, 1000 resamples), or when we randomly re-sort shares of PM2.5 con-
centrations across space (dark grey histogram, 1000 resamples); estimates for both placebo experiments
are centered around zero and several orders of magnitude smaller than the eect estimated with the true
ordering. (c) Analogous to (b) but with our rainfall instrument.
Figure 5: Instrumental variable (IV) estimates suggest large impacts of PM2.5 on infant
mortality, with eect sizes similar to quasi-experimental studies from higher income coun-
tries. a. IV estimates indicate a 10µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 concentration causes infant mortality to rise
by 15% in West Africa and 22% across the full Sub-Saharan Africa sample; IV estimates are substantially
larger than OLS estimates. Eects are similar when using either dust or rainfall over the Bod´    el´
                                                                                                   e Depres-
sion as instruments for local PM2.5 . Both IV and OLS estimates include DHS cluster, birth-year, and
country-month fixed eects as well as household, mother, and child controls (see Methods). b IV estimates
are larger than previous all-Africa estimates, and similar to causal estimates in other parts of the world
with higher incomes.
Figure 6: Disagreement among climate models projections of future rainfall changes in the
Sahara generates a large spread in projected infant mortality changes in Africa a Projected
changes in rainfall levels (2045-2055 relative to 2000-2015) over the Bod´el´
                                                                            e Depression during the Harmat-
tan season (Nov-Apr) across 36 climate models. Baseline average rainfall during these months is 40mm.
b Projected changes in PM2.5 across West Africa in response to rainfall changes shown in (a), incorporat-
ing uncertainty in both the distribution of rainfall projections and in the statistical relationship between
rainfall in the Bod´
                   el´e and local PM2.5 across West Africa (See Methods). C Changes in infant mortality
resulting from the changes in PM2.5 modeled in (b). Distribution of outcomes represents uncertainty in
PM2.5 changes as well as uncertainty in the relationship between PM2.5 and infant mortality.
Methods appendix and figures

Interpreting the first stage For several specifications using the dust instrument, the
magnitude of the estimated first stage coe cients is greater than 1. At first glance this
would seem to imply that a 1-unit increase in dust concentration in the Bod´    el´
                                                                                  e causes a
more than 1-unit increase in PM2.5 concentrations across Africa. However, a coe cient
greater than 1 only implies that the rate of dust transmission from the Bod´   el´
                                                                                 e to our study
locations is greater than the share of PM2.5 from dust in those locations. A simplified ver-
sion of our first stage is P Mit = xit + "it , where xit = t · i is our instrument, t is dust
in the Bod´   e, and i is share of pm from dust. We are interested in dP
            el´                                                            Mit
                                                                          d t
                                                                                    Mit
                                                                               = dPdx    dx
                                                                                        ·d t
                                                                                             , or
the change in total P M2.5 in our study locations per 1 unit increase in dust in the Bod´    el´
                                                                                               e
Depression.

Let dP Mit
      d t
            = be the transmission rate of PM from the Bod´     el´
                                                                 e to local total PM2.5 . We
know 0   1. dPdx      Mit
                          = is the coe cient estimated in our first stage equation above.
                                 dx
Our share of PM from dust is d     t
                                     = , with 0    1. Thus:            = ·  and =  .
Our estimates for  for all of Africa, for West Africa, and for Africa outside of the west are
0.44, 0.74, and 0.17, respectively. Therefore in order to estimate first stage coe cients ( )
greater than 1, the increase in total PM2.5 in our study locations in response to a 1 µg/m3
increase in dust in the Bod´ el´
                               e would need to be greater than 0.44, 0.74 and 0.17 for each
of the three groups. In fact, we estimate that, for example, a 1 µg/m3 increase in Bod´    el´
                                                                                             e
                               3
dust results in an 0.86 µg/m increase in average PM2.5 across West Africa and therefore
our first stage estimate is greater than 1.

A similar logic applies to our first-stage estimates with the rainfall instrument. The esti-
mated magnitude of the rainfall instrument in our first stage ranges from -1.5 to -2, indi-
cating that a 1-unit increase in our rainfall instrument reduces average PM2.5 concentra-
tions in our study locations by -1.5 to -2 µg/m3 . The same dust shares that are used to
construct the dust instruments are used in the rainfall instrument. Therefore, the magni-
tude of the coe cient on the rainfall instrument in the first stage will be greater than 1 if
an additional millimeter of seasonal rainfall over the Bod´ el´
                                                              e reduces average PM2.5 concen-
trations across our study location in West Africa by more than 0.75 µg/m3 . We estimate
that 1 millimeter of additional rainfall in the Bod´el´
                                                      e reduces PM2.5 in our study locations
                            3
by an average of 1.2 µg/m and therefore our estimate of the coe cient on the rainfall in-
strument ranges from -1.5 to -2.




                                               24
Calculation on mitigation of dust emission Damages from aerosol particulate mat-
ter can be mitigated by addressing either exposure or emission. Historically, dust emis-
sions have been considered a natural phenomenon and (limited) eorts have focused on
avoidance behaviors and, in farmland, surface roughening and vegetation planting as emis-
sion controls. Avoidance behavior would be extremely di cult for infants, especially in
the West African context, and agricultural mitigation techniques are not relevant in the
non-agricultural Bod´el´
                       e depression. As such, additional, more exotic-seeming mitigation
measures may in fact be appropriate.

One potential mitigation option would be to use limited renewable groundwater resources
in and near the Bod´ el´
                       e depression to dampen the surface of the emission region during the
Harmattan season. Assuming that the active dust emission region is around 10,000 km2
(Washington et al., 2009), and that sustainable recharge is of the order a few mm at av-
erage depth of 175 m, with maximum flow rates of 12 L/s (MacDonald et al., 2012), we
estimate that a distributed grid of borewells, pumps, and distribution systems, powered by
photovoltaic arrays, could substantially and sustainably reduce dust-related infant mor-
tality across West Africa. At the average depth-to-groundwater, PV-powered submersible
pumps could provide approximately 8 m3 per day, or enough, over the course of the Har-
mattan season, 2.2 mm of water over a standard quarter section (800m x 800m, or 160
acres). We calculate, using above estimates, that this would avert 37,000 infant deaths in
West Africa annually. Although more than 15,000 such units would be required to cover
the Bod´   e, o-the-shelf technologies could be installed for  $3000, with lifetimes of >20
         el´
years. The most eective and appropriate distribution systems would need to be deter-
mined by testing, but as an estimate, distribution costs of $25,000 per unit (again over 20
years) leads to an annualized cost of  $22M. This translates to  $600 per avoided death
in West Africa.

To compare this estimate to existing cost-eectiveness estimates of health interventions,
we very conservatively assume that infants whose death before reaching age 1 year has
been averted live, on average, 10 healthy life years (and therefore the averted death also
averts 10 disability-adjusted life years, or DALYs). This yields a conservative cost-eectiveness
estimate of  $60 per DALY averted. This would make such eorts to reduce dust emis-
sions high-value interventions by any benchmark for low-income countries, and would be
cost-competitive with many leading health interventions (Jamison et al., 2017). While this
back-of-the-envelope calculation clearly ignores other potential constraints to project de-
ployment, such as logistical and political impediments to operating in remote and insecure
environments in the Sahara, our intent is to suggest that such projects, if feasible, would

                                             25
yield enormous benefits at a modest cost.




                                            26
Figure S1: Dust from the Bod´
                            el´
                              e is exported to remote regions within a daily time-scale.
The left columns shows daily DAOD and the right column shows the raw MODIS image for the corre-
sponding date. Daily satellite based measures of dust concentrations illustrate that dust transmission
occurs over the period of a few days. However, spatial coverage for daily data is limited by missing ob-
servations due to both satellite paths and cloud cover.




                                                    27
Figure S2: Variation in dust concentration and rainfall over the Bod´
                                                                    el´
                                                                      e Depression are
strong predictors of variation in PM2.5 concentrations in other parts of Africa. Dust in the
Bod´el´
      e Depression is positively associated and rainfall negatively associated with PM2.5 concentrations in
both our West African sample (white dots) and full African sample (black dots; see Fig. S1 for study lo-
cations). Contemporaneous eects are large and statistically significant (F-stats of 17.17-366) while lagged
eects are not, and results are consistent across a large range of fixed eects and controls. All estimates
include the fixed eects and controls listed in the first and second columns.




                                                    28
Figure S3: Instrumental variables estimates of the eect of PM2.5 on infant mortality. A
10µg/m3 increase in PM2.5 concentration causes infant mortality to rise by 4-19% in West Africa and 8-
24% across the full African sample. Eects are similar when using either dust or rainfall over the Bod´
                                                                                                     el´
                                                                                                       e
Depression to instrument for local PM2.5 . IV estimates are larger than OLS estimates, although IV esti-
mates that use only within-mother variation in child outcomes are imprecisely estimated. All estimates
include the fixed eects and controls listed in the first and second columns.




                                                   29
