                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          POTENTIAL OUTCOME AND
              DIRECTED ACYCLIC GRAPH APPROACHES TO CAUSALITY:
               RELEVANCE FOR EMPIRICAL PRACTICE IN ECONOMICS

                                         Guido Imbens

                                      Working Paper 26104
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26104


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019




I am grateful for comments by Alberto Abadie, Jason Abaluck, Josh Angrist, Rebecca Diamond,
Dean Eckles, Ernst Fehr, Avi Feller, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Chuck Manski, Paul Milgrom,
Evan Munro, Michael Pollmann, Jasjeet Sekhon, Korinayo Thompson, and Heidi Williams. They
are not responsible for any of the views expressed here. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Guido Imbens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Potential Outcome and Directed Acyclic Graph Approaches to Causality: Relevance for Empirical
Practice in Economics
Guido Imbens
NBER Working Paper No. 26104
July 2019
JEL No. C01

                                           ABSTRACT

In this essay I discuss potential outcome and graphical approaches to causality, and their relevance
for empirical work in economics. I review some of the work on directed acyclic graphs, including
the recent "The Book of Why," ([Pearl and Mackenzie, 2018]). I also discuss the potential
outcome framework developed by Rubin and coauthors, building on work by Neyman. I then
discuss the relative merits of these approaches for empirical work in economics, focusing on the
questions each answer well, and why much of the work in economics is closer in spirit to the
potential outcome framework.


Guido Imbens
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
Imbens@stanford.edu
1     Introduction
Causal Inference (CI) in observational studies has been an integral part of econometrics since
its start as a separate field in the 1920s and 1930s. The simultaneous equations methods
developed by [Tinbergen, 1930], [Wright, 1928], and [Haavelmo, 1943] and their successors in
the context of supply and demand settings were from the beginning, and continue to be, explicitly
focused on causal questions. Subsequently, the work by the Cowles commission, and both the
structural and reduced form approaches since then, have thrived by focusing on identifying and
estimating causal and policy-relevant parameters. Over the last thirty years close connections
to related work on causal inference in other social sciences and statistics, and, more recently,
computer science have been established. In this essay I review some of the approaches to causal
inference in the different disciplines in the context of some recent textbooks, and discuss the
relevance of these perspectives for empirical work in economics. The two main frameworks
are (i) the Potential Outcome (PO) framework, associated with the work by Donald Rubin,
building on the work on randomized controlled trials (RCTs) from the 1920s by Ronald Fisher
and Jerzey Neyman, and (ii) the work on Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs), much of it associated
with work by Judea Pearl and his collaborators. These frameworks are complementary, with
different strengths that make them appropriate for different questions. Both have antecedents
in the earlier econometric literature, the PO framework in the demand and supply models in
[Tinbergen, 1930] and [Haavelmo, 1943], and the DAG approach in the path analysis in [Wright,
1928].
    The body of this essay consists of three parts. In the first part of the essay I discuss the
graphical approach to causality in the context of the recent book "The Book of Why" (TBOW)
by Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie [Pearl and Mackenzie, 2018], which is a very accessible
introduction to this approach. I highly recommend both TBOW and the more technical and
comprehensive [Pearl, 2000] for anyone who is interested in causal inference in statistics, and
that should include pretty much anyone doing empirical work in social sciences these days. The
graphical approach has gained much traction in the wider computer science community, see for
example the recent text "Elements of Causal Inference," ([Peters, Janzing, and Sch¨
                                                                                  olkopf, 2017])
and the work on causal discovery ([Glymour, Scheines, and Spirtes, 2014, Hoyer, Janzing, Mooij,
Peters, and Sch¨
               olkopf, 2009, Lopez-Paz, Nishihara, Chintala, Sch¨
                                                                olkopf, and Bottou, 2017]), and
also in parts of epidemiology and social sciences, although it has not had as much impact in


                                               1
economics as it should have.
      In the second part of this essay, in Section 3, I briefly review the potential outcome approach,
associated with the work by Donald Rubin, Paul Rosenbaum, and collaborators, that is more
familiar to economists. Representative of the methodological part of the potential outcome
literature is the collection of papers by Rubin and coauthors, "Matched Sampling for Causal
Effects," (MACE, [Rubin, 2006]) and "Observation and Experiment," ([Rosenbaum, 2017]).
Other references to this literature include [Rubin, 1974, Rosenbaum, 2002, 2010], [Holland,
1986] which coined the term "Rubin Causal Model" for this approach, and my own text with
Rubin, "Causal Inference in Statistics, Social, and Biomedical Sciences," (CISSB, [Imbens and
                  1
Rubin, 2015]).
      In the third and main part of this essay, in Section 4, I discuss the comparative strengths and
weaknesses of the PO and DAG approaches. I discuss why the graphical approach to causality
has not caught on very much (yet) in economics. For example, a recent econometrics textbook
focused on causal inference, Mostly Harmless Econometrics (MHE, [Angrist and Pischke, 2008]),
has no DAGs, and is largely in the PO spirit. Why has it not caught on, or at least not yet?
      At a high level the DAG approach has two fundamental benefits to offer. First, in what is
essentially an pedagogical component, the formulation of the critical assumptions is intended to
capture the way researchers think of causal relationships. The DAGs, like the path analyses that
came before them ([Wright, 1928, 1934]), can be a powerful way of illustrating key assumptions
in causal models. I elaborate on this aspect of DAGs in the discussions of instrumental variables
and mediation/surrogates. Ultimately some of this is a matter of taste and some researchers
may prefer graphical versions to algebraic versions of the same assumptions and vice versa.
Second, the machinery developed in the DAG literature, in particular the do-calculus discussed
in Section 2.5, aims to allow researchers to answer particular causal queries in a systematic way.
Here the two frameworks are complementary and have different strengths and weaknesses. I
agree that the DAG machinery simplifies the answering of certain causal queries compared to
the PO framework. This is particularly true for queries in complex models with a large number
of variables. However, this is not true for all queries in all settings, and in particular not for
many of the causal questions common in economics.
      In comparison, there are five features of the PO framework that may be behind its cur-
  1
    As a disclaimer, I have worked with both Rubin and Rosenbaum, and my own work on causal inference is
largely within the PO framework, although some of that work preceeds these collaborations.


                                                   2
rent popularity in economics. First, there are some assumptions that are easily captured in
the PO framework relative to the DAG approach, and these assumptions are critical in many
identification strategies in economics. Such assumptions include monotonicity ([Imbens and An-
grist, 1994]) and other shape restrictions such as convexity or concavity ([Matzkin et al., 1991,
Chetverikov, Santos, and Shaikh, 2018, Chen, Chernozhukov, Fern´
                                                               andez-Val, Kostyshak, and
Luo, 2018]). The instrumental variables setting is a prominent example, and I will discuss it
in detail in Section 4.2. Second, the potential outcomes in the PO framework connect easily to
traditional approaches to economic models such as supply and demand settings where potential
outcome functions are the natural primitives. Related to this, the insistence of the PO approach
on manipulability of the causes, and its attendant distinction between non-causal attributes and
causal variables has resonated well with the focus in empirical work on policy relevance ([Angrist
and Pischke, 2008, Manski, 2013]). Third, many of the currently popular identification strate-
gies focus on models with relatively few (sets of) variables, where identification questions have
been worked out once and for all. Fourth, the PO framework lends itself well to accounting for
treatment effect heterogeneity in estimands ([Imbens and Angrist, 1994, Sekhon and Shem-Tov,
2017]) and incorporating such heterogeneity in estimation and the design of optimal policy func-
tions ([Athey and Wager, 2017, Athey, Tibshirani, Wager, et al., 2019, Kitagawa and Tetenov,
2015]). Fifth, the PO approach has traditionally connected well with design, estimation and
inference questions. From the outset Rubin and his coauthors provided much guidance to re-
searchers and policy makers for practical implementation including inference, with the work on
the propensity score ([Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983b]) an influential example.
   Separate from the theoretical merits of the two approaches, another reason for the lack of
adoption in economics is that the DAG literature has not shown much evidence of the benefits
for empirical practice in settings that are important in economics. The potential outcome stud-
ies in MACE, and the chapters in [Rosenbaum, 2017], CISSB and MHE have detailed empirical
examples of the various identification strategies proposed. In realistic settings they demonstrate
the merits of the proposed methods and describe in detail the corresponding estimation and in-
ference methods. In contrast in the DAG literature, TBOW, [Pearl, 2000], and [Peters, Janzing,
and Sch¨
       olkopf, 2017] have no substantive empirical examples, focusing largely on identification
questions in what TBOW refers to as "toy" models. Compare the lack of impact of the DAG
literature in economics with the recent embrace of regression discontinuity designs imported
from the psychology literature, or with the current rapid spread of the machine learning meth-

                                                3
ods from computer science, or the recent quick adoption of synthetic control methods [Abadie,
Diamond, and Hainmueller, 2010]. All came with multiple concrete examples that highlighted
their benefits over traditional methods. In the absence of such concrete examples the toy models
in the DAG literature sometimes appear to be a set of solutions in search of problems, rather
than a set of solutions for substantive problems previously posed in social sciences.



2     The Graphical Approach to Causality and TBOW
In this section I review parts of TBOW and give a brief general introduction to Directed Acyclic
Graphs (DAGs).


2.1     TBOWs View of Causality, and the Questions of Interest
Let me start by clarifying what TBOW, and in general the DAG approach to causality is
interested in. The primary focus of TBOW, as well as [Pearl, 2000], is on identification. As
Figure 1 (TBOW, p. 12) illustrates, researchers arrive armed with a number of variables and
a causal model linking these variables, some observed and some unobserved. The assumptions
underlying this model are coded up in a graphical model, a Directed Acyclic Graph, or DAG. The
researchers then ask causal queries. Early in TBOW the authors present a couple of examples
of such questions (TBOW, p. 2):

    1. How effective is a given treatment in preventing a disease?

    2. Did the new tax law cause our sales to go up, or was it our advertising campaign?

    3. What is the health-care cost attributable to obesity?

    4. Can hiring records prove an employer is guilty of a policy of sex discrimination?

    5. I'm about to quit my job. Should I?

These types of questions are obviously all of great importance. Does the book deliver on this,
or more precisely, does the methodology described in the book allow us to answer them? The
answer essentially is an indirect one: if you tell me how the world works, I can tell you the
answers. Whether this is satisfactory really revolves around how much the researcher is willing

                                                4
to assume about how the world works. Do I feel after reading the book that I understand better
how to answer these questions? That is not really very clear. The rhetorical device of giving
these specific examples at the beginning of the book is very helpful, but the book does not
really provide context for them. Questions of this type have come up many times before, but
there is little discussion of the previous approaches to answer them. The reader is never given
the opportunity to compare answers. It would have been helpful for the reader if in the final
chapter TBOW would have returned to these five questions and described specific answers given
the book. Instead some of the questions come back at various stages, but not systematically.
   One class of questions that is missing from this list, somewhat curiously given the title of
TBOW, is explicitly "why" questions. Why did Lehmann Brothers collapse in 2008? Why did
the price of a stock go up last year? Why did unemployment go down in the Great Depression?
[Gelman and Imbens, 2013] refer to such questions as reverse causal inference question, "why"
an outcome happened, rather than forward causal questions that are concerned with the effect
of a particular manipulation.
   The focus of TBOW, [Pearl, 2000] and [Peters, Janzing, and Sch¨
                                                                 olkopf, 2017], is on developing
machinery for answering questions of this type given two inputs. First, knowledge of the joint
distribution of all the observed variables in the model, and, second, a causal model describing
the phenonoma under consideration. Little is said about what comes before the identification
question, namely the development of the model, and what comes after the identification question,
namely estimation and inference given a finite sample. The position appears to be that the
specification of a causal model and the statistical analyses are separate problems, with the
integration of those problems with questions of identification less important than the benefits
of the specialization associated with keeping the identification questions separate.
   However, many statistical problems and methods are specific to the causal nature of the
questions, and as a result much of the methodological literature on causality in statistics and
econometrics is about estimation methods. This includes the literature on weak instruments
[Staiger and Stock, 1997, Andrews and Stock, 2006], the literature on unconfoundedness in-
cluding discussions of the role of the propensity score ([Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983b]) and
problems with overlap ([Crump, Hotz, Imbens, and Mitnik, 2009, D'Amour, Ding, Feller, Lei,
and Sekhon, 2017, Li, Morgan, and Zaslavsky, 2018]), double robustness [Robins and Rotnitzky,
1995, Imbens, 2004, Belloni, Chernozhukov, Fern´
                                               andez-Val, and Hansen, 2013, Athey, Imbens,
and Wager, 2018b], the literature on regression discontinuity designs [Hahn, Todd, and Van der

                                                5
Klaauw, 2001, Imbens and Kalyanaraman, 2012], and the recent work on estimating heteroge-
nous treatment effects [Athey and Imbens, 2016, Wager and Athey, 2017] and synthetic control
methods ([Abadie and Gardeazabal, 2003, Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller, 2010]. Another
area where the separation between identification of causal effects and the identification of the
joint distribution of realized variables is more difficult is in network settings [Graham, 2015,
Ogburn, VanderWeele, et al., 2014]. This integration of statistical questions and causal identi-
fication has arguably been very beneficial in many of these settings.
   The choices and challenges in postulating a causal model, graphical or otherwise, a model of
how the world works, is also not a major subject of the book. TBOW views that as the task of
subject matter experts:

      "I am not a cancer specialist, and I would always have to defer to the expert opinion
      on whether such a diagram represents and real-world processes accurately." (TBOW,
      p. 228)

and

      "I am not personally an expert on climate change`' (TBOW, p. 294)

This is of course fine, but the result is that the models in TBOW are all, in a favorite phrase in
TBOW "toy models," that we should not take seriously. This is common to other discussions of
graphical causal models (e.g., [Koller, Friedman, and Bach, 2009]). It would have been useful if
the authors had teamed up with subject matter experts and discussed some substantive examples
where DAGs, beyond the very simple ones implied by randomized experiments, are afsligned
with experts' opinions. Such examples, whether in social sciences or otherwise, would serve well
in the effort to convince economists that these methods are useful in practice.
   The focus on toy models and the corresponding lack of engagement with estimation and
inference questions is in sharp contrast to the econometrics literature where the three steps, (i)
development of the causal models that preceeds the identification question, (ii) the study of
identification questions, and (iii) estimation and inference methods that follow once the iden-
tification questions have been resolved, typically go hand-in-hand. The models in econometric
papers are often developed with the idea that they are useful on settings beyond the specific
application in the original paper. Partly as a result of the focus on empirical examples the econo-
metrics literature has developed a small number of canonical settings where researchers view

                                                6
the specific causal models and associated statistical methods as well-established and understood.
These causal models correspond to what is nowadays often referred to as identification strate-
gies (e.g., [Card, 1993, Angrist and Krueger, 2000]). These identification strategies that include
adjustment/unconfoundedness, instrumental variables, difference-in-differences, regression dis-
continuity designs, synthetic control methods (the first four are listed in "Empirical Strategies in
Labor Economics," [Angrist and Krueger, 2000]) are widely taught in both undergraduate and
graduate economics courses, and they are familiar to most empirical researchers in economics.
The statistical methods associated with these causal models are commonly used in empirical
work and are constantly being refined, and new identification strategies are occasionally added
to the canon. Empirical strategies not currently in this canon, rightly or wrongly, are viewed
with much more suspicion until they reach the critical momentum to be included. This canon
is not static: despite having been developed in the early 1960s in the psychology literature,
regression discontinuity designs were virtually unheard of in economics until the early 2000s
when a number of examples caught researchers' attention (e.g., [Black, 1999, Van Der Klaauw,
2002, Lee, Moretti, and Butler, 2010, Pettersson-Lidbom, 2008]). Now regression discontinuity
designs are commonly taught in graduate and undergraduate courses. Similarly synthetic con-
trol methods ([Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller, 2010]) have become very popular in a very
short period of time.


2.2    The Ladder of Causality
TBOW introduces a classification of causal problems that they call the Ladder of Causality,
with three rungs, in order of complexity labeled association, intervention, and counterfactuals
respectively.
   On the first rung, assocation, researchers observe passively, and form predictions based
on these observations. A key concept is that of correlation. Methods associated with this
rung according to the discussion in TBOW are regression, as well as many of the modern
machine learning methods such as regression trees, random forests, and neural nets. Of course
regression is used in many disciplines as a causal method, but here TBOW views regression
in something akin to what econometricians would call the best linear predictor framework,
where the regression function is simply a parametric way of fitting the conditional expectation
[Goldberger, 1991]. There is little causal in this rung, and the problems here are well understood


                                                 7
and studied in a variety of disciplines. They are routinely taught in economics PhD programs
as part of the econometrics or statistics curriculum. Much of this is now being integrated with
predictive machine learning methods ([Athey and Imbens, 2018]).
   The second rung is that of intervention. A canonical example, used in Figure 1.2 (TBOW,
p. 28), and also in CISSB (p. 3), is the question what would happen to my headache if I
take an aspirin. In general the questions in this rung are about manipulations. These are the
questions that much of the causal inference work in the PO framework is focused on. Randomized
experiments are one of the key statistical designs here. In observational studies these questions
are much harder, but they are studied in a wide range of areas using a wide range of methods.
Question 1 in the list of questions in TBOW ("How effective is a given treatment in preventing
a disease?") belongs on this rung. This is where much of the empirical work in economics takes
place. The challenges typically concern the presence of unobserved confounders of some type
or another because economist typically model the behavior of optimizing agents, who often are
more knowledgable than the researcher and who take into account the expected results of their
actions. The identification strategies in [Angrist and Krueger, 2000] fit in here.
   The third rung of the ladder of causality deals with counterfactuals. Here the type of
question considered is "What would have happened had I not taken the aspirin?" [given that I
did take the aspirin, GWI] (TBOW, p. 33). The questions on this third run are more difficult
to answer, and the PO framework is more apprehensive about definite answers to such questions
that depend delicately on individual-level heterogeneity. In that framework the correlation
between the potential outcomes given the aspirin and without the aspirin, within subpopulations
homogenous in observed characteristics is not point-identified, so that estimands that depend on
this correlation, which includes most questions on the third rung, are only partially identified.
Although in legal settings this type of question does come up routinely, the economics literature
does not focus as much on this type of question as it does on the second type.
   Similar to the issue raised in the discussion in Section 2.1 of the list of questions provided
in TBOW, I would have liked to have seen a fourth rung of the ladder, dealing with "why," or
reverse causality questions ([Gelman and Imbens, 2013]). These are related to both the second
and third rung, but not quite the same.




                                                8
X           Y                                        X         Y

        (a) Randomized Experiment                              (b) Reverse Causality


                                                     X         Y

X       Y


                                                     U1        U2
       U                                            (d) Randomized Experiment (Alternative
            (c) Spurious Correlation                DAG)




                           Figure 1: DAGs for the Two Variable Case


2.3    Directed Acyclic Graphs
The approach to causality in TBOW and [Pearl, 2000] centers on graphical models, and in
particular Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs). These are seen as an attractive way to capture
how people think about causal relationships. The DAGs are characterized by nodes and directed
edges between the nodes. Let us start with four examples, in increasing order of complexity.
    The first example is as simple as it gets. In Figure 1(a) there are only two nodes, corre-
sponding to two variables, denoted by X and Y . There is an arrow (directed edge) connecting
these two nodes, going from X to Y . The direction of the arrow captures the notion that X
"causes" Y , rather than some other explanation. Alternative explanations include Y causing
X as in Figure 1(b), or some third, unobserved, variable U causing both, as in the spurious
correlation in Figure 1(c). If we have data on the values of these variables X and Y for a large
number of units (meaning we can infer the full joint distribution of X and Y ), we can estimate
the association between them. The model then allows us to infer from that association the
causal effect of X on Y . Obviously simply the data on X and Y are not sufficient: we need the
causal model to go from the association to the causal statement that it is X causing Y and not
the other way around. The model also says more than simply coding the direction of the causal
link. It also captures, through the absence of other nodes and edges, the fact that there are no

                                               9
                                         X               Y




                                                     W



                                 Figure 2: Unconfoundedness



                                   Z            X                Y




                                                             U



                               Figure 3: Instrumental Variables


other variables that have causal effects on both X and Y as in Figure 1(c). Note that we could
expand the DAG by including two unobserved variables, U1 and U2 , with an arrow (U1  X )
and an arrow (U2  Y ), as in Figure 1(d). In the Structural Equation Model (SEM) version
of the DAGs these would be explicit. Because there is no association between U1 and U2 , the
presence of these two unobserved variables does not affect any conclusions, so we omit them
from the DAG, following convention.
   Next, consider Figure 2. Here the DAG is slightly more complex. There are now three
observed variables. In addition to X and Y , with an arrow going from X to Y , there is a third
variable W with arrows going both from W to X and from W to Y . W here is a confounder,
or, more precisely, an observed confounder. Simply looking at the association between X and Y
is not sufficient for infering the causal effect: the effect is confounded by the effect of W on X
and Y . Nevertheless, because we observe the confounder W we can still infer the causal effect
of X on Y by controlling or adjusting for W .
   Figure 3 is even more complicated. Now there are three observed variables, X , Y , and Z ,


                                                10
and one unobserved variable U (denoted by a circle rather than a dot). There are arrows from Z
to X , from X to Y , and from U to both X and Y . The latter two are dashed lines in the figure
to indicate they are between two nodes at least one of which is an unobserved variable. U is an
unobserved confounder. The presence of U makes it impossible to completely infer the causal
effect of X on Y from just the joint distribution of X and Y . To make progress the presence of
the additional variable, the instrument Z , is important. This captures an instrumental variables
setting. In the econometrics terminology X is endogenous because there is an unobserved
confounder U that affects both X and Y . There is no direct effect of the instrument Z on
the outcome Y , and there is no unobserved confounder for the effect of the instrument on
the endogenous regressor or the outcome. This instrumental variables set up is familiar to
economists, although traditionally in a non-DAG form. In support of his first argument of
the benefits of DAGs, TBOW argues that the DAG version clarifies the key assumptions and
structure compared to the econometrics set up. Compared to the traditional econometrics setup
where the critical assumptions are expressed in terms of the correlation between residuals and
instruments, I agree with TBOW that the DAGs are superior in clarity. I am less convinced that
the benefits of the DAG relative to the modern PO set up for the IV setting with its separation
of the critical assumptions into design-based unconfoundedness assumptions and a substantive
exclusion restriction (e.g., [Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin, 1996]) are clear cut, but that appears
to me to be a matter of taste. Certainly for many people the DAGs are an effective expository
tool. That is quite separate from its value as formal method for infering identification and lack
thereof. Note that formally in this instrumental variables setting identification of the effect of X
on Y is a subtle one, and in fact this effect is not identified according to the DAG methodology.
I will return to this setting where only the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE) is identified
([Imbens and Angrist, 1994]) in more detail in Section 4.2. It is an important example because
it shows explicitly the inability of the DAGs to derive some classes of identification results.
   The last example, in Figure 4, is substantially more complex. The first subfigure, Figure
4(a), is taken from [Pearl, 1995]. There are five observed variables, soil fumigation (X ), crop
yield (Y ) the eelworm population before the treatment (Z1 ), the eelworm population after the
fumigation, (Z2 ), and the eelworm population at the end of the season, (Z3 ). There are two
unobserved variables, the bird population (B ) and the eelworm population last season, (Z0 ).
The question is whether and how we can identify the effect of the soil fumigation X on the crop
yield Y from the joint distribution of the observed variables (X, Y, Z1 , Z2 , Z3 ). The do-calculus,

                                                 11
              Z0                                                    Z0



                            B                                                    B
                   Z1                                                    Z1



X                           Z3                          X                        Z3
                   Z2                                                    Z2



              Y                                                      Y
                   (a) original                                  (b) Two Additional Links

                           Figure 4: Based on Figure 1 in [Pearl, 1995].


described in Section 2.5 is helpful here. This is an example of the second benefit of DAGs
for causal modeling, the ability to infer identifiability given a complex model. [Pearl, 2000]
argues that in contrast to the DAG approach the PO framework is not well equipped to assess
identifiability in complex models involving a large number of variables:

      "no mortal can apply this condition [ignorability, GWI] to judge whether it holds
      even in simple problems, with all causal relationships correctly specified, let alone
      in partially specified problems that involve dozens of variables." ([Pearl, 2000], p.
      350).

Similarly, Elias Bareinboim writes,

      "Regarding the frontdoor or napkin, these are just toy examples where the cur-
      rent language [the PO framework, GWI] has a hard time solving, I personally never
      saw a natural solution. If this happens with 3, 4 var examples, how could some-
      one solve one 100-var instance compounded with other issues?" (Elias Bareinboim,
      Twitter,@eliasbareinboim, March 17, 2019).

I agree that in cases like this inferring identifiability is a challenge that few economists would be
equipped to meet. However, in modern empirical work in economics there are few cases where
researchers consider models with dozens, let alone a hundred, variables and complex relations


                                                 12
between them that do not reduce to simple identification strategies. As Jason Abaluck responds
to Bareinboim's comment:

     "No one should ever write down a 100 variable DAG and do inference based on
     that. That would be an insane approach because the analysis would be totally
     impenetrable. Develop a research design where that 100 variable DAG trivially
     reduces to a familiar problem (e.g. IV!)" (Jason Abaluck, Twitter, @abaluck, March
     17th, 2019).

   Many years ago [Leamer, 1983] in his classic paper "Let's take the Con out of Econometrics,"
articulated this suspicon of models that rely on complex structures between a large number of
variables most eloquently (and curiously also in the context of studying the effect of fertilizer
on crop yields):

     " The applied econometrician is like a farmer who notices that the yield is somewhat
     higher under trees where birds roost, and he uses this as evidence that bird droppings
     increase yields. However, when he presents this finding at the annual meeting of the
     American Ecological Association, another farmer in the audience objects that he
     used the same data but came up with the conclusion that moderate amounts of
     shade increase yields. A bright chap in the back of the room then observes that
     these two hypotheses are indistinguishable, given the available data. He mentions
     the phrase "identification problem," which, though no one knows quite what he
     means, is said with such authority that it is totally convincing." ([Leamer, 1983], p.
     31).

Ultimately Leamer's concerns were part of what led to the credibility revolution with its focus
on credible identification strategies, typically in settings with a modest number of variables.
This is why much of the training in PhD programs attempt to provide economists with a deep
understanding of a number of the identification strategies listed earlier, regression discontinuity
designs, instrumental variables, synthetic controls, unconfoundedness, and others, including the
statistical methods conditional on the identification strategy, than train them to be able to infer
identification in complex, and arguably implausible, models. That is not to say that there is
not an important role for structural modeling in econometrics. However, the structural models
used in econometrics use economic theory more deeply, exploiting monotonicity and other shape

                                                13
restrictions as well as other implications of the theory that are not easily incorporated in the
DAGs and the attendant do-calculus, despite the claims of universality of the DAGs.
   To be specific about the concerns about this type of DAG, let us consider two additional
causal links. In Figure 4(b) there are two additional causal links. First, there is an additional
direct effect of the bird population B on the crop yield Y . Birds may eat the seeds, or parts
of the plants in a way that affect the yield. There is also a direct link from the soil fumigation
X on the bird population B : the soil fumigation may have an effect on other food sources
for the birds separate from the effect on the eelworm population. In general it is easy to
come up with arguments for the presence of links: as anyone who has attended an empirical
economics seminar knows, the difficult part is coming up with an argument for the absence of
such effects that convinces the audience. Why is the eelworm population before the fumigation
independent of the fumigation, conditional on last season's eelworm population? Why is the bird
population independent of both the pre and post-fumigation eelworm population conditional on
last season's eelworm population, but not independent of the end-of-season eelworm population?
This difficulty in arguing for the absence of effects is particularly true in social sciences where
any effects that can possibly be there typically are, in comparison with physical sciences where
the absence of deliberate behavior may enable the researcher to rule out particular causal links.
As Gelman puts it, "More generally, anything that plausibly could have an effect will not have
an effect that is exactly zero." ([Gelman, 2011], p. 961). Another question regarding the specific
DAG here is why the size of the eelworm population is allowed to change repeatedly, whereas
the local bird population remains fixed.
   The point of this discussion is that a major challenge in causal inference is coming up with
the causal model. In this step the DAG is of limited value. Establishing whether a particular
model is identified, and if so, whether there are testable restrictions, in other words, the parts
that a DAG is potentially helpful for, is a secondary, and much easier, challenge.


2.4    Some DAG Terminology
Let me now introduce some additional terminology to facilitate the discussion. See TBOW or
[Pearl, 2000] for details. To make the concepts specific I will focus on the eelworm example
from Figure 4(a). The set of nodes in this DAG is Z = {Z0 , Z1 , Z2 , Z3 , B, X, Y }. The edges are
Z0  X , Z0  Z1 , Z0  B , Z1  Z2 , B  Z3 , X  Y , X  Z2 , Z2  Z3 , Z2  Y , and


                                                14
Z3  Y . Consider a node in this DAG. For any given node, all the nodes that have arrows going
directly into that node are its parents. In Figure 4(a), for example, X and Z1 are the parents
of Z2 . Ancestors of a node include parents of that node, their parents, and so on. The full set
of ancestors of Z2 is {Z0 , Z1 , X }. For any given node all the nodes that have arrows going into
them directly from the given node are its children. In Figure 4(a) Z2 is the only child of Z1 .
Descendants of a node include its children, their children, and so on. The set of descendants of
Z1 is {Z2 , Z3 , Y }.
    A path between two different nodes is a set of connected edges starting from the first node
going to the second node, irrespective of the direction of the arrows. For example, one path
going from Z2 to Z3 is the edge (Z2  Z3 ). Another path is (Z2  X  Y  Z3 ). A collider
of a path is a node on that path with arrows from that path going into the node, but no arrows
from that path coming out of the node. Z2 is a collider on the path (X  Z2  Z1 ). A
non-collider of a path is a node on a path that is not a collider. Z2 is a non-collider on the path
(X  Z2  Z3 ).
    Now consider types of paths. A directed path is a path where the arrows all go in the same
direction. The path (Z2  Z3  Y ) is a directed path, but the path (Z2  X  Y  Z3 ) is
not. If a path is not directed, it follows that it must have at least one collider on it. A back-door
path from node A to node B is a path from A to B that starts with an incoming arrow into A
and ends with an incoming arrow into B . The path (X  Z0  Z1  Z2 ) is a back-door path
from X to Z2 . A back-door path must contain at least one non-collider, although in general it
may contain both colliders and non-colliders. A path between two nodes is blocked or d-separated
by conditioning on a subset Z1 of the set of all nodes Z in the DAG if and only if one of two
conditions is satisfied. Either (i) the path contains a noncollider that has been conditioned on,
or (ii) it contains a collider such that (a) that collider has not been conditioned on and (b)
that collider has no descendants that have been conditioned on. In Figure 4(a), conditioning on
Z1 = {Z2 } would block/d-separate the path (X  Z2  Z3 ) because Z2 is a non-collider on this
path. Without conditioning on anything, Z1 = , the path (X  Y  Z2 ) is blocked because
Y is a collider that is not conditioned on and that has no descendants that are conditioned on.
If we condition on Z1 = {Y } the path (X  Y  Z2 ) is no longer blocked.




                                                 15
2.5        The do-operator and the do-Calculus
From the joint distribution of two variables X and Y we can infer the conditional distribution
P (Y |X ), and evaluate that at a particular value, say X = x, to get P (Y |X = x). However, what
we are interested in is not the distribution of the outcome we would encounter if X happened to
be equal to x, but the distribution of the outcome we would encounter if we set X to a particular
value. TBOW writes this using the do-operator as P (Y |do (X = x)) to distinguish it from the
conditional distribution P (Y |X = x). We can directly infer the conditional distributions of the
type P (Y |X = x) from the joint distribution of all the variables in the graph. Thus we take as
given that we know (or can estimate consistently) all the conditional distributions P (Y |X = x).
The question is whether that, in combination with the assumptions embodied in the DAG,
allows us to infer causal objects of the type P (Y |do (X = x)). This is what the do-calculus is
intended to do. See Tucci [2013] for a simple introduction, and [Pearl, 1995, 2000] for more
details.
   How does this relate to the DAG? Suppose we are interested in the causal effect of X on Y .
This corresponds to comparing P (Y |do (X = x)) for different values of x. To get P (Y |do (X ))
we modify the graph in a specific way (we perform surgery on the graph), using the do-calculus.
Specifically, we remove all the arrows going into X . This gives us a new causal model. For that
new model the distribution P (Y |X ) is the same as P (Y |do (X )). So, the question is how we
infer P (Y |X ) in the new model from the joint distribution of all the observed variables in the
old model. One tool is to condition on certain variables. Instead of looking at the correlation
between two variables Y and X , we may look at the conditional correlation between them where
we condition on a set of additional variables. Whether the conditioning works to get the causal
effects is one of the key questions that the DAGs are intended to answer.
   The do-calculus has three fundamental rules

   1. Consider a DAG, and P (Y |do (X ), Z, W ). If, after deleting all paths into X , the set of
      variables Z blocks all the paths from W to Y , then P (Y |do (X ), Z, W ) = P (Y |do (X ), Z ).

   2. If a set of variables Z blocks all back-door paths from X to Y , then P (Y |do (X ), Z ) =
      P (Y |X, Z ) ("doing" X is the same as "seeing" X ).

   3. If there is no path from X to Y with only forward-directed arrows, then P (Y |do (X )) =
      P (Y ).

                                                 16
   Let us consider two of the most important examples of identification strategies based on
the do-calculus for identifying causal effects in DAG, the back-door criterion and the front-door
criterion.


2.6    The Back-door Criterion
The back-door criterion for identifying the causal effect of a node X on a node Y is based on
blocking all backdoor paths through conditioning on a subset of nodes. Let us call this subset of
conditioning variables Zbd , where the subscript "bd" stands for back-door. When is it sufficient
to fscondition on this subset? We need to check whether all back-door paths are blocked as a
result of conditioning on Zbd . Recall the definition of blocking or d-separating a backdoor path.
It requires either conditioning on a non-collider, or the combination of not conditioning on a
collider and not conditioning on all the descendants of that collider.
   Consider Figure 2. In this case conditioning on Zbd = {W } suffices. By the second rule
of the do-calculus, P (Y |do (x), W ) = P (Y |X = x, W ) and so P (Y |do (x)) can be inferred from
P (Y |X = x, W ) by integrating over the marginal distribution of W . In Figure 33, however,
the backdoor criterion does not work. There is a backdoor path from X to Y that cannot be
blocked, namely the path (X  U  Y ). We cannot block the path by conditioning on U
because U is not observed.
   The back-door criterion typically leads to the familiar type of statistical adjustments through
matching, weighting, or regression adjustments. The main difference is that given the DAG the
back-door criterion provides a systematic way of selecting the set of variables to condition on.


2.7    The Front-door Criterion
A second identification strategy is the front-door criterion. This strategy for identifying the
effect of a variable X on an outcome Y does not rely on blocking all back-door paths. Instead
the front-door criterion relies on the existence of intermediate variables that lie on the causal
path from X to Y . It relies both on the effect of X on these intermediate variables being
identified, and on the effect of the intermediate variables on the outcome being identified. This
is an interesting strategy in the sense that it is not commonly seen in economics.
   Consider the DAG in Figure 5(a) using a widely used example of the front-door criterion.


                                               17
smoking     tar deposit lung cancer                     smoking    tar deposit lung cancer




           smoking gene                                           smoking gene
(a) Original Pearl DAG for front-door crite-            (b) Freedman Concern 1: smoking gene  tar
rion                                                    deposits
                                                        smoking    tar deposit lung cancer
smoking     tar deposit lung cancer



                                                                  smoking gene       hazardous
           smoking gene                                                           work environment
(c) Freedman Concern 2: smoking  lung                   (d) Imbens Concern: hazardous work envi-
cancer                                                  ronment




                                  Figure 5: Front-Door Criterion


We are interested in the causal effect of smoking (X ) on lung cancer (Y ). A smoking gene (U )
is an unobserved confounder for this causal effect, so P (Y |X ) = P (Y |do (X )). However, there
is another way to identify the causal effect of interest, using the additional variable tar deposits
(Z ). We can identify the causal effect of X on Z because there is no unobserved confounder,
and P (Z |X ) = P (Z |do (X )). We can identify the causal effect of Z on Y by adjusting for X ,
because P (Y |Z, X ) = P (Y |do (Z ), X ). Putting these two together allows us to infer the causal
effect of X on Y . With discrete Z , the formula that relates the average causal effect of X on Y
to the joint distribution of the realized values is


      P (Y |do (x)) =           P (Y |Z = z, X = x )P (x )p(Z = z |X = x).
                        x   z


Note the close connection to the instrumental variable DAG, given in Figure 3. Just as in instru-
mental variables settings, a key assumption in the front door criterion is an exclusion restriction
that the effect of one variable on another variable is mediated entirely by a third variable. In the
instrumental variables case in Figure 3 it is the effect of the instrument Z on the outcome Y that


                                                  18
is assumed to be mediated by the endogenous variable X . In the front door criterion in Figure
5(a) it is the effect of smoking on lung cancer that is assumed to be mediated through the tar
deposit. The connection between the instrumental variables case and the front-door criterion
shows that the exclusion restriction is common to both, and thus is likely to be equally contro-
versial in both. The other key assumption in the instrumental variables case is that there is no
unmeasured confounder for the relation between the instrument and both the outcome and the
treatment on the other hand. In many of the most convincing instrumental variables application
that assumption is satisfied by design because of randomization of the instrument (e.g, the draft
lottery number in [Angrist, 1990], and random assignment in randomized controlled trials with
noncompliance, [Hirano, Imbens, Rubin, and Zhou, 2000]). In the front door case the additional
key assumption is that there are no unmeasured confounders for the intermediate variable and
the outcome. Unlike the no-unmeasured-confounder assumption in the instrumental variables
case this assumption cannot be guaranteed by design. As a result it will be controversial in
many applications.
   The front-door criterion is an interesting case, and in some sense an important setting for
the DAGs versus PO discussion. I am not aware of any applications in economics that explic-
itly use this identification strategy. The question arises whether this is an important method,
whose omission from the canon of identification strategies has led economists to miss interesting
opportunities to identify causal effects. If so, one might argue that is should be added to the
canon along side instrumental variables, regression discontinuity designs and others. TBOW
clearly think so, and are very high on this identification strategy:

     "[the front door criterion] allows us to control for confounders that we cannot observe
     ... including those we can't even name. RCTs [Randomized Controlled Trials, GWI]
     are considered the gold standard of causal effect estimation for exactly the same
     reason. Because front-door estimates do the same thing, with the additional virtue
     of observing people's behavior in their own natural habitat instead of a laboratory,
     I would not be surprised if this method eventually becomes a serious competitor to
     randomized controlled trials." (TBOW, p. 231).

David Cox and Nanny Wermuth on the other hand are not quite convinced, and, in a comment
on [Pearl, 1995] write:

     "Moreover, an unobserved variable U affecting both X and Y must have no direct

                                                19
     effect on Z . Situations where this could be assumed with any confidence seem likely
     to be exceptional." ([Cox and Wermuth, 1995], p. 689).

As the Cox-Wermuth quote suggests, a question that does not get answered in many discussions
of the front-door criterion is how credible the strategy is in practice. The smoking and lung
cancer example TBOW uses has been used in a number of other studies as well, e.g., [Koller,
Friedman, and Bach, 2009]. TBOW mentions that the former Berkeley statistician David Freed-
man raised concerns that the DAG in Figure 5(a) was not realistic in three ways. He thought
the same unobserved confounder could also affect tar deposits (as in Figure 5(b)), similar to
the Cox-Wermuth concern. Smoking might also affect cancer through other mechanisms (as in
Figure 5(c)), a concern also raised in [Koller, Friedman, and Bach, 2009]. Finally, Freedman
thought the observational study would not be feasible because it is not possible to measure tar
deposits in living individuals accurately. I would add to those three concerns of Freedman's a
fourth, namely the concern that there may be a second unmeasured confounder that affects tar
deposits and cancer, even if it does not affect smoking, for example work environment (as in
Figure 5(d). TBOW deflects these concerns by saying that

     "I have no quarrel with Freedman's criticism in this particular example. I am not a
     cancer specialist, and I would always have to defer to the expert opionion on whether
     such a diagram represents the real-world processes accurately." (TBOW, p. 228)

Similarly [Koller, Friedman, and Bach, 2009] argue that this specific example is "more useful as
a thought experiment than a practical computational tool" ([Koller, Friedman, and Bach, 2009],
p. 1024) and concede that they view the substantive assumptions as "unlikely." But there's the
rub. Freedman was not a cancer specialist either, but is willing to engage with the substantive
assumptions, and argues they fall short. It is fine that a method make strong assumptions
and that some of these assumptions are controversial. However, if in TBOWs favorite front-
door example, none of the authors using the example are willing to put up any defense for the
substantive assumptions that justify the use of the front-door criterion, then I agree with Cox
and Wermuth that it is difficult to imagine that there is a wealth of credible examples out there
waiting for the DAGs to uncover them.
   The discussion of this example also appears to reflect an unwillingness to acknowledge that
in many settings it is very hard to come up with convincing simple structures. Especially in
social science applications any exclusion restriction as captured by the absence of an arrow, or

                                               20
any absence of an unmeasured confounder in the absence of independence guaranteed by design
is typically difficult to defend, as illustrated earlier by the Gelman quote. The recognition of
this difficulty in specifying credible models in economics in Leamer's celebrated "Let's take the
Con out of Econometrics" (Leamer [1983]) was a big part of the motivation for the so-called
credibility revolution (Angrist and Pischke [2010]) with its focus on natural experiments and
clear identification. In a twitter discussion with Pearl, Jason Abaluck, like Cox and Wermuth,
questions the empirical relevance of this criterion and asks Judea Pearl for real-world examples
where the front-door assumptions are convincing:

      "Now, it might be that in addition to having a mental model of IV in their heads
      when they search for a "clean DAG", economists should also have a mental model of
      the "front-door criterion". ... But before we get to that stage, we will need many real-
      world examples where the relevant assumptions seem supportable." (Jason Abaluck,
      Twitter, 25 Mar 2019).

   One paper that is sometimes cited in these discussions as an example of the front-door
criterion is [Glynn and Kashin, 2018]. They analyze a job training program, with the treatment
an indicator whether the individual signed up for the training program and the outcome post-
program earnings. The mediator is an indicator whether the individual actually enrolled in the
program. This is an interesting paper, and it illustrates the issues well, but it difficult to see it
as a credible example of the front-door set up. As the authors themselves admit,

      "As we discuss in detail below, the assumptions implicit in this graph will not hold
      for job training programs, but this presentation clarifies the inferential approach."
      ([Glynn and Kashin, 2018], p. 1042).

   On page 240 TBOW presents one additional example, in a setting with four observed vari-
ables, linked through the path (W  Z  X  Y ), and two unobserved confounders, U1 ,
which affects W and Y , and U2 , which affects W and X . See Figure 6. The question is whether
the effect of X on Y is estimable. What is a good example where this is a natural DAG? TBOW
is silent on this matter. It presents the DAG as a puzzle: can we identify the effect of X on Y ?
This lack of substantive examples is exactly one of the issues that makes it hard to integrate
the DAG methodology with empirical practice.



                                                 21
                                                          U1

                                                 U2



                                      W      Z        X    Y

         Figure 6: (Based on: Figure 7.5, A new napkin problem? TBOW, P. 240)


2.8    Mediation and Surrogates
Analyses involving mediators, discussed in Chapter 9 in TBOW, are common in biostatistics
and epidemiology. They are not as common in economics, and probably deserve more attention
in the latter. Here I discuss some of the basics and the related surrogacy analyses. Mediation is
about understanding causal pathways from some variable to an outcome. See [MacKinnon, 2012,
VanderWeele and Vansteelandt, 2014, Robins and Greenland, 1992, Pearl, 2014, VanderWeele,
2015, Pearl, 2001, Lok, 2016].
   Let us consider a specific example from [VanderWeele, 2015]. There is a well-established
association between some genetic variances on chromosome 15q25.1 and lung cancer. Part of
this link may be through smoking. So, in this case we are interested in understanding the role of
a potential mediator, smoking (S ) in the causal link between the genetic variation (X ) on lung
cancer (Y ). There may be an observed confounder W that affects the variable of interest, the
genetic variant, the mediator, smoking, and the outcome, lung cancer. Figure 7(a) presents the
basic mediation case. There is a direct causal link from the basic treatment to the outcome, as
well as a link from the basic treatment to the mediator and from the mediator to the outcome.
In this case, with no unobserved confounders complicating matters, we can infer all the causal
effects, and we can separate out the direct effect of the genetic variation and the indirect effect
that is mediated through smoking. Let us be more specific. There are three effects we are
interested in. First, the total effect of the genetic variation on lung cancer. We can identify that
total effect given the DAG because there are no back-door paths. Second, the indirect effect
of the genetic variation on lung cancer. This consists of two components, the effect of genetic
variation on smoking, and the effect of smoking on lung cancer. Given the DAG we can estimate
the first of these two because there is no back-door path. We can also estimate the second, the

                                                 22
X       S               Y                            X       S            Y




        W                                                    W
                (a) Mediation                                       (b) Surrogates


    U                                                                 U

X           S       Y                                X       S                Y




        W                                                    W
        (c) Invalid Surrogates                                (d) Invalid Surrogates




                                Figure 7: Mediation and Surrogacy




                                               23
effect of smoking on lung cancer by controlling for the genetic variation. Third, the direct effect,
which we can infer by subtracting the indirect effect from the total effect. See [VanderWeele,
2015] for details, an exposition of the precise definition of the estimands using the PO approach.
   The value of the mediation analysis is that it sheds light on the causal pathways. The
challenge is that it requires us to identify a number of constituent causal effects. As such it
requires more assumptions than those required for estimating the total effect alone. However,
if those assumptions are satisfied, it delivers more than simply the total effect.
   A closely related set up is that of surrogate variables. The basic DAG is shown in Figure 7(b).
Compared to the mediation set up a key additional assumption is that there is no direct effect
in this case. Under the same assumptions as required for the mediation case this would lead to
testable restrictions, but the typical use case is a different one. As in [Athey, Chetty, Imbens,
and Kang, 2016], a prominent use case is that with two samples (see also [Gupta, Kohavi,
Tang, and Xu, 2019] discussing the use of surrogacy methods in the context of experimentation
in tech companies). The first sample comes from a randomized experiment where both the
basic treatment and the surrogates/mediators are observed (possibly plus some pre-treatment
variables), but not the outcome of interest. The second sample is from an observational studie
where only the surrogates and the primary outcome are observed (possibly plus the pre-treatment
variables), but not the basic treatment. The goal is to estimate the causal effect of the treatment
on the outcome, without ever seeing data on the the treatment and the outcome for the same
units. In practice the setting often involves multiple surrogates. For example, in an online
experimental setting one may observe many intermediate outcomes in a short term experiment,
without observing the long term outcome of interest.
   In the surrogate case, as in the mediation case, the DAG can clarify the content of the
assumptions. In particular it rules out a direct effect of the treatment on the outcome (as in
Figure 7(a)). It also rules out unobserved confounders that affect both the treatment and the
surrogates (as in Figure 7(c)). Finally, it rules out by assumption unobserved confounders that
affect both the surrogates and the primary outcome (as in Figure 7(d)). The DAGs have less to
offer in terms of estimation strategies and formal statistical assumptions in this setting. Here the
PO framework offers clear estimation strategies and methods for inference. See [Athey, Chetty,
Imbens, and Kang, 2016] for details. Note also the close connection between the surrogate DAG
and the instrumental variables DAG.



                                                24
2.9       "Elements of Causal Inference," ([Peters, Janzing, and Sch¨
                                                                    olkopf,
          2017], [Peters, Janzing, and Sch¨
                                          olkopf, 2017]) and Other New
          Developments
[Peters, Janzing, and Sch¨
                         olkopf, 2017] is a fascinating book discussing new directions for causal
inference followed in the computer science literature, often using graphical models. Many of
the problems studied in this book are quite different from those studied traditionally in the
economics literature. For example, there is much interest in the literature that [Peters, Janzing,
and Sch¨
       olkopf, 2017] draws on in assessing the direction of causality, whether X causes Y or
Y causes X . This question has recieved much attention in the econometric literature in the
context of time series data, leading to the concept of Granger-Sims causality ([Granger, 1969,
Sims, 1972, Chamberlain, 1982]). The CS literature is focused on a cross-section setting, where
we have observations on exchangeable pairs (Xi , Yi ). Consider for example two linear models:


         Y i =  0 +  1 X i + i ,


and


         Xi = 0 + 1 Yi + i .


Can we tell which of these models is the right one? Obviously without additional assumptions we
cannot, but if we are willing to put additional structure on the model we may be able to make
progress. For example, [Peters, Janzing, and Sch¨
                                                olkopf, 2017] considers the assumption that
the unobserved term (i or i ) is independent of the right-hand side variable. This is still not
sufficient for choosing between the models if the distributions are Gaussian, but outside of that,
we can now tell the models apart. Identifying models based on this type of assumption is not
common in economics. The basic question is also an unusual one in economics settings. Typically
we know the cause and the outcome, the questions are about the magnitude of the causal effects,
and the possible presence of unmeasured confounders. For example we are interested in the effect
of education on earnings, not the effect of earnings on education because we know which comes
first.
    This example shows how the questions studied in this literature are different from those in


                                               25
economics. This is particularly true for the questions on causal discovery ([Uhler, Raskutti,
B¨
 uhlmann, Yu, et al., 2013, Glymour, Scheines, and Spirtes, 2014, Hoyer, Janzing, Mooij, Pe-
ters, and Sch¨
             olkopf, 2009, Lopez-Paz, Nishihara, Chintala, Sch¨
                                                              olkopf, and Bottou, 2017, Mooij,
Peters, Janzing, Zscheischler, and Sch¨
                                      olkopf, 2016]), where the goal is to find causal structure in
data, without starting with a fully specified model. The fact that the questions in this literature
are currently quite different from those studied in economics does not take away from the fact
that ultimately the results in this literature may be very relevant. The aim is to infer from
complex data directly the causal structure governing these data. If succesful, this would be very
relevant for social science questions, but it is currently not there yet.



3     Potential Outcomes and the Rubin Causal Model
What I refer to here as the PO framework is what [Holland, 1986] calls the Rubin Causal Model.
[Rubin, 1974] is a very clear and non-technical introduction, and [Imbens and Rubin, 2015] is
a textbook treatment. It has many antecedents in the econometrics literature, as early as the
1930s and 1940s and it is currently widely used in the empirical economics literature. Here I give
a brief overview. The starting point is a population of units. There are then three components
of the PO approach. First, there is a treatment/cause that can take on different values for each
unit. Each unit in the population is characterized by a set of potential outcomes Y (x), one for
each level of the treatment. In the simplest case with a binary treatment there are two potential
outcomes, Y (0) and Y (1), but in other cases there can be more. Only one of these potential
outcomes can be observed, namely the one corresponding to the treatment received:


      Y obs = Y (X ) =       Y (x)1X =x .
                         x


The others are ex post counterfactuals. The causal effects correspond to comparisons of the
potential outcomes, of which at most one can be observed, with all the others missing. Paul
Holland refers to this as the "fundamental problem of causal inference," ([Holland, 1986], p.
59). This leads to the second component, the presence of multiple units so that we can see
units receiving each of the variour treatments. The third key component is the assignment
mechanism that determines which units receive which treatments. Much of the literature has


                                                 26
concentrated on the case with just a single binary treatment, with the focus on estimating the
average treatment effect of this binary treatment for the entire population or some subpopulation


       = E[Yi (1) - Yi (0)].


In the do-calculus, this would be written as  = E[Y (do (1)f s) - Y (do (0))]. At this stage the
difference between the PO and DAG approach is relatively minor. The disctinction between
P (Y |X = x) and P (Y |do (x)) in the PO framework corresponds to the difference between
P (Y obs |X = x) and P (Y (x)). There is a smaller literature on the case with discrete or continuous
treatments (e.g., [Imbens, 2000]).


3.1    Potential Outcomes and Econometrics
For each unit, and for each value of the treatment, there is a potential outcome that could
be observed if that unit was exposed to that level of the treatment. We cannot see the set of
potential outcomes for a particular unit because each unit can be exposed to at most one level of
the treatment, and only the potential outcome corresponding to that level of the treatment can
ever be observed. With a single unit and a binary treatment, the two potential outcomes could be
labelled Y (0) and Y (1), with the causal effect being a comparison of the two, say, the difference
Y (1) - Y (0). This is a simple, but powerful notion. It has resonated with the econometrics
and empirical economics community partly because it directly connects with the way economists
think about, say, demand and supply functions. The notion of potential outcomes is very clearly
present in the work of Wright, Tinbergen and Haavelmo in the 1930s and 1940s ([Wright, 1928,
Tinbergen, 1930, Haavelmo, 1943]). Tinbergen carefully distinguishes in his notation between
the price as an argument in the supply and demand function, and the realized equilibrium price:

      "Let  be any imaginable price; and call total demand at this price n( ), and total
      supply a( ). Then the actual price p is determined by the equation


            a(p) = n(p),


      so that the actual quantity demanded, or supplied, obeys the condition u = a(p) =
      n(p), where u is this actual quantity.`' ([Tinbergen, 1930], translated in [Hendry and


                                                 27
      Morgan, 1997], p. 233)

Similarly, Haavelmo writes:

      "Assume that if the group of all consumers in the society were repeatedly furnished
      with the total income, or purchasing power, r per year, they would, on the average,
      or `normally', spend a total amount u
                                          ¯ for consumption per year, equal to


            u
            ¯ = r + ,


      where  and  are constants. The amount, u actually spent each year might be
      different from u
                     ¯.`' (italics in original, [Haavelmo, 1943], p. 3)

Some of the clarity of the potential outcomes that is present in [Tinbergen, 1930] and [Haavelmo,
1943] got lost in some of the subsequent econometrics. The Cowles Foundation research that
led to the general simultaneous equations set up modeled only the observed outcomes and lost
the notation for the potential outcomes. The resurgence of the use of potential outcomes in the
program evaluation literature starting with [Heckman, 1990] and [Manski, 1990] was so effective
precisely because of the precursors in the earlier econometric literature. Note also that the
potential outcomes, here the supply and demand function, are taken as primitives, in line with
much of the economic literature.


3.2    The Assignment Mechanism
The second key component of the PO approach is the assignment mechanism. Given the multiple
potential outcomes for a unit, there is only one of these that can be observed, namely the realized
outcome corresponding to the treatment that was received. Critical is how the treatment was
chosen, that is the assignment mechanism, as a function of the pretreatment variables and the
potential outcomes.. In the simplest case, that of a completely randomized experiment, it is
known to the researcher how the treatment was determined: it did not depend on the potential
outcomes, and it has a known distribution. For this case we understand the critical analyses well.
This can be relaxed by assuming only unconfoundedness, where the assignment mechanism is
free of dependence on the potential outcomes, but can depend in arbitrary and unknown ways on
the pretreatment variables. Again there is a huge literature with many well-understood methods.

                                                 28
See [Imbens, 2004, Imbens and Rubin, 2015, Rubin, 2006, Abadie and Cattaneo, 2018] for recent
reviews. The most complicated case is where selection is partly on unobservables, and this case
has received the most attention in the econometrics literature.


3.3     Multiple Units and Interference
In many analyses researchers assume that there is no interference between units, part of what
Rubin calls SUTVA (stable unit treatment value assumption). This greatly simplifies analyses,
and makes it conceptually easier to separate the questions of identification and estimation.
However, the assumption that there is no interference is in many cases implausible. There is
also a large and growing literature analyzing settings where this assumption is explicitly relaxed.
Within the PO framework this is conceptually straightforward. Key papers include [Manski,
1993, Hudgens and Halloran, 2008, Athey, Eckles, and Imbens, 2018a, Aronow, 2012, Aronow
and Samii, 2013, Basse, Feller, and Toulis, 2019]. In many of the settings considered in this
literature it is not so clear what the joint distribution is that can be estimated precisely in
large samples. As a result the separation between identification of the distribution of observed
variables and the identification of causal effects that underlies many of the DAG analyses is
no longer so clear. Recent work using DAGs with interference includes [Ogburn, VanderWeele,
et al., 2014].


3.4     Randomized Experiments and Experimental Design
In the PO literature there is a very special place for randomized experiments. Consider the
simplest such setting, where Nt units out of the population are randomly selected to receive
the treatment and the remaining Nc = N - Nt are assigned to the control group, and where
the no-interference assumption holds. The implication of the experimental design is that the
treatment is independent of the potential outcomes, or


      Wi         Yi (0), Yi (1) .




                                                29
This validates simple estimation strategies. For example, it implies that

                                            1                                 1
     ^ = Y t - Yc ,
                          where Y t =                      Yi ,   and Y c =                      Yi ,
                                            Nt   i:Wi =1
                                                                              Nc       i:Wi =0


is unbiased for the average treatment effect, and that

           1                        2            1                            2
                         Yi - Y t       +                      Yi - Y c            ,
      Nt (Nt - 1) i:W =1                    Nc (Nc - 1) i:W =0
                      i                                           i



is a conservative estimator for the variance.
   The primacy of randomized experiments has long resonated with economists, despite the
limited ability to actually do randomization. Since the late 1990s the development economics
literature has embraced the strength of experiments ([Banerjee and Duflo, 2008]), leading to a
huge empirical literature that has had a major influence on policy. [Angrist and Pischke, 2010]
quote [Haavelmo, 1944] as arguing that we should at least have such an experiment in mind:

     "Over 65 years ago, Haavelmo submitted the following complaint to the readers of
     Econometrica (1944, p. 14): A design of experiments (a prescription of what the
     physicists call a crucial experiment) is an essential appendix to any quantitative
     theory. And we usually have some such experiment in mind when we construct the
     theories, although­unfortunately­most economists do not describe their design of
     experiments explicitly." ([Angrist and Pischke, 2010], p. )

Similarly, the statistics literature is of course full of claims that randomized experiment are the
most credible setting for making causal claims. [Freedman, 2006] for example is unambiguous
about the primacy of RCTs:

     "Experiments offer more reliable evidence on causation than observational studies"
     ([Freedman, 2006], abstract).

   When going beyond randomized experiments, researchers in the PO framework often an-
alyze observational studies by viewing them as emulating particular randomized experiments,
and analyzing them as if there was approximately a randomized experiment. The natural ex-
periment and credibility revolution literatures ([Angrist and Pischke, 2010]), and much of the
subsfsequent empirical literature, are focused on finding settings where assignment is as good

                                                            30
as random at least for a subpopulation, using the various identification strategies including
matching, regression discontinuity designs, synthetic control methods, and instrumental vari-
ables. In contrast, the graphical literature is largely silent about experiments, and does not see
them as special. In fact, Pearl proudly proclaims himself a skeptic of any superiority of RCTs.
When Angus Deaton and Nancy Cartwright write "We argue that any special status for RCTs
is unwarranted." ([Deaton and Cartwright, 2018], page 2), Pearl comments that

      "As a veteran skeptic of the supremacy of the RCT, I welcome D&C's challenge
      wholeheartedly." ([Pearl, 2018a])

   If anything the importance of RCTs has increased in recent years, both in academic circles,
as well as outside in the tech companies: "Together these organizations [Airbnb, Amazon,
Booking.com, Facebook, Google, LinkedIn, Lyft, Microsoft, Netflix, Twitter, Uber, Yandex,
and Stanford University, GWI] tested more than one hundred thousand experiment treatments
last year" ([Gupta, Kohavi, Tang, and Xu, 2019], p.20). This has spurred a new literature on
the design of experiments in complex environments. There are now many computer scientists,
economists and statisticians working on complex experimental designs that take account of
interference ([Hudgens and Halloran, 2008, Athey, Eckles, and Imbens, 2018a, Aronow, 2012,
Aronow and Samii, 2013, Basse, Feller, and Toulis, 2019], and that use multi-armed bandit
methods and other adaptive designs, [Scott, 2010, Dimakopoulou, Athey, and Imbens, 2017,
Dimakopoulou, Zhou, Athey, and Imbens, 2018]. Even in the traditional setting of RCTs for
medical treatments these issues have led to new and innovative designs, e.g., [Isakov, Lo, and
Montazerhodjat, 2019, Das and Lo, 2017].


3.5    Unconfoundedness
One of the most common settings for estimating treatment effects is that under unconfound-
edness. The key assumption is that given a set of pre-treatment variables it is assumed that
assignment to treatment is independent of the potential outcomes.


      Xi       Yi (0), Yi (1)   Wi .


A DAG representing this set up is given in Figure 8(a).


                                               31
                                                                  U




 X                                 Y                    X                                     Y




W1       W2       W3      ...      Wk                     W1      W2      W3       ...     Wk
              (a) Confoundedness                            (b) Violation of Unconfoundedness

               Figure 8: Unconfoundedness with Multiple Observed Confounders

     The DAG here does not include additional links between the pretreatment variable, but the
estimation strategies justified by the DAG as given can allow for arbitrary links between them.
It does rule out the presence of an unobserved confounder, e.g., the variable U in Figure 8(b).
Because it is such a canonical setting, the subject of a huge theoretical literature as well as the
basis for a vast empirical literature, it would appear that the form of the assumptions, graphical
or algebraic, would no longer be a concern in practice because researchers understand what is
the issue here, and can move easily between the DAG and the PO form. However, TBOW
questions whether researchers understand these assumptions:

       "Unfortunately, I have yet to find a single person who can explain what ignorability
       means in a language spoken by those who need to make this assumption or assess
       its plausibility in a given problem." (TBOW, p. 281).

The unconfoundedness assumption implies that the average treatment effect  = E[Yi (1) - Yi (0)]
can be written in terms of the observed variables as


        = E E[Yi |Xi = 1, Wi ] - E[Yi |Xi = 0, Wi ] .


As arguably the most common setting in empirical work for estimating treatment effects, there is
a huge theoretical literature on specific methods for estimating the average effect of the treatment
on the outcome in this case that has closely interacted with the similarly vast empirical literature.

                                                 32
All methods involve adjusting in some fashion for the difference in pretreatment values Wi
between treated and control units. The methods differ in terms of the components of the joint
distribution of the observed variables they focus on. A key paper is [Rosenbaum and Rubin,
1983b], and more generally the papers in [Rubin, 2006]. A key result is that irrespective of the
number of pre-treatment variables, it is sufficient to adjust for differences between treated and
control units in just a scalar function of the pre-treatment variables, the propensity score, defined
as e(x) = pr(Wi = 1|Xi = x). Much of the statistical and econometric literatures have focused on
effective ways of implementing these ideas in statistics and econometrics. Common in practice is
still the simple least squares estimator, but much of the methodological literature has developed
more robust and efficient methods. Some focus on estimating µ(x, w) = E[Yi |Xi = x, Wi = w]
                                     ^(1, Wi ) - µ
followed by averaging the difference µ           ^(0, Wi ) over the sample distribution of the
pre-treatment variables Wi . Another strand of the literature has focused on inverse propensity
score weighting, with the weight for unit i proportional to (e(Wi )Xi (1 - e(Wi ))1-Xi )-1 , where
e(w) = pr(Xi = 1|Wi = x) is the propensity score ([Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983b]). The
current state of the literature is that the most effective and robust methods use estimates of the
conditional outcome means as well as estimates of the propensity score, in what is referred to as
doubly robust methods. See [Robins, Rotnitzky, and Zhao, 1994, Imbens and Wooldridge, 2009,
Abadie and Cattaneo, 2018] for surveys.
   Recently this literature has focused on the case with a relatively large number of pre-
treatment variables (Chernozhukov et al. [2017], Athey et al. [2018b], Van der Laan and Rose
[2011], Shi et al. [2019]). Overlap issues in covariate distributions, absent in all the the DAG
discussions, become prominent among practical problems ([Crump, Hotz, Imbens, and Mitnik,
2009, D'Amour, Ding, Feller, Lei, and Sekhon, 2017]). In this setting there has been much
interaction with the machine learning literature, focusing on regularization methods that are
effective given the particular causal estimand, rather than effective for prediction purposes. In
this setting simply assuming that one knows or can consistently estimate the joint distribution
of all variables in the model, which is the basis of the discussion in TBOE and [Pearl, 2000],
is not helpful, and the corresponding "statistical vs. causal dichotomy" ([Pearl, 2000], p. 348)
becomes blurred.




                                                 33
3.6    Sensitivity Analyses
The PO framework has been a natural setting for considering violations of the assumptions
required for point identification. For example, starting with an unconfoundedness setting, one
may wish to consider the presence of an unobserved confounder that has some limited effect on
the treatment assignment as well as on the outcome, and assess the sensitivity of the results to
the presence of such confounders ([Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983a, Imbens, 2003]). More recent
work has taken these sensitivity analyses further, e.g., [Andrews, Gentzkow, and Shapiro, 2017,
Andrews and Oster, 2019].



4     Graphical Models, Potential Outcomes and Empirical
      Practice in Economics
Since its inception in the late 1980s and early 1990s the DAG approach to causality has generated
much interest in among others, computer science, epidemiology, and parts of social science (e.g.,
in sociology, [Morgan and Winship, 2014]). In epidemiology in particular it has connected
well with related work on structural equations models ([Greenland, Pearl, Robins, et al., 1999,
Robins, 1997]). It has not, however, made major inroads into the theoretical econometric or
empirical economic literatures, and is absent from most textbooks (e.g., [Wooldridge, 2001]
and MHE). Although causal inference broadly defined has a long and prominent tradition in
econometrics, and since the 1990s there has been much activity in this area, this work has
relied primarily on the PO framework. There are exceptions to this, and there are now some
discussions of DAGs in the econometric literature (e.g., the discussion in [Cunningham, 2018]),
but these remain the exception. Instead much of the empirical work in economics is closer to
the PO approach.
    In this part of this essay I will discuss some of the reasons for this. I think the case for
the DAGs is the strongest in terms of exposition. The DAGs are often clear and accessible
ways to expressing visually some, though not necessarily all, of the key assumptions. It may
provide the reader, even more than the researcher, with an easy way to interpret and assess
the overall model. I am less convinced that the formal identification results are easier to derive
in the DAG framework for the type of problems commonly studied in economics. I see three


                                               34
reasons for that. First, the DAGs have difficulty coding shape restrictions such as monotonicity
and identification results for subpopulations. Second, the advantages of the formal methods for
deriving identification results with DAGs are most pronounced in complex models with many
variables that are not particularly popular in empirical economics. Third, the PO approach hs
connected well with estimation and inference issues. Although the PO approach has largely
focused on the problem of estimating average effects of binary treatments, it has been able to
make much progress there, not just in terms of identification, but als on problems regarding
study design, estimation and inference. On this issue that the PO or Rubin-Causal-Model
framework is much more closely tied to statistics and practical issues in inference, Steve Powell
writes in his review of TBOW that

      "Donald Rubin offers an alternative framework [the PO framework, GWI], also not
      shy of dealing with causality, which is much more fully developed for the needs and
      concerns of social scientists in general and evaluators in particular." ([Powell, 2018],
      p. 53)

   I will focus in this section on six specific issues. First, I will discuss the role of randomized
experiments and the importance of manipulability. Second, I will discuss instrumental variables,
the importance of shape restrictions in economics. Third, I will discuss the role of simultaneity
in economics. Fourth, I discuss unconfoundedness, M-bias, and the choice of the set of condi-
tioning variables. Fifth, I will discuss the difficulty with counterfactuals. Finally, I will discuss
identification strategies in the context of the returns to education.


4.1    Non-manipulable Causes or Attributes, Hypothetical Experi-
       ments, and the Role of the Assignment Mechanism
The PO framework starts by defining the potential outcomes with reference to a manipulation
(e.g., [Imbens and Rubin, 2015], p. 4). In doing so it makes a distinction between attributes
or pre-treatment variables which are fixed for the units in the population, and causes, which
are potentially manipulable. This is related to the connection between causal statements and
randomized experiments. The causes are tied to at least hypothetical experiments. This may
appear to be a disadvantage as it leads to difficulties in the PO framework when making causal
statements about such attributes as race or gender. In the modern causal literature in economics

                                                 35
researchers have often acknowledged this difficulty and focused on causal effects tied to manipu-
lable aspects of attributes. A seminal example is [Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004] who study
the effect of manipulation of the perception of race by changing names from Caucasian sounding
to African-American sounding ones, rather than the effect of race itself. This view concerning
the importance of manipulability is shared in part of the statistics literature, where David Cox
writes,

      "In this discussion, only those variables which in the context in question can con-
      ceptually be manipulated are eligible to represent causes, i.e. it must make sense,
      always in the context in question, that for any individual the causal variable might
      have been different from the value actually taken. Thus in most situations gender
      is not a causal variable but rather an intrinsic property of the individual." ([Cox,
      1992], p. 296).

The advantage of being explicit about which variables are causal and which are not is that on
only needs to consider the determinants (parents in the DAG terminology) of the causes, and
not those of the attributes.
   In contrast, Pearl sees no difficulty in defining causal effects for non-manipulable attributes
in a DAG using the do-calculus:

      "Another misguided doctrine denies causal character to nonmanipulable variables."
      ([Pearl, 2015] p. 172).

This is not simply a matter of impicitly assuming that the effect of such a variable is invariant to
the method in which is it manipulated, and that therefore the articulation of the manipulation
is immaterial. [Pearl, 2018b] admits that the choice of manipulation may in fact matter, but
that this is simply not relevant for the definition of the do-operator, and that the causal effect is
well-defined irrespective of this. [Pearl, 2018b] discusses the third question from Section 2.1, the
effect of obesity, and admits that the effect of changing obesity through exercise or diet may be
very different, but that nevertheless the causal effect of obesity on mortality, corresponding to a
virtual intervention, very much in the spirit of a strong version of the ceteris paribus condition,
is well defined:

      "While it is true that the probability of death will generally depend on whether we
      manipulate obesity through diet versus, say, exercise, [...] do (obesity = x) describes

                                                 36
     a virtual intervention, by which nature sets obesity to x, independent of diet or
     exercise, while keeping every thing else intact, especially the processes that respond
     to X ." ([Pearl, 2018b], p. 3) .

Although other researchers working on graphical models have taken a different view on the
manipulability issues (e.g.,[Richardson and Robins, 2013, Hern´
                                                              an, Hsu, and Healy, 2018]), Pearl
doubles down on the position that tying causal effects to manipulations is not necessary in his
most recent work:

     "We end with the conclusion that researchers need not distinguish manipulable from
     non-manipulable variables; both types are equally eligible to receive the do (x) oper-
     ator" ([Pearl, 2019], abstract).

I find the position that the manipulation is irrelevant unsatisfactory, and find the insistence
in the PO approach on a theoretical or practical manipulation helpful. I am not sure what is
meant by do (obesity = x) if the effect of changing obesity depends on the mechanism (say, diet,
surgery, or exercise), and the mechanism is not specified in the operator. It is also not clear
to me why we would care about the value of do (obesity = x) if the effect is not tied to an
intervention we can envision. The insistence on manipulability in the PO framework resonates
well in economics where policy relevance is a key goal (e.g., [Manski, 2013]). We are interested
in policies that change the weight for currently obese people (e.g., encouraging exercise, dietary
changes, or surgery), or that discourage currently non-obese people who are at risk of becoming
obese from doing so (exercise, dietary changes, or other life-style changes). What is relevant
for policy makers is the causal effect of such policies, not the effect of a virtual intervention
that makes currently obese people suddenly like non-obese people. In my original 1995 PhD
course with Don Rubin on causal inference we had a similar discussion about the "effect of
child poverty." From our perspective that question was ill-posed, and a better-posed question
would be about the effect of a particular intervention that would make currently poor families
better off. The discusion in that class led to a study of the effect of one such intervention,
namely winning the lottery on subsequent outcomes (which ultimately led to [Imbens, Rubin,
and Sacerdote, 2001]) as a way of illustrating the causal effect of a particular manipulation.
   Without a specific manipulation in mind, it is also difficult to assess a particular identification
strategy. It is only in the context of a particular treatment that it becomes clear whether diet is


                                                 37
a confounder or a mediator. The flip side of that is that if the treatment is a virtual intervention,
it becomes difficult to assess whether there are unobserved confounders.
       As a third example to clarify the benefits from being explicit about the nature of the ma-
nipulation, consider the statement: "she did not get the position because she is a woman." In
the PO approach such a statement is not clear without reference to some intervention. One
such intervention could involve hiding the fact that the job candidate is a woman at the time
of the interview from the individuals who make the hiring decisions. The recognition of the
importance of being precise about the intervention is evident in [Goldin and Rouse, 2000] who
study the effect of blind auditions for orchestras.


4.2       Instrumental Variables, Compliers, and the Problem of Repre-
          senting Substantive Knowledge
In this section I discuss instrumental variables and related methods from a PO and DAG per-
spective. I want to make two main points. First, some of the key assumptions in instrumental
variables settings are not naturally captured in DAGs, whereas they are easily articulated in the
PO framework. This extends to other shape restrictions that play an important role in economic
theory. Second, one of the modern results in instrumental variables settings, the identification
of the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE, Imbens and Angrist [1994], Angrist et al. [1996])
is not easily derived in a DAG approach.2
       Instrumental variables have played an important role in econometrics since the 1920s. Whereas
causal inference in statistics started with randomized experiments, econometricians were more
interested in settings where the assignment mechanism reflected choice rather than chance ([Im-
bens, 2014]). They continue to be important topics for current research in various nonparametric
settings, e.g., [Horowitz, 2011, Imbens and Newey, 2009]. Here I focus on the simplest case with
a single binary instrument. Let me start by recalling the DAG for a simple instrumental variables
setting, in Figure 9(a). Endogeneity is captured by the links between the unobserved confounder
U and the treatment X and the outcome Y . In economics the endogeneity often arises from
   2
     I should also note that the discussions of instrumental variables in the PO framework, and the subsequent
Principle Stratification (PS) literature (Frangakis and Rubin [2002], Mealli and Mattei [2012]) shows that the
claim in TBOW that "the major assumption that potential outcome practitioners are invariably required to make
is called `ignorability.' " (TBOW, p. 281) is clearly incorrect. In the IV and PS settings a critical assumption is
the exclusion restriction, similar to the absence of an arrow in a DAG, rather than an ignorability assumption.



                                                        38
                                                     Z         X           Y
Z           X         Y


                                                                      U
                 U                                   (b) Violation of Exclusion Restriction in In-
         (a) Instrumental Variables                  strumental Variables Setting


                                                               U2



Z           X         Y                              Z         X           Y



       U2        U1                                                   U1
(c) Violation of Exogeniety Assumption in In-        (d) Violation of Exogeniety Assumption in In-
strumental Variables Setting                         strumental Variables Setting




                               Figure 9: Instrumental Variables




                                                39
agents actively making choices regarding the causal variable on the basis of anticipated effects of
those choices ([Athey and Stern, 1998, Imbens, 2014]). The first of the two key assumptions is
that there are no direct effect of the instrument Z on the outcome Y . If such a direct effect were
present the DAG would look like Figure 9(b). The second key assumption is that there is no
unmeasured confounder that affects the instrument and either the endogenous variable X or the
outcome Y . The DAGs in Figures 9(c) and 9(d) have such unmeasured confounders. In the PO
approach in Angrist et al. [1996] the starting point is the postulation of the potential outcomes
Yi (z, x), indexed by both the treatment and the instrument, and the potential treatment status
Xi (z ), indexed by the instrument. The first assumption is the exclusion restriction that the
potential outcomes do not vary with the instrument, Yi (z, x) = Yi (z , x) for all z, z , and the sec-
ond is an unconfoundedness assumption, Zi  (Yi (0, 0), Yi (0, 1), Yi (1, 0), Yi (1, 1), Xi (0), Xi (1)).
Again one may well find the graphical representation of these assumptions more attractive or
accessible than the algebraic representation in the PO framework, or the other way around.
   A third key assumption in the instrumental variables setting is the monotonicity condition
that the instrument has a monotone effect on the treatment, Xi (1)  Xi (0), also referred to
as the no-defiance assumption. This captures the notion that the instrument is an incentive,
and that although agents need not respond to such incentives (Xi (1) may be equal to Xi (0)
for some individuals), they do not respond perversely to them (there are no individuals with
Xi (1) < Xi (0), the so-called defiers). In economics much information comes in the form of
such monotonicity, or more generally, shape restrictions. Utility functions are typically at least
weakly increasing in their arguments (e.g., quantities of products, leisure) over the relevant
ranges, as well as concave. Combined with budget constraints this leads to demand functions
being decreasing in prices. By the same argument, instruments that can be interpreted as
changing incentives lead to responses that are monotone in these instruments. Because the
compliance types are defined explicitly in terms of potential outcomes, this condition is easy
to articular in the PO framework. DAGs do not naturally represent such conditions, as was
pointed out in [Imbens and Rubin, 1995] in a comment on [Pearl, 1995]. More than twenty
years later this has not been addressed, although that may change:

      "Judging from my discussions with @eliasbareinboim and @analisereal, I think that
      incorporating shape restrictions such as monotonicity into the framework, to see
      how it creates opportunities for identification, will be high on the agenda of com-


                                                  40
     puter scientists in the coming years." (April 4th, 2019, Twitter, Paul H´
                                                                             unermund,
     @PHuenermund)

There are already some attemps to include these assumptions in the DAGs, e.g., [Steiner, Kim,
Hall, and Su, 2017], but I do not find these DAGs particularly illuminating.
   Given the assumptions, the identification results are also easier to derive in the PO frame-
work. The early results in the instrumental variables literature with heterogenous treatment
effects established that the average effect of the treatment was not identified in general (Heck-
man [1990]). In addition bounds were derived ([Robins, 1986, Manski, 1990, Balke and Pearl,
1997]. Such results follow easily in both the DAG and PO approaches. However, the subsequent
identification result for the average effect for compliers, the Local Average Treatment Effect
(LATE),


      late = E[Yi (1) - Yi (0)|Xi (0) = 0, Xi (1) = 1],


fs is more difficult to derive using a graphical approach. In fact, setting the problem up in
the PO framework led ([Imbens and Angrist, 1994, Angrist et al., 1996]) to solve it. The PO
framework is a natural one here because the very definition of the LATE estimand involves the
potential outcomes Xi (0) and Xi (1) that define compliance status. TBOW acknowledges the
difficulty the DAG approach has in this setting:

     "To sum up, instrumental variables are an important tool in that they help us
     uncover causal information that goes beyond the do-calculus. [...] if we can justify an
     assumption like monotonicity ... on scientific grounds, then a more special-purpose
     tool like instrumental variables is worth considering." (TBOW, p.257)

This reflects more general difficulties in the DAG framework to capture individual level hetero-
geneity ([Hartman, Grieve, Ramsahai, and Sekhon, 2015, Wager and Athey, 2017]).
   TBOW also discusses instrumental variables in the context of one of the classic examples,
non-compliance in a randomized experiment (e.g., Imbens and Rubin [1997]). Here the instru-
ment is the random assignment to the cholesterol drug or a placebo, the treatment of interest
or endogenous variable is the receipt of the cholesterol drug, and the outcome is the subsequent
cholesterol level. In this case the instrument is unconfounded by design: the randomization
rules out the presence of the unmeasured confounders in Figures 9(c) and 9(d). However, the

                                                  41
      y                                                         f (x)

                                    E (y |x)


                                x                                                          x
                   c                                                          c
          (a) Conditional Expectation                                   (b) Density

                              Figure 10: Regression Discontinuity


exclusion restriction that rules out the direct effect in Figure 9(b) is still controversial. Although
TBOW dismisses concerns with the exclusion restriction in this setting by writing that "Com-
mon sense suggests that there is no way that receiving a particular random number (Z ) would
affect cholesterol (Y )" (TBOW, p. 253), there may in fact well be violations of the exclusion
restriction. For example, side-effects of the actual drug could lead the patients to non-comply,
but seek other treatments. Simply leaving out an arrow because of "common sense" may not
be sufficient to make identifying assumptions. The careful discussion of such possible violations
of the exclusion restriction from a PO perspective is a hallmark of modern econometric prac-
tice, through sensitivity analyses (e.g., Angrist et al. [1996]) and other supplementary analyses
(Athey and Imbens [2017], Ding et al. [2017]). For example, in the seminal Angrist [1990] in-
strumenal variables application it is helpful to consider separately the exclusion restriction (the
absence of a direct effect of the instrument, the draft lottery number, on the outcome, earnings)
for never-takers and always-takers, because it may be much more plausible for some groups than
for others. It underlines how rare it is in practice to have settings where the absence of arrows
is immediately credible.
   A closely related setting where DAGs have also not added much insight is in regression dis-
continuity designs (RDDs) (Imbens and Lemieux [2008], Calonico et al. [2014], Lee and Lemieux
[2010]). In the sharp RDD the assignment rule for the binary treatment X is a deterministic
function of a running pretreatment variable W :


      X (w) = 1wc ,


for some fixed threshold c. The average effect at the threshold is identified in that case under
smoothness conditions on the expected values or the distribution of the potential outcomes


                                                 42
conditional on the running variable. A long time after RD designs were first introduced in
[Thistlewaite and Campbell, 1960], they have become a very popular identification strategy
in economics with many credible applications. See [Cook, 2008] for a historical perspective.
There are many settings where it is attractive for administrators to set fixed assignment rules
that justify such identification strategies, although it does not merit any discussion in TBOW.
Although DAGs have been proposed for this setting, [Steiner, Kim, Hall, and Su, 2017], I do not
think they clarify the identification results, where the critical assumptions include a discontinuity
in one conditional expectation, and smoothness of other conditional expectations. Nor do the
DAGs illuminate any of the issues that have occupied the methodological literature in this area.
Such issues include violations of the smoothness assumption because of manipulation of the
running variable, which motivated the McCrary test (McCrary [2008]). Other concerns mainly
relate to estimation issues stemming from the problem of estimating a regression function at a
single point (Imbens and Kalyanaraman [2012], Calonico et al. [2014], Armstrong and Koles´
                                                                                         ar
[2018], Imbens and Wager [2018]). Although DAGs are rarely seen in regression discontinuity
analyses, it is not because figures are not viewed as useful there. Figure 10(a) and 10(b) are
typical of the figures that are routinely presented in regression discontinuity analyses, and more
than any DAG for this case, it clarifies what is going on here. There is a running variable X ,
and at a particular threshold c the conditional mean of the outcome changes discontinuously.
This jump is interpreted as the causal effect of the change in the participation rate. Second,
there is a concern that the running variable may have been manipulated. Such violations would
show up in a discontinuity in the density of the running variable at the threshold as in 10(b).


4.3    Simultaneity
DAGs are by their very definition not cyclical, and as such do not naturally capture assumptions
about equilibrium behavior, although there is recent work going in that direction ([Forr´
                                                                                        e and
Mooij, 2019]). Such equilbrium assumptions are of course central to economics. Identification
and estimation of supply and demand functions in competitive markets is at the core of the
econometrics, and has been since the early days in econometrics in the 1930s and 1940s (e.g.,
[Tinbergen, 1930, Haavelmo, 1943]). In a PO framework equilibrium notions are accomodated




                                                 43
                                                                       Demand




                     Yield per Acre                 Supply                Price

                        Figure 11: Based on Figure 7.10 in TBOW, p. 251.


very naturally. Let the demand function and supply function in market t be

       d
      qt (p, xd ),           s
                        and qt (p, xs ).


Here xd and xs are exogenous demand and supply shifters, with the demand shifters only entering
the demand function, and the supply shifters only entering the supply function. [Haavelmo, 1943]
and [Tinbergen, 1930] are very clear that these potential outcome functions are well defined at
all values of the prices and shifters, not just the realized ones. Given their values in market t,
xd      s
 t and xt respectively, the equilibrium price that we observe in market t is the value of p that

solves


      pt solves q d (p, xd      s      s
                         t ) = qt (p, xt ),



and the equilibrium quantity is qt = q d (pt , xd      s        s
                                                t ) = qt (pt , xt ).

    TBOW touches on the simultaneous equations case briefly, but dismisses any real concerns
with simultaneity:

      "Figure 7.10 [Figure 11 here, GWI] shows a somewhat simplified version of Wright's
      diagram. Unlike most diagrams in this book, this one has `two-way' arrows, but I
      would ask the reader not to lose too much sleep over it. With some mathematical
      trickery we could equally well replace the DemandPriceSupply chain with a
      single arrow DemandSupply, and the figure would then look like Figure 7.9 (though
      it would be less acceptable to economists)." (TBOW, p. 250-251).

Here Pearl's lack of engagement with the data shows. It is not clear what is meant by the
variables "Supply" and "Demand" that may affect each other, and in particular how these

                                                      44
                                                                            pe

             demand                                               q d (·)          q s (·)
         q               p                             xd                                    xs


              supply                                                        qe
xd                              xs
          (a) Demand and Supply I                               (b) Demand and Supply II

                              Figure 12: Simultaneous Equations


variables relate to the variables we typically think of observing in such settings, namely prices,
quantities, and possibly some exogenous demand and supply shifters (and why, there is an
asymmetry between Suppy and Demand, where Demand has an arrow going into Price, but
Supply has both an arrow going into Price and an arrow coming from Price). In 1998 Pearl
invited me to present the supply and demand analysis in [Angrist, Graddy, and Imbens, 2000]
to his group at UCLA. Unfortunately my presentation seems not to have succeeded in giving the
audience a full understanding of the way economists think about supply and demand, although
it seems to have made Pearl aware that his diagram 7.10 (Figure 11) may not be fully capturing
the way economists do think about these problems.
     In fact it is not clear to me how one would capture supply and demand models in a DAG.
In Figures 12(a) and 12(b) there are two attempts. The first, Figure 12(a), captures the si-
multaneity by having arrows go from prices to quanties and back. This does not, in my view,
really capture what is going on. It is not that there is an effect of prices on quantities that cor-
responds to the demand function and an effect from quantities to prices that captures supply.
Rather, as in Figure 12(b), the demand and supply function are the primitives. Together they
determine both equilibrium prices and quantities. The identification comes from the presence of
observed demand and supply shifters. However, in this figure the nodes dd (·) and q s (·) are not
variables, but functions, so it is not clear that the graphical machinery such as the do-calculus
can illuminate the identification issues.




                                                45
4.4    Unconfoundedness, The Choice of Conditioning Variables and
       M-Bias
The unconfoundedness setting where the researcher adjusts for some variables in order to esti-
mate the causal effect of a binary treatment on some outcome is probably the most important
one in practice in the modern CI literature. There is much theoretical statistical theory devel-
oped for this case, and it underlies much empirical work in economics. In the PO literature the
starting point is the assumption that conditional on the observed confounders Wi the cause Xi
is independent of the potential outcomes Yi (0) and Yi (1), or in the standard notation,


      Xi        Yi (0), Yi (1)   Wi .                                                       (4.1)


A classic example is the Lalonde study (LaLonde [1986]), which has been re-analyzed many
times (e.g., Heckman and Hotz [1989], Dehejia and Wahba [1999], Abadie and Imbens [2011]),
and which currently is a standard data set on which to try out new methods (see Athey, Imbens,
Metzger and Munro 2019 for a discussion regarding simulation studies in this context). In this
study the treatment of interest is a labor market training program, the outcome is earnings,
and the eight pre-treatment variables include mesaures of educational achievement, ethnicity,
marital status, age, and prior measures of annual earnings. One DAG corresponding to this is
Figure 8(a). We could also include any number of arrows between the pre-treatment variable
without changing the identification strategy based on adjusting for the full set of pre-treatment
variables.
   One may wish to argue whether the DAG here expresses the content of the critical assumption
more clearly than the conditional independence statement in (4.1). [Pearl, 2012] takes a strong
view on this:

      "The weakness of this [the potential outcome, GWI] approach surfaces in the prob-
      lem formulation phase where, deprived of diagrams and structural equations, re-
      searchers are forced to express the (inescapable) assumption set A in a language
      totally removed from scientific knowledge, for example, in the form of conditional
      independencies among counterfactual variables" ([Pearl, 2012] p. 16-17).

I think that statement misses the point. This setting, where the critical assumption is ignor-
ability or unconfoundedness, is so common and well studied, that merely referring to its label

                                               46
                        attitudes towards                                     attitudes towards
attitude towards        safety and health             attitude towards        safety and health
  social norms          related measures                social norms          related measures




                 seat belt                                             seat belt
                    use                                                   use


     smoking                 lung cancer                  smoking                  lung cancer
     (a) M-Bias Assumption Satisfied                     (b) Violation of M-Bias Assumption

                                      Figure 13: M-Bias


is probably sufficient for researchers to understand what is being assumed. Adding a DAG,
or for that matter adding a proof that the average causal effect is identified in that setting, is
superfluous because researchers are familiar with the setting and its implications.
   One question that needs to be answered prior to the choice of estimation methods, is the
choice of variables Wi to condition on. In the PO literature it is typically taken as given
which variables Wi need to be conditioned on. Often it is mentioned that a requirement is
that these are pre-treatment variables, that is, variables that are not affected themselves by
the treatment because they assume their value prior to the determination of the treatment.
Rosenbaum [1984] warns about the dangers of adjusting for variables that are not proper pre-
treatment variables. Although one can generate examples where it would be valid to do so, there
do not appear to be many realistic applications where adjusting for post-treatment variables
is helpful. However, if the variables under consideration are viewed as proper pre-treatment
variables the recommendation in the PO literature is typically to include all of them, possibly
subject to concerns about efficiency. There are some exceptions to this. In settings where some
of the pre-treatment variables are instruments, researchers typically follow different strategies.
In practice I have not seen much evidence of confusion in such cases.
   The DAG literature is more concerned with the systematic choice of conditioning variables,
even in settings where all of these are proper pre-treatment variables. A key example used in
TBOW and Pearl [2009], exhibits what is called M-bias. Consider Figure 13(a). Using the


                                               47
example in TBOW, the interest is in the causal effect of smoking on lung cancer. All three of
the remaining variables are proper pre-treatment variables. Suppose that only seat belt use is
observed, with the other two pre-treatment variables, attitudes towards social norms and safety
and health measures unobserved. Note that in general seat belt use will be correlated with both
smoking and lung cancer in the DAG in Figure 13(a because of the back-door paths from seat
belt use to smoking and lung cancer. There is only one backdoor path from smoking to lung
cancer, namely (smoking  social norms  seat belt  safety/health  lung cancer). Because
seat belt usage is a collider on this path there is no need to condition on any variable, and without
any conditioning we can identify the causal effect of smoking on lung cancer because P (lung
cancer|do (smoking)) = P (lung cancer|smoking). However, again because seat belt usage is a
collider on this backdoor path, conditioning on pre-treatment variable seat belt usage, would
introduce bias. (We would have no bias if we conditioned on the other two pre-treatment
variables, social norms and safety/healt attitudes, but because these are not observed this is
not feasible.) This all follows directly from the back-door criterion, as pointed out in TBOW.
In TBOW and Pearl [2009] this example comes up repeatedly as a warning against the common
practice in the PO literature to adjust for any pre-treatment variables that are correlated with
the treatment and the outcome.
   This is an interesting case. There is no doubt that if we are confident that this is, at least
approximately, the appropriate DAG, we should not condition on seat belt use. However, it is
not clear how relevant this case is for practice. The main example that is given in TBOW and
Pearl [2009] is motivated by an analysis carried out by Donald Rubin. Let us consider the DAG
in Figure 13(a) for a moment. First of all, seatbelt usage may in fact not be a pre-treatment
variable because it may reflect behavior after smoking was started. I will put that issue aside for
the moment. It seems reasonable to assume there is no direct causal effect of seatbelts on either
smoking or lung cancer, so I am comfortable with no arrows from seat belt use to either smoking
or lung cancer. However, the implicit assumption that there is no effect of attitudes towards
safety and health-related measures on smoking seems very implausible. In all the discussions
of this example, Pearl never discusses whether this assumption is plausible. In order to use
these methods, one needs to carefully consider every absent link, and in a setting with as many
variables as there are in Figure 13(b) that is a daunting task. Now suppose we allow for one
such direct effect, leading to the DAG in Figure 13(b). Now the causal effect of smoking on lung
cancer is not identified. Conditioning on seat belt use introduces a new bias, but not adjusting

                                                 48
for differences in seat belt use between smokers and non-smokers leaves a bias. What to do?
Here seat belt use is essentially a proxy for the unobserved attitude variable, and whether to
use it is a difficult question that does not have a single right anwer. The researcher has to make
a choice which of the two evils is the lesser one, or possibly do a sensivity analysis. I am not
sure whether adjusting for seat belt usage between smokers and non-smokers, as Rubin did, is
a good thing or not, but certainly I would not rule out doing this. The recent analysis in [Ding
and Miratrix, 2015] suggests that, both in this specific example, and more generally when there
is concern with confounding as well as M-bias, adjusting may still be superior. Beyond that, I
want to point out that that, as in the front-door criterion setting, even in the examples TBOW
chooses to discuss it is not at all clear that the method that TBOW favors actually works. This
is particularly important because TBOW introduces this example after admitting that there
was concern that such a DAG might be very implausible:

     "When I started showing this diagram to statisticians in the 1990s, some of them
     laughed it off and said that such a diagram was extremely unlikely to occur in
     practice. I disagree!" (TBOW, p. 161)

   Another way to make the point that this may be an unusual setting in practice, note that if
the DAG in Figure 13(a) is correct, it means that we can identify the causal effect of smoking
on lung cancer, but we cannot identify the effect for those who wear seat belts, because there
is a hidden confounder there, nor can we identify the effect for those not wearing seat belts,
because there is a hidden confounder there. Mixing those who wear seat belts and those who do
not, exactly cancels the two biases and leaves us with a valid casusal effect. This does appear
an "extremely unlikely" setting.
   To conclude this discussion, let us return to the Lalonde study. The M-bias argument would
suggest that if we carefully model the causal relationships between all eight of the pre-treatment
variables, we might come up with a structure that could suggest that we should not adjust
for differences in some of these pre-treatment variables. It appears difficult to me to find a
credible story that would lead to such a conclusion. In the end a DAG like Figure 8(a), possibly
augmented with some arrows between the pre-treatment variables would be just as plausible as
any such alternative.




                                               49
                                               Experience




                                   Education           Salary




                       Figure 14: Based on Figure 8.3, TBOW, p. 276


4.5    Counterfactuals
Counterfactuals occupy the third and highest rung of the ladder of causality in TBOW. The
identification of counterfactuals is a very tricky issue, and I want to clarify some of the issues
that are raised in TBOW and compare the answers to what a PO-based approach might say. On
page 273 TBOW presents an example of such a question: Alice has a high school degree, 6 years
of experience, and her earnings are $81K. TBOW asks: "What would Alice's salary be if she had
a college degree?" (TBOW, p. 273). This is a difficult question. It comes up in other settings
as well where it is generally fraught with complications. Suppose someone took a drug, and
they died. Would they not have died had they not taken the drug? A randomized experiment
can only identify the fraction of survivors under both taking the drug and not taking the drug,
within subpopulations defined in terms of pre-treatment characteristics. Such an experiment
cannot identify which individuals would have survived under the alternative treatment, without
strong additional assumptions.
   So what do the authors do here? To answer the question about Alice's salary had she had
a college degree, given that in fact she had a high school degree, TBOW presents the DAG in
Figure 14. The authors then go further, and set up a Structural Causal Model, where they specify
salary (Y ) as a function of education (X ) and experience (W ) and an unobserved component,
and similarly for experience as a function of education and an unobserved component as


      Y = fY (X, W, UY ),      and W = fW (X, UX ).




                                               50
They then simplify things "assuming linear functions throughout" (TBOW, p. 277):


       Y = 0 + 1 X + 2 W + UY ,             W = 0 + 1 X + UW .


This allows them to first estimate the coefficients (0 , 1 , 0 , 1 , 2 ) and then, importantly, the
unobserved components UY and UW for Alice as


       UY,Alice = YAlice - 0 - 1 XAlice - 2 WAlice ,


       UW,Alice = XAlice - 0 - 1 XAlice .

Given these coefficients and residuals TBOW then estimates Alice's salary given a college degree
(Xcollege ) as

       ^Alice = 0 + 1 Xcollege + 2 0 + 1 Xcollege + UW,Alice + UY,Alice .
       Y


    From a PO perspective a major question concerns the way the residuals UY,Alice and UW,Alice
are used. Starting with potential outcomes, WAlice (highschool) and WAlice (college), the residuals
would be also be indexed by the treatment:


       UW,Alice (highschool) = WAlice (highschool) - 0 - 1 highschool,


and


       UW,Alice (college) = WAlice (college) - 0 - 1 college.


There would be a reluctance to rely on assumptions about the association between the residuals
UW,Alice (highschool) and UW,Alice (college) from potential outcomes after conditioning on other
variables, whereas the discussion in TBOW implicitly assumes the two are equal. These issues
involving unit-level heterogeneity come up in many settings, e.g, [Sekhon and Shem-Tov, 2017].
Putting aside for a moment the other variables, and assume we actually have a randomized
experiment. We would not be confident that the rank of YAlice (highschool) in the distribution of
high-school salaries would be the same as the rank of YAlice (college) in the distribution of college


                                                  51
salaries (corresponding in the linear case to equality of the residuals UW,Alice (highschool) and
UW,Alice (college)). There is obviously many reasons why an individual who would be relatively
productive given a college degree (e.g., someone with strong cognitive abilities), would not
necessarily be relatively productive with only a high-school degree. The jobs a person would
end up with given a college degree would be different from the one they would have with a high-
school degree, with value placed on different sets of skills. This type of comparative advantage
argument is common in economics, and it is a critical part of the Roy model of occupational
choice ([Roy, 1951]). TBOWs implicit assumption of a single (scalar) unobserved component
is quite distinct from the assumption of linearity of the conditional expectations that TBOW
bundles it with, but it is crucial to the ability to predict Alice's salary given a college degree.
   This is not to say that this type of assumption is never made in economics. The point is
that it is typically made explicitly, with full recognition of the identifying power it has (e.g.,
the discussion of the rank correlation assumption in [Chernozhukov and Hansen, 2005]), rather
than as part of a set of functional form assumptions. It has also received much attention in
the discussion on identifying distributions of treatment effects, as opposed to differences in the
distribution of potential outcomes (see the discussion in [Manski, 1996, Deaton, 2010, Imbens,
2010]). The way in which TBOW exploits this assumption without being explicit about it
undercuts the arguments advanced in other parts of the book about the transparency of the
DAG-based assumptions.
   A second issue is that TBOW is unhappy with the formulation of the critical assumptions
here in terms of the potential outcomes:

      "To determine if ED [education] is ignorable [...] we are supposed to judge whether
      employees who would have one potential salary, say S1 = s [that is, Y (highschool) =
      s], are just as likely to have one level of education as the employees who would have
      a different potential salary, say S1 = s [that is, Y (highschool) = s ]. If you think
      this sounds circular, I can only agree with you! ... It is quite a cognitive nightmare."
      (TBOW, p. 282).

These assumptions may be challenging, but of course the formulation agrees closely with stan-
dard economic theory. Since [Roy, 1951] and [Mincer, 1974] economists model individuals choos-
ing whether to go to college partly by comparing their utility (e.g., earnings) if they were to go
to college with the utility if they were not to go to college, that is, by comparing their potential

                                                 52
outcomes Y (highschool) and Y (college), or expecations thereof. It is precisely the important
role the potential outcomes play in the formulation of the choice models (e.g., the random utility
choice models in [McFadden et al., 1973] and [Manski, 1977]) that makes the PO framework a
natural one in economics.


4.6    An Example: Identifying the Returns to Education
Let me finally discuss an empirical setting where economists have used different identification
strategies for the same problem and compare DAGs and econometric identification strategies.
The focus is on estimating the returns to education, or, more specifically, the effect of years of
education on the logarithm of earnings. Since [Mincer, 1974] economists have focused on the
effect on the logarithm of earnings in order to interpret the effect as a return, similar to the
return on financial investments.
   The basic data consists of observations on years of education and the logarithm of earnings.
Figure 15 (a) shows the simplest strategy in a DAG format, directly comparing people with
different levels of education. Typically this would be done by linear regression of log earnings on
years of education, but in a more flexible approach one could simply compare average values for
log earnings by education levels. The concern is that this is too simple a model, and that there
may be an unmeasured confounder. In substantive discussions the unmeasured confounder is
typically thought of as unmeasured ability, as in Figure 15(b). Omitted variable bias arguments
suggest that failure to adjust for differences in ability would lead to an upward bias in the
estimated returns to education, because it is likely that ability is positively correlated with
levels of education and with the potential outcomes. See [Griliches, 1977, Card, 1999, 2001] for
general discussions.
   In response to these concerns econometricians have used a variety of approaches. I will briefly
discuss some of them and attempt to illustrate them in DAGs. One approach is to attempt to
measure ability. For example, one may use parental background measures, including parental
education or socio-economic status. Researchers have also attempted to directly measure ability,
through test scores or iq tests. Using both parental background and iq scores leads to a DAG as
in Figure 15(c) where adjusting for the pre-treatment variables leads to unbiased estimates of
the effect of interest. Of course there may be concerns that variables like parental background
do not have a direct causal effect on the child's later earnings, and that this is merely a proxy


                                                53
                                                  Education            log (Earnings)




Education          log (Earnings)
                                                                    Ability
       (a) Education Exogenous                            (b) Unmeasured Confounder



                       Education             log (Earnings)




                                    P arentalBackground

                           IQ
                                 (c) Unconfoundedness




                  Figure 15: DAGs for the Returns to Education (I)




                                           54
     Quarterof Birth Education log (Earnings)




                                     Ability



     (a) Instrumental Variables: Quarter of Birth


     DistancetoCollege        Education        log (Earnings)




                                            Ability



     (b) Instrumental Variables: Distance to Col-
     lege



        Education log (Earnings)




                          GeneticBackground




     EducationT win      log (Earnings)T win



            (c) Fixed Effects Using Twins

Figure 16: DAGs for the Returns to Education (II)

                         55
for unobserved ability. In practice, however, researchers have attempted to control as much
as possible for variables that are proper pre-treatment (that is, prior to educational decisions
being made), without concerns about introducing M-bias. It is rare to see researchers use post-
treatment variables as controls in this approach.
   Another strategy has been to use instrumental variables approaches, based on instruments
that change the incentives to acquire additional formal education. One classic example is the
[Angrist and Krueger, 1991] study using quarter of birth as an instrument, as in Figures 16(a).
A second classic example is [Card, 1993] using distance to college as an instrument, as in 16(b).
Both applications are complicated. Although originally they assumed constant treatment effects,
they are now typically interpreted as weighted average effects for compliers with the weights
varying by education levels [Angrist and Imbens, 1995]. There are also concerns with the
exclusion restriction in both cases. There may also be concerns with the monotonicity condition
in the college distance application if the closest college is a two-year college. The [Angrist and
Krueger, 1991] study also spawned a big literature on weak instrument problems (e.g., [Staiger
and Stock, 1997, Andrews and Stock, 2006, Chamberlain and Imbens, 2004]). These problems
are often naturally discussed in a PO framework, with the benefit of putting this in a DAG
unclear.
   Yet another strategy has been to look for siblings, or, going even further, twins, as in [Ashen-
felter and Krueger, 1994, Ashenfelter and Rouse, 1998]. The estimation procedure regresses
differences in the logarithm of earnings on differences in years of education. Implicitly there is a
DAG similar to Figures 16(c), but there is additional structure. The causal effect of education
on log earnings is the same for the two members of a twin pair, and similarly the causal effect
of the unobserved confounder (genetic background) on education and earnings is the same for
both members of the twin. The full set of assumptions here is difficult to capture in a DAG.
There is some connection between this identification strategy and the multiple causes approach
in [Wang and Blei, 2018]. They assume that there is an unobserved confounder that affects both
causes. In the twins case this is the genetic background that is common to both members of the
twin pair. The additional structure in the twins case (symmetry between the two members of
the twin pairs) helps pin down the shared confounder, but there may be additional links that
can be exploited. These strategies are not without controversy: it is not always clear that the
variation in education levels between siblings or twins is exogenous (see [Card, 1999, 2001]).
   This is a rich literature with clever attempts to get closer to the causal effect of education.

                                                56
The challenge for the graphical literature is to come up with new strategies that shed light on
questions like this.



5     Conclusion
TBOW and the DAG approach fully deserve the attention of all researchers and users of causal
inference as one of its leading methodologies. Is it more than that? Should it be the framework
of choice for all causal questions, everywhere, or at least in the social sciences, as TBOW
argues? In my view no, it should not. The questions it currently answers well are not the ones
that are the most pressing ones in practice. Conversely, for the most common and important
questions the PO framework is in my view an attractive one in social sciences, and one that
resonates well with economic theory by effectively incorporating restrictions beyond conditional
independencies. Moreover, for the problems where DAGs could contribute substantially, the
most important issue holding back the DAGs is the lack of convincing empirical applications.
History suggests that those are what is driving the adoption of new methodologies in economics
and other social sciences, not the mathematical elegance or rhetoric. It is studies such as
[LaLonde, 1986], [Card, 1990], [Angrist, 1990], [Angrist and Krueger, 1991], and [Ashenfelter
and Krueger, 1994] that spurred the credibility revolution and the adoption of the PO framework,
not the theoretical advances. There have not been similar applications of the DAG framework,
and more papers discussing toy models will not be sufficient.




                                              57
References
Alberto Abadie and Matias D Cattaneo. Econometric methods for program evaluation. Annual
  Review of Economics, 10:465­503, 2018.

Alberto Abadie and Javier Gardeazabal. The economic costs of conflict: A case study of the
  basque country. American Economic Review, 93(-):113­132, 2003.

Alberto Abadie and Guido W Imbens. Bias-corrected matching estimators for average treatment
  effects. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 29(1):1­11, 2011.

Alberto Abadie, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. Synthetic control methods for com-
  parative case studies: Estimating the effect of california's tobacco control program. Journal
  of the American statistical Association, 105(490):493­505, 2010.

Donald Andrews and James H. Stock. Inference with weak instruments. 2006.

Isaiah Andrews and Emily Oster. A simple approximation for evaluating external validity bias.
  Economics Letters, 178:58­62, 2019.

Isaiah Andrews, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M Shapiro. Measuring the sensitivity of parame-
  ter estimates to estimation moments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4):1553­1592,
  2017.

Joshua Angrist and Alan Krueger. Empirical strategies in labor economics. Handbook of Labor
  Economics, 3, 2000.

Joshua D Angrist. Lifetime earnings and the Vietnam era draft lottery: Evidence from social
  security administrative records. The American Economic Review, pages 313­336, 1990.

Joshua D Angrist and Guido W Imbens. Two-stage least squares estimation of average causal
  effects in models with variable treatment intensity.    Journal of the American statistical
  Association, 90(430):431­442, 1995.

Joshua D Angrist and Alan Krueger. Does compulsory schooling affect schooling and earnings.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVI(4):979­1014, 1991.



                                              58
Joshua D Angrist and J¨
                      orn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's
  companion. Princeton University Press, 2008.

Joshua D Angrist and J¨
                      orn-Steffen Pischke. The credibility revolution in empirical economics:
  How better research design is taking the con out of econometrics. Journal of economic
  perspectives, 24(2):3­30, 2010.

Joshua D Angrist, Guido W Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin. Identification of causal effects using
  instrumental variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91:444­472, 1996.

Joshua D Angrist, Kathryn Graddy, and Guido W Imbens. The interpretation of instrumental
  variables estimators in simultaneous equations models with an application to the demand for
  fish. The Review of Economic Studies, 67(3):499­527, 2000.

Timothy B Armstrong and Michal Koles´
                                    ar. Optimal inference in a class of regression models.
  Econometrica, 86(2):655­683, 2018.

Peter Aronow. A general method for detecting interference between units in randomized exper-
  iments. Sociological Methods & Research, 41(1):3­16, 2012.

Peter M. Aronow and Cyrus Samii. Estimating average causal effects under interference between
  units, 2013.

Orley Ashenfelter and Alan Krueger. Estimates of the economic return to schooling from a new
  sample of twins. The American Economic Review, 84(5):1157­1173, 1994.

Orley Ashenfelter and Cecilia Rouse. Income, schooling, and ability: Evidence from a new
  sample of identical twins. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1):253­284, 1998.

Susan Athey and Guido Imbens.        Recursive partitioning for heterogeneous causal effects.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(27):7353­7360, 2016.

Susan Athey and Guido Imbens. Machine learning methods economists should know about.
  manuscript, 2018.

Susan Athey and Guido W Imbens. The state of applied econometrics: Causality and policy
  evaluation. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(2):3­32, 2017.


                                             59
Susan Athey and Scott Stern. An empirical framework for testing theories about complimentarity
  in organizational design. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1998.

Susan Athey and Stefan Wager. Efficient policy learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.02896,
  2017.

Susan Athey, Raj Chetty, Guido Imbens, and Hyunseung Kang. Estimating treatment effects
  using multiple surrogates: The role of the surrogate score and the surrogate index. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1603.09326, 2016.

Susan Athey, Dean Eckles, and Guido W Imbens. Exact p-values for network interference.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(521):230­240, 2018a.

Susan Athey, Guido W Imbens, and Stefan Wager. Approximate residual balancing: debiased
  inference of average treatment effects in high dimensions. Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 80(4):597­623, 2018b.

Susan Athey, Julie Tibshirani, Stefan Wager, et al. Generalized random forests. The Annals of
  Statistics, 47(2):1148­1178, 2019.

Alexander Balke and Judea Pearl. Bounds on treatment effects from studies with imperfect
  compliance. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92(439):1171­1176, 1997.

Abhijit V Banerjee and Esther Duflo. The experimental approach to development economics.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2008.

GW Basse, A Feller, and P Toulis. Randomization tests of causal effects under interference.
  Biometrika, 2019.

Alexandre Belloni, Victor Chernozhukov, Ivan Fern´
                                                 andez-Val, and Chris Hansen. Program
  evaluation with high-dimensional data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1311.2645, 2013.

Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan. Are emily and greg more employable than lakisha
  and jamal? a field experiment on labor market discrimination. American economic review,
  94(4):991­1013, 2004.

Sandra E Black. Do better schools matter? parental valuation of elementary education. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2):577­599, 1999.

                                             60
S. Calonico, Matias Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik. Robust nonparametric confidence intervals
  for regression-discontinuity designs. Econometrica, 82(6):2295­2326, 2014.

David Card. The impact of the mariel boatlift on the miami labor market. Industrial and Labor
  Relation, 43(2):245­257, 1990.

David Card. Using geographic variation in college proximity to estimate the return to schooling.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1993.

David Card. The causal effect of education on earnings. In Handbook of labor economics,
  volume 3, pages 1801­1863. Elsevier, 1999.

David Card. Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent econometric
  problems. Econometrica, 69(5):1127­1160, 2001.

Gary Chamberlain. The general equivalence of granger and sims causality. Econometrica:
  Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 569­581, 1982.

Gary Chamberlain and Guido Imbens. Random effects estimators with many instrumental
  variables. Econometrica, 72(1):295­306, 2004.

Xi Chen, Victor Chernozhukov, Iv´
                                an Fern´
                                       andez-Val, Scott Kostyshak, and Ye Luo. Shape-
  enforcing operators for point and interval estimators. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.01038, 2018.

Victor Chernozhukov and Christian Hansen.           An iv model of quantile treatment effects.
  Econometrica, 73(1):245­261, 2005.

Victor Chernozhukov, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian Hansen, and
  Whitney Newey. Double/debiased/neyman machine learning of treatment effects. American
  Economic Review, 107(5):261­65, 2017.

Denis Chetverikov, Andres Santos, and Azeem M Shaikh. The econometrics of shape restrictions.
  Annual Review of Economics, 10:31­63, 2018.

Thomas Cook. Waiting for life to arrive: A history of the regression-discontinuity design in
  psychology, statistics and economics. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2):636­654, 2008.




                                               61
David R Cox. Causality: some statistical aspects. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
  Series A (Statistics in Society), 155(2):291­301, 1992.

David R Cox and Nanny Wermuth.            Discussion-causal diagrams for empirical research.
  Biometrika, 82(4):688­689, 1995.

Richard K Crump, V Joseph Hotz, Guido W Imbens, and Oscar A Mitnik. Dealing with limited
  overlap in estimation of average treatment effects. Biometrika, pages 187­199, 2009.

Scott Cunningham. Causal Inference: The Mixtape. Manuscript, 2018.

Alexander D'Amour, Peng Ding, Avi Feller, Lihua Lei, and Jasjeet Sekhon. Overlap in obser-
  vational studies with high-dimensional covariates. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.02582, 2017.

Sonya Das and Andrew W Lo. Re-inventing drug development: A case study of the i-spy 2
  breast cancer clinical trials program. Contemporary clinical trials, 62:168­174, 2017.

Angus Deaton. Instruments, randomization, and learning about development. Journal of
  Economic Literature, 48(2):424­455, 2010.

Angus Deaton and Nancy Cartwright. Understanding and misunderstanding randomized con-
  trolled trials. Social Science & Medicine, 210:2­21, 2018.

Rajeev H Dehejia and Sadek Wahba. Causal effects in nonexperimental studies: Reevaluating
  the evaluation of training programs. Journal of the American statistical Association, 94(448):
  1053­1062, 1999.

Maria Dimakopoulou, Susan Athey, and Guido Imbens. Estimation considerations in contextual
  bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.07077, 2017.

Maria Dimakopoulou, Zhengyuan Zhou, Susan Athey, and Guido Imbens. Balanced linear
  contextual bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.06227, 2018.

Peng Ding and Luke W Miratrix. To adjust or not to adjust? sensitivity analysis of m-bias and
  butterfly-bias. Journal of Causal Inference, 3(1):41­57, 2015.

Peng Ding, TJ VanderWeele, and JM Robins. Instrumental variables as bias amplifiers with
  general outcome and confounding. Biometrika, 104(2):291­302, 2017.

                                               62
Patrick Forr´
            e and Joris M Mooij. Causal calculus in the presence of cycles, latent confounders
  and selection bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.00433, 2019.

Constantine E Frangakis and Donald B Rubin. Principal stratification in causal inference.
  Biometrics, 58(1):21­29, 2002.

David A Freedman. Statistical models for causation: what inferential leverage do they provide?
  Evaluation review, 30(6):691­713, 2006.

Andrew Gelman. Causality and statistical learning. American Journal of Sociology, 117(3):
  955­966, 2011.

Andrew Gelman and Guido Imbens. Why ask why? forward causal inference and reverse causal
  questions. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.

Clark Glymour, Richard Scheines, and Peter Spirtes. Discovering causal structure: Artificial
  intelligence, philosophy of science, and statistical modeling. Academic Press, 2014.

Adam N Glynn and Konstantin Kashin. Front-door versus back-door adjustment with unmea-
  sured confounding: Bias formulas for front-door and hybrid adjustments with application to
  a job training program. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(523):1040­1049,
  2018.

Arthur Stanley Goldberger. A course in econometrics. Harvard University Press, 1991.

Claudia Goldin and Cecilia Rouse. Orchestrating impartiality: The impact of" blind" auditions
  on female musicians. American economic review, 90(4):715­741, 2000.

Bryan S Graham. Methods of identification in social networks. Annu. Rev. Econ., 7(1):465­485,
  2015.

Clive WJ Granger. Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-spectral
  methods. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 424­438, 1969.

Sander Greenland, Judea Pearl, James M Robins, et al. Causal diagrams for epidemiologic
  research. Epidemiology, 10:37­48, 1999.




                                              63
Zvi Griliches. Estimating the returns to schooling: Some econometric problems. Econometrica:
  Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 1­22, 1977.

Somit Gupta, Ronny Kohavi, Diane Tang, and Ya Xu. Top challenges from the first practical
  online controlled experiments summit. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 21(1):20­35,
  2019.

Trygve Haavelmo.        The statistical implications of a system of simultaneous equations.
  Econometrica, 11(1):1­12, 1943.

Trygve Haavelmo. The probability approach in econometrics. Econometrica, 12(Supplement):
  iii­vi+1­115, 1944.

Jinyong Hahn, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. Identification and estimation of
  treatment effects with a regression-discontinuity design. Econometrica, 69(1):201­209, 2001.

Erin Hartman, Richard Grieve, Roland Ramsahai, and Jasjeet S Sekhon. From sate to patt:
  combining experimental with observational studies to estimate population treatment effects.
  JR Stat. Soc. Ser. A Stat. Soc.(forthcoming). doi, 10:1111, 2015.

James Heckman. Varieties of selection bias. The American Economic Review, 80(2):313­318,
  1990.

James J Heckman and V Joseph Hotz. Choosing among alternative nonexperimental methods
  for estimating the impact of social programs: The case of manpower training. Journal of the
  American statistical Association, 84(408):862­874, 1989.

David F Hendry and Mary S Morgan. The foundations of econometric analysis. Cambridge
  University Press, 1997.

Miguel A Hern´
             an, John Hsu, and Brian Healy. Data science is science's second chance to get
  causal inference right: A classification of data science tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.10846,
  2018.

Keisuke Hirano, Guido W Imbens, Donald B Rubin, and Xiao-Hua Zhou. Assessing the effect
  of an influenza vaccine in an encouragement design. Biostatistics, 1(1):69­88, 2000.



                                               64
Paul W Holland. Statistics and causal inference. Journal of the American statistical Association,
  81(396):945­960, 1986.

Joel L Horowitz. Applied nonparametric instrumental variables estimation. Econometrica, 79
  (2):347­394, 2011.

Patrik O Hoyer, Dominik Janzing, Joris M Mooij, Jonas Peters, and Bernhard Sch¨
                                                                              olkopf. Nonlin-
  ear causal discovery with additive noise models. In Advances in neural information processing
  systems, pages 689­696, 2009.

Michael Hudgens and Elizabeth Halloran. Toward causal inference with interference. Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, pages 832­842, 2008.

Guido Imbens.     The role of the propensity score in estimating dose­response functions.
  Biometrika, 87(0):706­710, 2000.

Guido Imbens. Nonparametric estimation of average treatment effects under exogeneity: A
  review. Review of Economics and Statistics, pages 1­29, 2004.

Guido Imbens. Better late than nothing: Some comments on deaton (2009) and heckman and
  urzua (2009). Journal of Economic Literature, pages 399­423, 2010.

Guido Imbens. Instrumental variables: An econometrician's perspective. Statistical Science,
  (3):323­358, 2014.

Guido Imbens and Karthik Kalyanaraman. Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression dis-
  continuity estimator. Review of Economic Studies, 79(3):933­959, 2012.

Guido Imbens and Thomas Lemieux. Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice.
  Journal of Econometrics, 142(2):615­635, 2008.

Guido Imbens and Stefan Wager.        Optimized regression discontinuity designs.     Review of
  Economics and Statistics, (0), 2018.

Guido W Imbens. Sensitivity to exogeneity assumptions in program evaluation. The American
  Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 93(2):126­132, 2003.




                                               65
Guido W Imbens and Joshua D Angrist. Identification and estimation of local average treatment
  effects. Econometrica, 61:467­476, 1994.

Guido W Imbens and Whitney K Newey. Identification and estimation of triangular simultaneous
  equations models without additivity. Econometrica, 77(5):1481­1512, 2009.

Guido W Imbens and Donald B Rubin. Discussion of "causal diagrams for empirical research"
  by j. pearl. Biometrika, 82(4):694­695, 1995.

Guido W Imbens and Donald B Rubin. Bayesian inference for causal effects in randomized
  experiments with noncompliance. The annals of statistics, pages 305­327, 1997.

Guido W Imbens and Donald B Rubin. Causal Inference in Statistics, Social, and Biomedical
  Sciences. Cambridge University Press, 2015.

Guido W Imbens and Jeffrey M Wooldridge. Recent developments in the econometrics of pro-
  gram evaluation. Journal of economic literature, 47(1):5­86, 2009.

Guido W Imbens, Donald B Rubin, and Bruce I Sacerdote. Estimating the effect of unearned
  income on labor earnings, savings, and consumption: Evidence from a survey of lottery players.
  American Economic Review, pages 778­794, 2001.

Leah Isakov, Andrew W Lo, and Vahid Montazerhodjat. Is the fda too conservative or too
  aggressive?: A bayesian decision analysis of clinical trial design. Journal of Econometrics,
  2019.

Toru Kitagawa and Aleksey Tetenov. Who should be treated? Empirical welfare maximization
  methods for treatment choice. Technical report, Centre for Microdata Methods and Practice,
  Institute for Fiscal Studies, 2015.

Daphne Koller, Nir Friedman, and Francis Bach. Probabilistic graphical models: principles and
  techniques. MIT press, 2009.

Robert J LaLonde. Evaluating the econometric evaluations of training programs with experi-
  mental data. The American economic review, pages 604­620, 1986.

Edward E Leamer. Let's take the con out of econometrics. The American Economic Review,
  73(1):31­43, 1983.

                                              66
David Lee, Enrico Moretti, and M Butler. Do voters affect or elect policies? evidence from the
  u.s. house. Quarterly Journal of Economics, pages 807­859, 2010.

David S Lee and Thomas Lemieux. Regression discontinuity designs in economics. Journal of
  economic literature, 48(2):281­355, 2010.

Fan Li, Kari Lock Morgan, and Alan M Zaslavsky. Balancing covariates via propensity score
  weighting. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(521):390­400, 2018.

Judith J Lok. Defining and estimating causal direct and indirect effects when setting the medi-
  ator to specific values is not feasible. Statistics in medicine, 35(22):4008­4020, 2016.

David Lopez-Paz, Robert Nishihara, Soumith Chintala, Bernhard Sch¨
                                                                 olkopf, and L´
                                                                              eon Bottou.
  Discovering causal signals in images. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6979­6987, 2017.

David MacKinnon. Introduction to statistical mediation analysis. Routledge, 2012.

Charles Manski. Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem. Review of
  Economic Studies, 60(3):531­542, 1993.

Charles F Manski. The structure of random utility models. Theory and decision, 8(3):229­254,
  1977.

Charles F Manski. Nonparametric bounds on treatment effects. The American Economic Review,
  80(2):319­323, 1990.

Charles F Manski. Learning about treatment effects from experiments with random assignment
  of treatments. Journal of Human Resources, pages 709­733, 1996.

Charles F Manski. Public policy in an uncertain world: analysis and decisions. Harvard Uni-
  versity Press, 2013.

Rosa L Matzkin et al. Semiparametric estimation of monotone and concave utility functions for
  polychotomous choice models. Econometrica, 59(5):1315­1327, 1991.

Justin McCrary. Testing for manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
  design. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2):698­714, 2008.

                                               67
Daniel McFadden et al. Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. 1973.

Fabrizia Mealli and Alessandra Mattei. A refreshing account of principal stratification. The
  international journal of biostatistics, 8(1), 2012.

Jacob Mincer. Schooling, experience, and earnings. human behavior & social institutions no. 2.
  1974.

Joris M Mooij, Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, Jakob Zscheischler, and Bernhard Sch¨
                                                                                  olkopf.
  Distinguishing cause from effect using observational data: methods and benchmarks. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):1103­1204, 2016.

Stephen L Morgan and Christopher Winship. Counterfactuals and causal inference. Cambridge
  University Press, 2014.

Elizabeth L Ogburn, Tyler J VanderWeele, et al. Causal diagrams for interference. Statistical
  science, 29(4):559­578, 2014.

Judea Pearl. Causal diagrams for empirical research. Biometrika, 82(4):669­688, 1995.

Judea Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, New
  York, NY, USA, 2000. ISBN 0-521-77362-8.

Judea Pearl. Direct and indirect effects. In Proceedings of the seventeenth conference on
  uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pages 411­420. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2001.

Judea Pearl. Myth, confusion, and science in causal analysis. 2009.

Judea Pearl. The causal foundations of structural equation modeling. Technical report, CALI-
  FORNIA UNIV LOS ANGELES DEPT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE, 2012.

Judea Pearl. Interpretation and identification of causal mediation. Psychological methods, 19
  (4):459, 2014.

Judea Pearl. Trygve haavelmo and the emergence of causal calculus. Econometric Theory, 31
  (1):152­179, 2015.

Judea Pearl. Challenging the hegemony of randomized controlled trials: A commentary on
  deaton and cartwright. Social Science & Medicine, 2018a.

                                                68
Judea Pearl. Does obesity shorten life? or is it the soda? on non-manipulable causes. Journal
  of Causal Inference, 6(2), 2018b.

Judea Pearl. On the interpretation of do (x). Journal of Causal Inference, 2019.

Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie. The book of why. Allen Lane, 2018.

Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Sch¨
                                               olkopf.           Elements of causal inference:
  foundations and learning algorithms. MIT press, 2017.

Per Pettersson-Lidbom. Do parties matter for economic outcomes? a regression-discontinuity
  approach. Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(5):1037­1056, 2008.

Steve Powell. A review of: The book of why: The new science of cause and effect pearl, j., &
  mackenzie, d. (2018). new york, ny: Basic books. Journal of MultiDisciplinary Evaluation
  Volume 14, Issue 31, 2018, 14(31), 2018.

Thomas S Richardson and James M Robins. Single world intervention graphs (swigs): A unifi-
  cation of the counterfactual and graphical approaches to causality. Center for the Statistics
  and the Social Sciences, University of Washington Series. Working Paper, 128(30):2013, 2013.

James Robins. A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with a sustained exposure
  periodapplication to control of the healthy worker survivor effect. Mathematical modelling, 7
  (9-12):1393­1512, 1986.

James Robins and Andrea Rotnitzky. Semiparametric efficiency in multivariate regression mod-
  els with missing data. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90(1):122­129, 1995.

James M Robins. Causal inference from complex longitudinal data. In Latent variable modeling
  and applications to causality, pages 69­117. Springer, 1997.

James M Robins and Sander Greenland. Identifiability and exchangeability for direct and indi-
  rect effects. Epidemiology, pages 143­155, 1992.

James M Robins, Andrea Rotnitzky, and Lue Ping Zhao. Estimation of regression coefficients
  when some regressors are not always observed. Journal of the American statistical Association,
  89(427):846­866, 1994.


                                              69
Paul R Rosenbaum. The consequences of adjustment for a concomitant variable that has been
  affected by the treatment. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (General), 147
  (5):656­666, 1984.

Paul R Rosenbaum. Observational Studies. Springer, 2002.

Paul R Rosenbaum. Design of observational studies. Springer, 2010.

Paul R Rosenbaum. Observation and Experiment: An Introduction to Causal Inference. Harvard
  University Press, 2017.

Paul R Rosenbaum and Donald B Rubin. Assessing sensitivity to an unobserved binary covariate
  in an observational study with binary outcome. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series
  B (Methodological), pages 212­218, 1983a.

Paul R Rosenbaum and Donald B Rubin. The central role of the propensity score in observational
  studies for causal effects. Biometrika, 70(1):41­55, 1983b.

Andrew Donald Roy. Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford economic papers,
  3(2):135­146, 1951.

Donald B Rubin. Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized
  studies. Journal of educational Psychology, 66(5):688, 1974.

Donald B Rubin. Matched sampling for causal effects. Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Steven L Scott. A modern bayesian look at the multi-armed bandit. Applied Stochastic Models
  in Business and Industry, 26(6):639­658, 2010.

Jasjeet S Sekhon and Yotam Shem-Tov. Inference on a new class of sample average treatment
  effects. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02140, 2017.

Claudia Shi, David M Blei, and Victor Veitch. Adapting neural networks for the estimation of
  treatment effects. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02120, 2019.

Christopher A Sims. Money, income, and causality. The American economic review, 62(4):
  540­552, 1972.



                                               70
Douglas Staiger and James H Stock. Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments.
  Econometrica, 65(3):557­586, 1997.

Peter M Steiner, Yongnam Kim, Courtney E Hall, and Dan Su. Graphical models for quasi-
  experimental designs. Sociological methods & research, 46(2):155­188, 2017.

D Thistlewaite and Donald Campbell. Regression-discontinuity analysis: An alternative to the
  ex-post facto experiment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 51(2):309­317, 1960.

Jan Tinbergen. Determination and interpretation of supply curves: an example. Zeitschrift fur
  Nationalokonomie, 1(5):669­679, 1930.

Robert R Tucci. Introduction to judea pearl's do-calculus. arXiv preprint arXiv:1305.5506,
  2013.

Caroline Uhler, Garvesh Raskutti, Peter B¨
                                         uhlmann, Bin Yu, et al. Geometry of the faithfulness
  assumption in causal inference. The Annals of Statistics, 41(2):436­463, 2013.

Wilbert Van Der Klaauw. Estimating the effect of financial aid offers on college enrollment: A
  regression-discontinuity approach. International Economic Review, 43(2):1249­1287, 2002.

Mark J Van der Laan and Sherri Rose. Targeted learning: causal inference for observational
  and experimental data. Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.

Tyler VanderWeele. Explanation in causal inference: methods for mediation and interaction.
  Oxford University Press, 2015.

Tyler VanderWeele and Stijn Vansteelandt.       Mediation analysis with multiple mediators.
  Epidemiologic methods, 2(1):95­115, 2014.

Stefan Wager and Susan Athey. Estimation and inference of heterogeneous treatment effects
  using random forests. Journal of the American Statistical Association, (just-accepted), 2017.

Yixin Wang and David M Blei.           The blessings of multiple causes.        arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1805.06826, 2018.

Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. Asymptotic properties of weighted M-estimators for standard stratified
  samples. Econometric Theory, 17(2):451­470, 2001.

                                              71
Philip G Wright. Tariff on animal and vegetable oils. Macmillan Company, New York, 1928.

Sewall Wright. The method of path coefficients. The annals of mathematical statistics, 5(3):
  161­215, 1934.




                                            72
