                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         HOW DOES CONSUMPTION RESPOND TO NEWS ABOUT INFLATION?
            FIELD EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED CONTROL TRIAL

                                        Olivier Coibion
                                      Dimitris Georgarakos
                                      Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                       Maarten van Rooij

                                       Working Paper 26106
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26106


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the European Central Bank, De Nederlandsche Bank, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Olivier Coibion, Dimitris Georgarakos, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Maarten van
Rooij. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Does Consumption Respond to News about Inflation?
Field Evidence from a Randomized Control Trial
Olivier Coibion, Dimitris Georgarakos, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Maarten van Rooij
NBER Working Paper No. 26106
July 2019
JEL No. C83,D84,E31

                                           ABSTRACT

We implement a survey of Dutch households in which random subsets of respondents receive
information about inflation. The resulting exogenously generated variation in inflation
expectations is used to assess how expectations affect subsequent monthly consumption decisions
relative to those in a control group. The causal effects of elevated inflation expectations on non-
durable spending are imprecisely estimated but there is a sharp negative effect on durable
spending. We provide evidence that this is likely driven by the fact that Dutch households seem
to become more pessimistic about their real income as well as aggregate spending when they
increase their inflation expectations. There is little evidence to support the idea that the degree to
which respondents change their beliefs or their spending in response to information treatments
depends on their level of cognitive or financial constraints.

Olivier Coibion                                   Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin                     530 Evans Hall #3880
2225 Speedway                                     University of California, Berkeley
Austin, TX 78712                                  Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                          and IZA
ocoibion@gmail.com                                and also NBER
                                                  ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
Dimitris Georgarakos
European Central Bank                             Maarten van Rooij
Sonnemannstrasse 20 (Main Building)               Dutch Central Bank
60314 Frankfurt am Main                           P. O. Box 98
Germany                                           1000 AB Amsterdam
dimitris.georgarakos@ecb.int                      The Netherlands
                                                  M.C.J.van.Rooij@DNB.NL
1.            Introduction
As policy rates across advanced economies fell close to zero during and following the Great
Recession, policy-makers sought out new tools to spur economic activity and inflation. Many of
these tools were thought to operate in part through inflation expectations, and thereby real interest
rates. While theory suggests that policies like forward guidance could have very large effects on
consumption and other real economic variables, evidence from actual policy decisions suggests
modest effects at best, a contrast often denoted as the forward guidance puzzle (Del Negro,
Giannoni and Patterson 2015). Using a novel methodological strategy to study the spending
behavior of households, we provide evidence for a new potential explanation to this puzzle.
              This paper represents the first attempt to apply a randomized control trial (RCT) approach
to determine how inflation expectations affect spending decisions of actual households in the
economy. Specifically, we apply randomized information treatments about recent inflation to a
representative sample of households in the Netherlands participating in a survey. These treatments
lead to discernible and exogenously generated changes in the inflation expectations of the treated
households relative to those in the (untreated) control group. Using follow-up surveys of these
same households, we then determine whether these exogenous changes in inflation expectations
affected the spending decisions of households in subsequent months. Given the fact that the
treatment was implemented during the period in which the European Central Bank's policy rate
was around the effective lower bound (ELB), our results speak directly to the effect of changes in
inflation expectations on economic outcomes. We find that inflation expectations do affect
spending decisions but not in the way that is commonly predicted in macroeconomic models.
              Standard theory underlying the predicted effects of changes in inflation expectations
focuses on a household's willingness to reallocate its consumption across different periods in light
of the real interest rate, which captures the relative price of consumption across periods, and the
discount rate, which captures how individuals compare utility across periods. When applied to
non-durable goods consumption1, this framework yields the prediction that higher inflation
expectations should lead to lower expected real interest rates at the zero bound, a lower return to
saving, and a higher level of spending today. Consistent with this prediction, we find that spending




                                                            
1
    We use the term non-durable goods throughout the paper to refer to the total of non-durable goods and services.

                                                                                                                      1
 
on non-durable goods by Dutch households does seem to rise when they raise their inflation
expectations, although the effects are too noisy to ascribe precise magnitudes.
              However, we find that spending on durable goods falls sharply when these same
households raise their inflation expectations. This occurs along both the intensive and extensive
margins: households report a lower frequency of purchasing big-ticket items as well as smaller
purchases when they have higher inflation expectations. The effect of this decline in durable goods
purchases is large and dwarfs the change in non-durable spending. The result is that total spending
by households declines when their inflation expectations are exogenously raised. The absence of
a discretionary increase in spending on the part of households following an increase in their
inflation expectations could therefore naturally account for the small observed effects of policies
like forward guidance on macroeconomic outcomes.
              Our approach is closely related to recent work focusing on the forward guidance puzzle.
The most commonly emphasized source of the discrepancy is the consumption Euler equation,
which implies that very distant changes in interest rates should have large effects on consumption.
McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016), for example, argue that incomplete markets imply
heavier discounting in the Euler equation, thereby weakening the consumption response to
announcements of future policy changes. Fahri and Werning (2018) instead emphasize limited
higher-order thinking by agents, a feature which also dampens consumption responses to news.
Angeletos and Lian (2018) stress imperfect common knowledge as a related mechanism.2
              In contrast to these papers, we emphasize the importance of durable goods spending in
explaining the total spending response of households when inflation expectations are revised.
Nonetheless, our survey results also speak to these previously proposed mechanisms. This reflects
the fact that respondents were asked questions that quantify both their cognitive and financial
constraints, allowing us to directly test the first two types of channels. We find little support for
either. Respondents who do higher orders of thinking do not raise their spending more than those
with lower orders of thinking when they expect higher inflation, which is the mechanism operating
in Fahri and Werning (2018). Nor do we find that financially constrained households raise their
consumption less than unconstrained households when they expect higher inflation, which is the
mechanism operating in McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016). Instead, the large declines in

                                                            
2
 Afrouzi and Yang (2019) also attempt to explain the forward guidance puzzle through information frictions but do
so by considering rational inattention in price-setting decisions rather than focusing on consumption decisions.

                                                                                                               2
 
spending that we observe happen primarily for respondents with higher levels of cognitive ability
as well as higher levels of wealth and financial liquidity.
       What drives the reduced spending of these households when they raise their inflation
expectations? We document that Dutch households seem to take a stagflationary view of inflation.
Specifically, households do not predict increased nominal income after we elevate their inflation
expectations, that is, households effectively predict their real incomes to fall. They also tend to
anticipate reduced spending at the aggregate level and even anticipate that other households will
become more pessimistic about aggregate spending. This stagflationary view of inflation by Dutch
households--which is in line with survey evidence for other countries (e.g., Kamdar 2019, Coibion,
Gorodnichenko and Ropele 2018)--can therefore explain why Dutch households choose to cut
rather than increase their spending on durable goods.
       Our results are related to several additional literatures. One is on how economic agents
form their expectations. This work has documented statistically and economically significant
departures from the null of full-information rational expectations for a range of agents in a number
of different settings: e.g., U.S. professional forecasters and households (Coibion and
Gorodnichenko 2012, 2015), European professional forecasters (Andrade and Le Bihan 2013),
German households (Dräger and Nghiem 2018), and firms in New Zealand (Coibion,
Gorodnichenko and Kumar 2018) and Italy (Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Ropele 2018). Our
survey and experimental evidence supports these previous findings: households respond to
publicly available information, which indicates that they don't have full-information, and do so
like Bayesians, consistent with noisy information models for example. We also build on this
literature by studying the higher-order beliefs of households, much like Coibion et al. (2018;
henceforth CGKR) for firms.
       A second literature focuses more specifically on how inflation expectations of households
affect their propensity to spend. Using the Michigan Survey of Consumers, Bachmann, Berg and
Sims (2015) found little evidence that U.S. households with higher inflation expectations had
different perceptions of whether now was a good time to purchase big-ticket household items. A
number of follow-up papers have found evidence more consistent with the idea that inflation
expectations should affect consumption. For example, using inflation expectations from the New
York Fed's Survey of Consumer Expectations, Crump et al. (2015) estimate a value of 0.8 for the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Dräger and Nghiem (2018) find similar results for German

                                                                                                  3
 
households using a survey developed by the University of Hamburg. Ichiue and Nishiguchi (2013)
find evidence consistent with the Euler equation using household survey data in Japan during the
ZLB period. Pooling data from seventeen European countries, Duca, Kenny and Reuter (2018)
also find that when households expect inflation to be higher, they report that they are more inclined
to spend on consumer durables.3 Unfortunately, these papers lack exogenous variation in inflation
expectations and can only report correlations. Only a few papers provide more direct causal
evidence. D'Acunto, Hoang and Weber (2016), for example, examine how an anticipated change
in the VAT in Germany affected the expectations and readiness to spend of German households.
We contribute to this literature by generating clearly exogenous variation in the inflation
expectations of households, which allows us to assess the causal effects of the latter on household
decisions. Importantly, our experimental approach is applied to actual households in the
Netherlands and therefore speaks directly to the effects of exogenously-generated changes in
inflation expectations on the spending decisions of households. Moreover, unlike many previous
studies using qualitative questions about the propensity to spend on big-ticket items, we measure
non-durable and durable monthly consumption separately in subsequent waves following our
baseline survey. While our results of weakly positive non-durable consumption responses to higher
inflation expectations are consistent with much of this recent literature, the negative effects found
for durable goods as well as overall spending are much more at odds with this body of evidence.
              Our results also build on a growing literature studying higher-order beliefs, particularly for
macroeconomic variables. Following Fahri and Werning (2018) in particular, we characterize the
degree of higher-order thinking of different households in our survey as well as measure their
higher-order beliefs about aggregate spending. This unique dimension of the survey allows us not
just to assess the degree to which consumption responds to changes in beliefs but also some of the
underlying mechanisms. We document a number of novel features from this survey of households'
higher-order beliefs about inflation. First, there is generally a strong positive correlation between
the first-order and higher-order beliefs of households. Second, cross-sectional means of the two
are similar, but the dispersion in higher-order beliefs is somewhat smaller. Third, the degree of
higher-order thinking varies significantly across households, but does not appear to be strongly



                                                            
3
  Related work has studied how inflation expectations affect other decisions households face, for example the
composition of their assets (Vellekoop and Wiederholt 2017).

                                                                                                           4
 
correlated with how they form or revise their higher-order beliefs about inflation. In this sense, our
results confirm prior evidence on higher-order beliefs of firms documented in CGKR.
       However, we find little evidence that differences in higher-order thinking matter for
consumption decisions, which speaks to recent models in which limits to higher-order thinking
play an important role in the transmission mechanism. For example, there are few differences in
how households respond to information treatments with respect to their degree of higher-order
thinking, which suggests that the latter is not a primary source of differences in beliefs across
households. Whether the signal is viewed as a private or public one also does not seem to make a
difference. In particular, some treated households were told that the information about inflation
provided to them was publicly available, others were told that this information was being provided
to selected participants in the survey (both of which are true statements). This had no discernible
impact on the way in which households revised either their first or higher order beliefs. The
absence of any significant difference between the two is not consistent with imperfect common
knowledge playing a central role in the expectations formation process either.
       From a methodological point of view, we contribute to a small but budding literature that
uses RCTs to address macroeconomic questions. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
do so in the context of household consumption decisions and their relation to macroeconomic
expectations. Prior work has focused on how expectations affect firms' pricing decisions (Coibion,
Gorodnichenko and Kumar 2018; CGKR 2018) or house price expectations (Armona, Fuster and
Zafar forthcoming). RCTs allow for clearer exogenous variation and more precise statements about
causality than traditional identification strategies used in macroeconomic analysis. Our results
highlight the potential usefulness of this approach in identifying the role of different economic
channels behind economic decisions like those of households.
       In Section 2, we describe the survey of Dutch households that was used to measure
expectations and outcomes. Section 3 discusses various household expectations measured by the
survey. The information treatments are described in Section 4, along with how they were
implemented as well as their effects on inflation expectations. Section 5 presents results on the
causal effects of inflation expectations on spending decisions of households, while Section 6
discusses the possible channels underlying the spending responses. Section 7 concludes.




                                                                                                    5
 
2.     Survey Design
We use data from the CentER Internet panel, which is sponsored by the Dutch National Bank
(DNB) and maintained by CentERdata at Tilburg University. The members of the panel are
recruited through face-to-face or telephone interviews. CentERdata provides respondents who are
selected for participation in the panel but who do not have a computer with Internet access with
the necessary equipment (for more details on the CentERdata panel, see Teppa and Vis 2012).
The baseline survey is conducted annually and collects detailed information on a range of
demographic and economic characteristics for a representative sample of Dutch-speaking
households. The panel includes 2,187 adult respondents from 1,843 households. In addition to the
baseline survey, respondents participate during the course of a year in special purpose surveys.
       We designed such a special purpose survey providing random sub-groups of respondents
with different information treatments about inflation and asking a number of questions (pre- and
post-treatment) that are necessary for our analysis. We administered the special survey and the
information experiment to every panel participant aged 18 and older in April 2018. Participants
are invited to take the survey in the first week of each month. Those who do not respond receive a
reminder invitation and can fill in the survey in the second week of the month. Given that the
survey allows for contacting respondents at a high-frequency (i.e., monthly), we repeated (part of)
the survey in May, June and July 2018 in order to track changes in expectations and behavior in
the post-treatment period. All surveys are done online.
       The specific questions asked in each wave are in Appendix B. The first wave collected a
range of households' expectations, both about the aggregate economy and their own economic
situation. It also included a randomized information treatment, which was followed by a few
additional questions. Subsequent waves targeted the behavior and expectations of the same
respondents to assess whether and how the information treatments affected their beliefs and
outcomes relative to the untreated control group. We describe the treatments in detail in Section 4.
       Descriptive statistics about respondents are provided in Table 1. The average respondent
is 49 years old, and about half are women. Half of the respondents have either a college or
vocational education degree. The average net monthly household income is approximately 2,500
with a net financial wealth of 38,000, although the variance across respondents is very large for
both. Spending on durables is infrequent but large when it occurs, such that average spending on
durables is twice that on non-durables.

                                                                                                       6
 
              In addition to standard demographics, we collect information on various household
characteristics that can help us better understand the workings of forward guidance and other tools
based on the management of expectations. Specifically, we ask respondents to report how much
money they had in their checking and savings accounts and in cash on the day before their last
regular paycheck arrived (excluding fixed term deposits, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, or retirement
accounts, etc.). As discussed in Kaplan and Violante (2014), hand-to-mouth (liquidity constrained)
consumers do not carry liquid assets from period to period and thus, a hand-to-mouth consumer
should have zero liquid wealth just before receiving a paycheck. To the extent that liquidity
constraints may be important for the response to forward guidance (e.g., McKay, Nakamura and
Steinsson 2016), we should observe heterogeneous responses in consumer spending for liquid and
illiquid households. Table 1 reports three measures of liquid wealth just before receiving a
paycheck: i) absolute amount in euro; ii) as a multiple of net monthly income; iii) as a multiple of
monthly (average over the previous three months) spending on non-durable goods. The median
amount is approximately 2,000, 0.88 of net monthly income, and 5 times their monthly spending
on non-durable goods. There is considerable variation in liquid wealth across households (e.g., the
interquartile range of liquid wealth is 11,800) and the distribution has a thick right tail.
Approximately, six percent of households reported zero liquid wealth just before receiving a regular
paycheck. Using high-frequency data generated by a financial aggregation and bill-paying
computer/smartphone application, Gelman et al. (2016) report that approximately 20 percent of
U.S. households have zero liquid wealth before receiving a regular paycheck. Kaplan and Violante
(2014) report a similar magnitude for U.S. households in the Survey of Consumer Finances.
              García-Schmidt and Woodford (2019) and Fahri and Werning (2018) suggest that constraints
in cognitive reasoning can also influence the reaction of households to policy announcements. To
quantify the importance of this potential channel, we construct two measures. First, we ask
respondents to play a game as in Nagel (1995) which measures the ability of consumers to eliminate
dominated strategies and thus allows us to quantify a level of reasoning for each respondent. We
describe the game and the results in Section 3.3 below. Second, we ask three standard questions on
financial literacy and take the count of correct responses as a measure of literacy.4 On average,


                                                            
4
  The specific questions are:
a. "Suppose you had 100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year. After 5 years, how much do you
think you would have in the account if you left the money to grow: more than 102, exactly 102, less than 102?"

                                                                                                                7
 
consumers get a score of 2 (out of 3) with 44 percent of respondents answering all question correctly
and 16 percent of respondents answering all questions incorrectly. In their seminal work introducing
this literacy scale, Lusardi and Mitchell (2011), report that 30 (12) percent of the adult US population
answered all (no) questions correctly with an average of 1.8 (out of 3) correct answers.


3.            Unconditional Properties of Households' Expectations


3.1           Household Income and Spending on Durables and Non-Durables
Respondents are asked a wide range of forward-looking questions, both about their own
circumstances as well as their beliefs about aggregate economic conditions (translated survey
questions from each wave are in Appendix B). For example, after being separately asked about the
level of their spending on durable and non-durable goods over the previous three months, they are
asked to provide point forecasts about how much they expect to spend on each over each of the
following three months. This provides us with an anticipated level of monthly expenditures for
each type of spending. Households are then asked, using a distributional question, to characterize
the likely path of their household's spending on non-durables as well as their income over the next
twelve months.5 As documented in Table 2, respondents report that they expect their spending on
non-durable goods to rise by 1.33% on average over the next twelve months. There is significant
cross-sectional variation in this planned level of spending, however, with many reporting that they
expect their spending to rise or fall by much more than this. Respondents report expected changes
in their household net income which are very much in line: the average rise in expected income is
also about 1% with a similar amount of cross-sectional dispersion as for spending. There is a weak
positive correlation ( = 0.16) in individuals' expectations of their future income and spending on
non-durables, which suggests respondents interpret most of their income changes as transitory.
              Because the questions regarding twelve month ahead forecasts of non-durable spending
and income are distributional, we can also measure the uncertainty associated with their forecasts.
                                                            
b. "Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was 2% per year. After 1 year,
how much would you be able to buy with the money in this account: more than today; exactly the same, less than
today?"
c. "Do you think that the following statement is `true' or `false'? Buying a company stock usually provides a safer
return than a stock mutual fund."
5
 We fit generalized beta distributions to their reported distributions to measure mean and standard deviation of their
forecasts.

                                                                                                                     8
 
The average uncertainty of individuals with respect to these two economic variables is close to but
somewhat smaller than the cross-sectional disagreement in each. Individuals who are more
uncertain about their future income also tend to be more uncertain about their future non-durable
spending, with a correlation of 0.55.
        An unusual feature of the survey is that respondents were asked not just about their own
expected change in consumption but also about what they expected spending on non-durables to
be for the whole economy over the next twelve months, again via a distributional question. As
reported in Table 2, the average expectation of aggregate spending on non-durables is very close
to the average expectation across individuals of planned changes in personal non-durable
spending: 1.65% vs. 1.33% respectively. The dispersion in forecasts about aggregate non-durable
spending is somewhat lower than that for individual spending, as is uncertainty about each.
Individuals who anticipate larger increases in their spending generally anticipate higher spending
at the aggregate level as well, with a correlation of 0.54.
        In addition to questions about expected aggregate spending, respondents were asked about
what they thought other households expected would happen to aggregate non-durable spending,
thereby measuring their higher-order belief about this variable. The average higher-order belief is
almost identical to the first-order belief at 1.79% vs. 1.65% respectively, but the former is associated
with significantly lower disagreement (cross-sectional standard deviation of 1.95 vs. 2.20
respectively) but somewhat higher uncertainty. There is again a strong positive correlation across
beliefs: individuals who expect themselves to spend more over the next twelve months also tend to
think that other households expect others to spend more, with a correlation of 0.41.


3.2     Inflation Expectations
After being asked about spending and income, respondents were asked about aggregate prices. First,
they were presented with a question asking about the percentage change in consumer prices over the
last twelve months. The median response was 2.0%, close to the actual rate of 1.2% in February 2018
(the most recent publicly available figure for inflation at the time of the first wave of the survey). At
the same time, there is a thick right tail in the distribution of perceived inflation so that the mean
response was 4.9%, with a cross-sectional dispersion of 10.0%. Approximately, five percent of
respondents perceive inflation to be greater than 20% with some respondents reporting 100%
perceived inflation over the previous twelve months. Because these extreme perceptions appear to be

                                                                                                       9
 
outliers, we also compute moments robust to extreme observations: Huber-robust mean and standard
deviation are 2.2% and 1.3% respectively. This level of disagreement about recent inflation is
relatively low compared to other recent surveys of households. For example, Coibion, Gorodnichenko
and Weber (2019) report that the Huber-robust standard deviation of perceived inflation for U.S.
households during the same period is 2.6% with the median inflation perception of 3.0% (actual
inflation was 2.3%). The low level of disagreement about recent inflation as well as the fact that the
median belief about recent inflation is so close to actual inflation suggests that Dutch households were
relatively familiar with inflation dynamics compared to households in other countries.
               Individuals were then presented with a distributional question about aggregate inflation over
the next twelve months. The average forecast was just under 2%, very close to the European Central
Bank's inflation target.6 For comparison, the DNB was predicting inflation rates of 1.4% in 2018 and
2.3% in 2019 for the Netherlands. In contrast, average inflation forecasts of households in the U.S. at
the time were well above those of professionals (Coibion et al. 2018). Disagreement about expected
inflation across households was also comparably low, with a cross-sectional standard deviation on
the same order of magnitude as for aggregate spending. Individuals report even less uncertainty about
inflation than for aggregate spending. Not surprisingly, there is a strong positive relationship between
individuals' perceived rates of inflation and their predicted rates of inflation, with a (Huber-robust)
correlation of 0.61, consistent with other evidence for households (e.g., Jonung 1981).7
              Unconditionally, there is little correlation between an individual's perceived rate of inflation
and their predicted change in either personal non-durable consumption or aggregate non-durable
consumption (Huber-robust correlations are 0.09 and 0.14 respectively). At the same time, the
correlation between (pre-treatment) expected inflation and expected spending is stronger (column
(3) in Table 2): 0.25 for personal spending on non-durable goods and 0.37 for aggregate spending
on non-durable goods. Interestingly, expected inflation is only weakly correlated (0.12) with
expected personal net income. Uncertainty about expected inflation is strongly correlated with
uncertainty about income and spending variables (column (6) in Table 2).
              One approach to estimating the effects of inflation expectations hews closely to these
correlations. For example, Bachmann, Berg and Sims (2015) consider whether individuals in the
Michigan Survey of Consumers are more likely to report that now is a good time to purchase big

                                                            
6
    Moments of expected inflation for various subgroups are presented in Appendix Table 1.
7
    Evidence for the Netherlands is reported in Christensen, van Els and van Rooij (2006).

                                                                                                           10
 
ticket items when they expect higher inflation and find little such correlation. Crump et al. (2015)
regress expected changes in spending of households in the New York Fed's Survey of Consumer
Expectations on their expected inflation to estimate the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. In
contrast, we go beyond this correlational approach and employ information treatments to generate
exogenous variation in inflation expectations to assess how these affect spending decisions.


3.3    Higher-Order Thinking
García-Schmidt and Woodford (2019) and Fahri and Werning (2018) among others emphasize that
limited levels of reasoning may be an important determinant of weak consumption responses to
changes in interest rates as economic agents may fail to appreciate the power of general-
equilibrium effects. To explore whether the level of reasoning is related to the strength of consumer
spending responses, we elicit respondents' level of thinking as well as their higher-order beliefs
about consumer spending done by other Dutch households.
       Following CGKR and the earlier experimental literature (e.g., Nagel 1995, Nagel and
Duffy 1997, Camerer, Ho and Chong 2004), we ask households to participate in a "beauty contest"
game. The specific survey question was:
       Please choose a number from zero to 100.
       We will take your number as well as the numbers chosen by other participants to calculate
       the average number. The winning number will be the number that is closest to two-thirds
       (2/3) of the average number.
       The participant who filled in the winning number will receive 500 euro (if more participants
       have filled in the winning number, the 500 euro will be divided equally among the winners).
A th-level thinker provides the following guess   :

                        50

As discussed in Nagel (1995) and subsequent literature, individuals with deeper levels of reasoning
should do more rounds of eliminating dominated strategies and thus pick a lower value of   .
Panel A of Figure 1 reports the distribution of guesses, with red vertical lines indicating values of

, blue line indicating responses one would observe if individuals pick            50 (that is, people

use (3/2) rather than (2/3)), and the green line indicating         100. The average value of the

reported guesses is 47 (standard deviation 22), which is a bit higher than the average reported in
other experiments outside labs (e.g., Camerer 1997).
                                                                                                  11
 
        Consistent with experimental evidence, we find lumps at the points that correspond to
various levels of thinking (50, 33, 22, etc.) but the distribution is not perfectly concentrated at these
points. Indeed, there is considerable variation outside these points and many individuals pick
dominated responses (e.g., anything that is greater than 66 is a dominated response). Usually, these
suboptimal responses are interpreted as level-0 thinking in the sense that this level would capture
a group of people who do not eliminate dominated strategies by failing to understand the rules of
the game. To differentiate this group from others, we classify a respondent as           0 if he or she
reports a guess in the 40,50 range and as            0 if he or she reports a guess in the 50,100 range.
      1, 2, 3, 4 includes everybody who reported a number in 30,40 , 20,30 , 10,20 and 0,10
ranges, respectively.
        Nearly 50 percent of respondents are classified as          0 with another 15 percent classified
as      0 (Table 3). We find that reported guesses differ by respondents' sociodemographic
characteristics. For example, younger, more educated, more financially literate people tend to pick
lower values for their guesses, which correspond to higher levels of thinking. Panel B of Figure 1
shows kernel density of guesses by age group: younger respondents have a higher mass of
responses that correspond to        1 and       2.
        In addition to eliciting a numerical response, we ask respondents to report their beliefs
about the distribution of numbers they think other participants are choosing. Specifically, the
[0,100] interval is split into ten equally sizes bins (e.g., [0,10), [10, 20) and so on) and respondents
are asked to assign a fraction of households who (they think) would provide a numerical response
for each bin. This question informs us about whether a chosen numeric response is consistent with
a respondent's belief about choices of other participants in the game. In other words, a person may
pick 66 as his guess (a dominated strategy) because he believes that everybody else picks 100.
        Panel A of Table 3 reports the perceived distribution of others' guesses by level of thinking.
We observe that none of the levels correctly conjectures the true distribution of types. Consistent
with CGKR, a typical respondent believes that: i) many other respondents have the same level of
thinking as the respondent; ii) there are many types of respondents in terms of level-k thinking
(including individuals with levels of thinking greater than the level of the respondent); iii) the
quality of the perceived distribution about others' guesses does not improve discernably in the
respondent's level of thinking.
        While respondents may have wrong perceptions about others' guesses, the reported guesses

                                                                                                      12
 
may still be internally consistent: to win the prize, a respondent should report a guess of two-thirds
of the believed average guess of other respondents.8 To test the consistency, we estimate the
following specification:
                                                               
where                              is the guess submitted by person  ,                 is person  's average guess for
others' guesses. We find (Panel B of Table 3) that the estimated  is generally close to one for
respondents with low , close to 2/3 for respondents with                            1, 2, and falls well below 2/3 for
         3.
                 Consist with prevalence of                    0 and    0 types, we find relatively small differences
between low-order expectations of spending and higher-order expectations of spending (Appendix
Table 2). In agreement with theoretical predictions, cross-sectional dispersion of beliefs is smaller
for higher-order expectations than for low-order expectations. At the same time, we fail to find
more confidence (smaller standard deviation implied by reported distribution) in higher-order
expectations than in low-order expectations. In summary, while we observe considerable
heterogeneity in levels of reasoning, the properties of the responses appear to pose a puzzle for
popular models of limited reasoning.


4.            Effects of Information Treatments on Expectations
After answering baseline questions, participants in the first wave of the survey were randomly
assigned to one of three groups. One group was provided with the following statement:

              "Before we proceed, we would like to share the following information with you. In a public
              release available to all Dutchmen at no charge, the Dutch Statistical Office recently
              reported that the percent increase in consumer prices in February compared to 12 months
              earlier in the Netherlands was 1.2%".
The statement provides information about the most recent inflation rate and describes it as
something that is publicly available to all citizens. The second group was provided with the
following statement:

              "Before we proceed, we would like to share the following information only with you and
              a few other households. The Dutch Statistical Office recently reported that the percent


                                                            
8
  It may be the case that when asked directly about other households, survey participants will engage in an additional
level of reasoning that was not present when they formed their own guess or expectation.

                                                                                                                   13
 
              increase in consumer prices compared in February to 12 months earlier in the Netherlands
              was 1.2%"
This alternative statement provides the same information about recent inflation but is phrased in
such a way that individuals should view this as information which is privately provided to them.
We therefore refer to the first group (N=702) as having been treated with a public signal while the
second group (N=744) was treated with a private signal. The third group (N=741) receives no such
information and serves as a control group.
              To assess whether respondents believe that the provided information is widely known,
those in the treatment groups were immediately asked what fraction of Dutchmen they thought
knew the provided information. The average fractions were 18.4% (standard deviation 18.9%) for
the private treatment group and 17.9% (standard deviation 18.2%) for the public treatment group.
Hence, the phrasing of the treatment did not lead respondents to interpret the information very
differently in terms of how well known it was to other households.
              Following these information treatments (or lack thereof for the control group), respondents
were asked a number of follow-up questions. These questions covered their expectations about
inflation, expected income and non-durable consumption over the next twelve months and
expected aggregate consumption in the Netherlands over the next twelve months. To avoid asking
respondents the same question twice, follow-up questions were phrased as point estimates rather
than distributional questions.
              We first characterize the average effects of information treatments on inflation expectations
of respondents. To do so, we regress the change in individual inflation expectations in each wave
relative to their pre-treatment belief on separate dummy variables equal to one if participants were
treated with the public or the private signal, respectively.9 The resulting coefficients on each dummy
variable tell us the average effect of each treatment on individual inflation expectations relative to
the control group. We use Huber-robust regressions to systematically control for outliers in the data.
              Because average inflation expectations are close to actual inflation (Table 2), regressing
revisions in expectations on a treatment dummy variable may yield no materially important
treatment effect, but this need not indicate that agents are not responding to the information. What
one should expect to see, if respondents are responding to treatments as Bayesians, is that all agents
                                                            
9
 Note that since inflation expectations in subsequent waves were measured in both distributional and point forecast
versions, we can use both to assess how expectations respond over time. The prior belief is measured using the elicited
distributional inflation forecast from wave 1 asked prior to information treatments.

                                                                                                                    14
 
should place some weight on their priors and some weight on the signal, leading to convergence
in beliefs. We illustrate this point in Figure 2. For the control group and each treatment group
separately, we present scatter plots of agents' posterior beliefs (immediately after treatment) versus
their prior beliefs about inflation. Panel A, for example, illustrates that the slope of the relationship
is less than one even for the control group, reflecting the different nature of the inflation
expectation questions asked (i.e., distributional vs. point forecasts) and possibly some mean
reversion in the responses. Panels B and C show much flatter slopes for the treatment groups,
suggesting that individuals in these groups placed less weight on their prior beliefs as they placed
weight on the common signals they received.
         To assess this prediction more formally and across waves, we regress individuals' posterior
expectations (             ) on their priors (               , a dummy variable for being treated
(            for the "public" information treatment and                 for the "private" information
treatment), and the interaction of the two:

                                                                                 

                                                                   .                            (1)

Given that the control group is not receiving any information, we would expect to see non-treated
respondents place a higher weight on their priors than those in the treatment groups, so the interaction
term should be negative. We report estimates of this regression across waves in Table 4. Panel A
shows that "private information" and "public information" treatments have broadly similar effects.
Consistent with Figure 2, we find that contemporaneously, individuals in the treatment groups place
significantly less weight on their priors than do those in the control group. These effects on
expectations dissipate rapidly: the average effects on beliefs have fully dissipated within one month
of the treatment, irrespective of which measure of expectations we use (point or distribution).
         Panel B of Table 4 shows the results of estimating the pooled treatment effect based on the
following specification:

                                                                                          . (1')

We find that little predictive power of the treatments is lost when we pool across treatments: R2 is
similar for specifications with either pooled or separate treatments. When we pool across


                                                                                                      15
 
treatments, the implied weight on the prior falls from 0.54 for the control group to 0.35 for the
treatment group. This is consistent with agents' forecasts in the treatment group converging toward
the signal received. However, in subsequent waves, there are few differences in the weights
assigned to prior beliefs between the treatment and control groups, confirming that the information
about recent inflation in the treatments has no discernible long-lived effect on inflation
expectations of Dutch households.
       In short, we find that the information treatments have clear, albeit small and transient,
effects on the inflation expectations of Dutch households. Although there is some heterogeneity in
the strength of the response, households revise their inflation expectations toward the treatment
that they receive, if any, in much the same way as documented in other information experiments
on households and firms. However, given that Dutch households were initially better informed
about inflation than commonly found in other advanced economies, the resulting average revisions
in expectations were smaller than found in prior work. This suggests that the information
treatments can serve as a valid source of exogenous variation in inflation expectations to study
their causal effect on spending decisions of households.


5.     Effects of Expectations on Household Spending
Inflation expectations are a frequent topic of discussion for policy-makers because, ultimately,
they are perceived as affecting economic decisions. One channel through which these expectations
may matter is the saving/spending decisions of households, as illustrated in e.g., the consumption
Euler equation. But causal evidence on this channel remains limited due to the inherently
endogenous nature of expectations and spending decisions. In this section, we overcome this issue
by using the information treatments to identify exogenous variation in inflation expectations to
characterize the effect of expectations on spending decisions.
       Our approach stems from the fact that we observe ex-post spending on non-durables and
durables on the part of households, measured in follow-up surveys, as well as exogenous variation
in inflation expectations. To characterize the link between the two, we therefore rely on an
instrumental variable (IV) strategy in which the treatments are used to identify exogenous variation
in expectations.




                                                                                                 16
 
              For non-durable spending, we regress ex-post non-durable expenditures (measured in
waves 2-4) on post-treatment inflation expectations from wave 1. The econometric specification
is given by the following equation:

 ,                                  ,                           ,  ,             ,                  ,      ,             (2)

where  ,                 denotes spending in category  (non-durable/ durable) by household i in month t+h
reported in survey at time t+h;  ,                                   is the 12-month ahead inflation forecast of household i at
the end of wave 1 (time t) after treatments while  ,                                      is the equivalent forecast prior to the
treatment (time t-);  ,  ,                                is the prediction prior to the treatment of household i in wave 1 (time
t-) of what the level of spending on goods in category  would be at time t+h; and  ,                                           is a
vector of household controls.10 Note that the latter is measured prior to the information treatment
and should capture much of the relevant information available to household i at time t about what
own spending would be at time t+h. We instrument for the inflation expectations using a treatment
dummy and the interaction of the treatment with households' prior inflation expectation. As
documented in Table 5, the F-statistic for the first stage is generally higher than 10, indicating that
the instruments are sufficiently strong for inference.11
              We run these regressions for each individual post-treatment wave (columns (1)-(3)) as well
as pooled across waves (column (4)) and present the results for spending on non-durables in Panel
A of Table 5. In the first two months, the estimated effect on consumption is positive but
insignificantly different from zero. In the third month, we detect a large positive effect, such that

                                                            
10
   The list of controls includes quadratic polynomial in age, log annual gross income, indicator variables for
educational attainment and marital status.
11
   Because of significant noise in both expectations and consumption data, we use the following approach to minimize
the effect of outliers. In the first stage, we use the Huber-robust regression to identify influential observations. In the
process of running Huber-robust regressions, we generate a weight  that quantifies the influence of each observation.
In this step, Huber-robust regressions effectively eliminate (i.e., assign weight  0) observations with extreme
predictions for future inflation (e.g., 100 percent inflation in the next 12 months). In the second stage, we use jackknife
to identify influential observations. That is, we run IV regressions (which use weights ) by dropping one observation
at a time and recording the resulting coefficient . We identify observation  as influential if it moves  by a magnitude
greater than a certain threshold. To ensure that we apply the same threshold across specifications, we normalize
estimated s by the standard error of  estimated on the full sample. Belsley, Kuh and Welsch (1980, p. 28) identify
influential observations as those that move the coefficient of interest by more than 2/#  (given the number of
observations per wave, this would mean that the threshold is approximately 0.05), but it is also common practice to
use a threshold of 1 (Bollen and Jackman 1990, p. 267). We use a threshold of 0.1 for specifications estimated on a
single wave and 0.05 for specifications estimated on data pooled across waves. These thresholds eliminate less than 1
percent of the sample.

                                                                                                                                17
 
the average effect across the three months is positive and statistically significant at the 10 percent
level. The implied magnitude is large: a 1 percent exogenous increase in inflation expectations
leads to an almost 10 percent increase in non-durable spending on average, in the three months
following our experiment. However, the standard errors are very large and we cannot reject the
null of much smaller effects. We interpret this result as a reflection of the significant noise in self-
reported data on non-durable spending and the relatively small number of participants in the
survey. In addition, the results suggest that the effects on non-durable goods spending may be
delayed for some months, and we may be missing the brunt of the effects given that we only
followed up with households for three months.
        We then turn to the effects of inflation expectations on durable goods spending. To do so,
we rely on two sets of questions in the survey. First, respondents were asked in wave 1 whether they
planned to engage in any purchases of durable goods (including, for instance, cars, electronics,
kitchen appliances, furniture, house maintenance and jewelries). If they answered yes, they were
then asked about how much they expected to spend on these items. In follow-up waves, all
respondents were asked whether they had made any purchases of durable goods over the previous
month and if so, how much they had spent. These questions therefore provide us with both an
extensive margin of durable goods spending (did they make unplanned purchases) as well as an
intensive margin of durable goods spending (how much more or less did they spend than expected).
        We first consider the extensive margin of durable goods spending. To do so, we use the
same empirical specification as for non-durable goods spending but replace the dependent variable
with a dummy variable equal to one if they did a durable goods purchase in that month. We also
replace the ex-ante forecast of their spending with a dummy variable for whether they had initially
planned to do a durable good purchase that month. Applying the same IV strategy as before for
inflation expectations yields estimated values of  shown in Panel B of Table 5 for each follow-
up wave as well as pooled across all three follow-up waves. For each month, we find negative
effects of inflation expectations on the probability of purchasing durable goods that month. The
effects are economically large: a 1 percentage point exogenous increase in inflation expectations
reduces the probability of purchasing durable goods by 25 percentage points on average. Unlike
the estimated effects on non-durable goods, the estimated effects on the probability of purchasing
durable goods are fairly precise and consistently imply large elasticities with respect to inflation
expectations. However, given that we have follow-up surveys only over the next three months, we

                                                                                                     18
 
cannot determine whether households are simply delaying these purchases or whether they are
cancelling them outright for the foreseeable future.
             To assess the effect on the intensive margin of durable goods spending, we restrict our
attention to households who purchased durable goods in one of the three follow-up waves. Because
large durable goods purchases are infrequent, only 329 such responses are present in the three follow-
up waves combined. As a result, we pool across all three waves using the log of their spending on
durables as the dependent variable. Results, shown in Panel C of Table 5, suggest a negative effect
on the amount spent on durable goods conditional on buying a durable good: a 1 percentage point
exogenous increase in inflation expectations is followed by households spending around 60 percent
less on these goods than they had originally planned, although this estimate is quite imprecise. We
interpret this result as indicating that inflation expectations matter along the intensive margin as well,
but there is insufficient variation in the data to speak clearly about the magnitude of the effects.
             We can also combine the intensive and extensive margins to assess the total effect of inflation
expectations on durable goods expenditures. In this case, we use a Tobit IV regression where the
dependent variable is the log of (one plus) durable goods spending (Panel D, Table 5). The effects
of higher inflation expectations are again negative and significant. They also appear to grow over
time, indicating that the effects on durable goods may take significant time to be fully realized.
             Finally, we consider the effect of changes in inflation expectations on the total level of
household spending, defined as the sum of their spending on non-durables with their spending on
durable goods items. We present results across each wave as well as pooled across the three follow-
up waves (Panel E, Table 5). We find that total spending is lower on average, but the imprecision of
the estimates remains high and we can only reject (at 10% level of confidence) the null of no change
when pooling across waves. This suggests that the decline in durable goods spending at least offsets,
and may even dominate, the increase in non-durable good spending identified in Panel A.
             These results do not hinge on using ex-post reported spending of households. We can verify
this using the fact that households were asked to report their monthly spending plans in each of the
follow-up waves. We can therefore examine if the reaction of spending plans to information
treatments is similar to the reaction of actual consumer spending. In particular, we estimate the
following version of equation (2):

     ,   ,                 ,                 ,  ,              ,                  ,      ,          (2')


                                                                                                           19
 
where  ,   ,    is spending for goods in category  planned in wave  . We focus on the responses
in the second wave of the survey since it gives us the largest number of observations (plans for
spending in May and June) and it is closest to the treatment in the first wave of the survey. To
maximize statistical power, we pool responses for planned spending in May and June. We find
(column (5) of Table 5) that the estimated responses of planned spending, as expressed in these
follow-up waves, are generally similar to the estimated responses of actual spending (column (4) of
Table 5), although there is considerable sampling uncertainty in the estimates. This helps confirm
that the identified responses of each type of consumption are not an anomaly: they are reflected both
in ex-post reports of actual spending as well as ex-ante predictions for the path of that spending.
        It also provides a potential rationale for why transitory changes in expectations in general and
inflation expectation in particular can appear to have longer-lived effects on actions. The temporary
effect on inflation expectations is itself not surprising and in fact consistent with earlier RCT studies
for the U.S. and other countries (e.g., Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia 2017, Coibion,
Gorodnichenko and Weber 2019, Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Ropele 2018). If economic agents
revise their plans for spending and other choices at the time of the treatment and then stick to these
plans even after treatment effects on inflation expectations are worn out, then one would expect to
find results like those above. Indeed, Chetty and Szeidl (2007) document that some types of consumer
spending may be rather inflexible and households may cut spending on food (more generally small
purchases) in response to large negative income shocks to stick to their consumption plans. Our result
that plans for spending react to transitory shocks is consistent with this type of effect.


6.      Channels
We find robust evidence that inflation expectations affect spending on the part of households.
While the evidence on non-durable spending is imprecise, the estimated effects on durable goods
spending are much sharper and negative. How does one interpret these effects of inflation
expectations on consumer spending? In this section, we explore several potential channels for how
information treatments influence consumption choices of Dutch households.


6.1. Expectations of other variables
One interpretation of the observed spending responses on durable goods is that they reflect
changing expectations of durable goods prices. Durable goods purchases depend not just on the

                                                                                                      20
 
perceived real interest rate but also on the expected path of prices of durable goods (e.g., consumers
may expect a fall in the price of durables and thus they postpone purchases on durable goods until
prices become more attractive). We do not observe price expectations for durable goods in the
survey and so it is difficult for us to speak directly to this channel.
         A second interpretation is that changes in inflation expectations also affect other
expectations of households and those then lead to offsetting effects on spending patterns. Coibion,
Gorodnichenko and Ropele (2018), for example, find that firms in Italy interpret higher inflation
as associated with worse economic outcomes, both at the aggregate level and at the level of their
firm, which may explain why firms with exogenously higher inflation expectations choose to
reduce their employment in a persistent fashion.
         To assess this possibility, we continue to use the same IV strategy as with ex-post spending
outcomes of households but instead replace the dependent variable with their expectations about
their future spending, their future nominal income, aggregate future spending on non-durables, or
what they think other households expect about future non-durable spending. These expectations
are from wave 1 immediately after the information treatment (if any) was applied to households.
We replace the ex-ante expectation of future spending on the right-hand side with the ex-ante belief
about the dependent variable measured prior to the treatment. We then instrument for post-
treatment inflation expectations in the same way as before. Formally, we estimate the following
specification

                                                                          

                               .                                                                (3)

where              is the post-treatment expectation for the variable of interest ,           is the pre-
treatment expectation for ,  include, as before, quadratic polynomial in a respondent's age,
indicator variables for a respondent's educational attainment, log gross annual income of the
household, and an indicator variable for marital status. The key coefficient in this regression is  . The
first-stage regression for           is given by equation (1'). The results are presented in Table 6.
         Households expect no change in their net nominal household income (column (1), Panel
A) when their inflation expectations exogenously increase, meaning that their perceived real
income declines. Consistent with this, they predict a strong decline in their spending on non-

                                                                                                        21
 
durable goods (column (2), Panel A): a one percent increase in inflation expectations leads to a 2.4
percent decrease in anticipated spending on non-durables. The reaction of households'
expectations for aggregate spending on non-durables (column (3), Panel A) and households'
higher-order expectations for aggregate spending on non-durables (column (4), Panel A) are
similarly strong, indicating that they perceive that broader economic activity will be weaker. While
counterintuitive for standard economic theory, these negative revisions in anticipated spending to
elevated inflation expectations are consistent with correlations observed for U.S. households.
Specifically, Kamdar (2019) documents that households in the Michigan Survey of Consumers
and in the New York Fed's Survey of Consumer Expectations associate high inflation with high
unemployment. In other words, U.S. and Dutch consumers apparently subscribe to a stagflationary
view of inflation, even though inflation and unemployment have largely been negatively correlated
in the data since the 1970s. Kamdar (2019) uses rational inattention to explain this apparent
contradiction. Intuitively, if consumers can have only a limited number of signals about shocks
hitting the economy, they will focus on the shocks that shift the Phillips curve because these shocks
are costliest for welfare. As a result, even if inflation and unemployment are uncorrelated in the
data generating process, inattentive consumers end up with a positive correlation between these
variables because they concentrate on specific shocks.
       Panels B and C in Table 6 report the reaction of net household income expectations in waves
2 through 4 to post-treatment inflation expectations immediately after the treatment. Panel B of the
table shows that mean income expectations implied by the reported distribution generally continue
to show little response to changes in inflation expectations. In contrast, uncertainty about income
expectations (Panel C) declines. These responses suggest that uncertainty is unlikely to be a central
channel of expected declines in future spending on non-durable goods (Table 6) or actual declines
in spending on durable goods (Table 5).
       Jointly, these results provide a possible interpretation for why total spending as well as
spending on durables falls sharply when inflation expectations rise while non-durable spending, if
anything, rises. The decline in expected real income calls for a decrease in total spending,
particularly if the decline in income is perceived to be persistent. Because income is
contemporaneously unchanged, meeting this necessary decline in total spending can be most easily
accomplished by delaying and reducing durable goods purchases. The anticipated rise in prices is
also likely to lead to some stocking up of storable goods, as documented elsewhere in D'Acunto,

                                                                                                  22
 
Hoang and Weber (2018) and Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Koustas (2017), which can explain why
there may be an increase in non-durable goods spending while also pushing toward an additional
reduction in durable goods spending to finance this stocking up behavior.




6.2 The Role of Cognitive and Financial Constraints
Other factors that could affect how spending responds to inflation expectations include financial
constraints on households (e.g., McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson 2016) and cognitive constraints
(Fahri and Werning 2018). To assess what role they play in driving our results, we verify to what
extent households with different levels of financial or cognitive constraints respond to information
treatments in the same way or whether these constraints lead to differential responses of
expectations and actions.
              We start by considering whether inflation expectations respond similarly to information
treatments depending on individual characteristics. To maximize statistical power, we focus on the
pooled treatment.12 The econometric specification is given by:

                                                                                          

                                                                                          
                                                                               .                             (4)

where  is some characteristic (level of thinking, education, income, etc.) of respondent  . To
measure cognitive constraints, we classify respondents based on their level-k of thinking. We also
consider splits of respondents based on their education and their income.13 To identify financial
constraints, we rely on whether respondents have enough liquid savings to cover three months of
non-durable good spending and, as a separate measure, on whether their financial wealth is greater
than 17,000 (the median financial wealth of households participating in the survey). We report
results in Table 7.




                                                            
12
  Results differentiating by treatment type are available in Appendix Table 2.
13
  We also examined other sample splits (e.g., based on financial literacy). Results are broadly similar and available
upon request.

                                                                                                                   23
 
              We find little evidence that the level of thinking has a discernable influence on how
treatment affects inflation expectations.14 In a similar spirit, liquidity positions of respondents do
not alter reactions to the treatment much. However, financial wealth has more of an effect on how
beliefs respond to treatments: higher wealth agents place more weight on their priors and therefore
respond less than agents with lower weight, on average. We also observe some differences by
education and income: more educated individuals rely less on their priors when treated than less
educated individuals, while the reverse is true for higher income respondents.
              These differences in treatment effects on expectations, while not very large in an economic
sense, still imply that there is a non-trivial amount of heterogeneity in the first stage of our
regressions. For this reason, to assess the sensitivity of actions to these characteristics, we run
separate IV regressions (2) for each subgroup of the population that we are interested in. We report
results for how different forms of consumption respond to inflation expectations for different
subgroups in Table 8.
              Some of the results are striking. For example, we find some role for level-k thinking in
spending decisions (columns (1) and (2) of Table 8). With respect to spending on non-durables,
         0 individuals increase their spending while            0 individuals tend to reduce their spending
when their inflation expectations are higher. Higher level thinkers also reduce their consumption
of durable goods more than lower-level thinkers, leading to a substantial difference in terms of
how total spending responds to higher inflation expectations across the two groups. But notably,
higher-level thinkers are the ones who significantly reduce their spending when inflation
expectations are higher, which is the opposite of what one would expect from a simple
consumption Euler equation logic. It is also the opposite of the effect required by Fahri and
Werning (2018) to explain the forward guidance puzzle, since their proposal is that higher level
thinkers will see their consumption rise more, not less, than lower-level thinkers when their
inflation expectations increase.
              Financial constraints also seem to be related to spending responses. As displayed in Table 8,
we find that respondents who are more liquid (column (8)) or who have more financial wealth
(column (10)) tend to reduce their durable spending relatively more compared to those who are less


                                                            
14
   How the level of thinking influences treatment effects may depend on whether information in a treatment is public
or private. We find that splitting the treatments does not yield statistical significance either (see column (1) of
Appendix Table 2).

                                                                                                                 24
 
liquid (column (7)) or have lower wealth (column (9)) when their inflation expectations rise. While
the small change in spending following changes in inflation expectations for liquidity-constrained
individuals is to be expected, the fact that spending on durable goods falls so sharply for the
unconstrained is at odds with the logic in McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016). In contrast, we
find little difference based on education or income, which suggests that the differences identified
based on cognitive and financial constraints are indeed capturing those forces.
       We also provide evidence that cognitive and financial constraints have effects above and
beyond those operating through expectations of future income or aggregate conditions. In Table 9,
we consider how inflation expectations vary across different subgroups of the population. We find
few significant differences in terms of how their expectations of future income or aggregate
conditions vary. For different levels of thinking, for example, we find similar sensitivity of non-
inflation expectations to inflation expectations for     0 and      0 thinkers. Similarly, for different
measures of financial constraints there are few differences in how non-inflation expectations respond
to changes in inflation expectations. This suggests that it is the financial and cognitive constraints
themselves which drive the differences in consumption behavior across sub-groups, not how these
different groups interpret news about inflation, even though these constraints cannot themselves
explain the observed average responses of different types of spending.


7.     Conclusion
We provide new causal evidence on the effect of inflation expectations on households' decisions.
Using a novel randomized control trial (RCT) design to identify exogenous variation in expectations
and actions of households, we find that our information treatments generate significant, albeit small,
effects on expectations. These effects on expectations then translate into households' spending
decisions at least in the short-term. The implied effects are pronounced for durable goods spending
but less clearly so for non-durable spending. We view the strong negative response of durable
spending as reflecting the fact that households interpret higher inflation as temporarily reducing their
future real income, which leads to little adjustment of non-durable spending but sharp delays and
reductions in durable goods purchases to offset this transitory shock.
       This result builds on a growing literature employing RCT methods to study microeconomic
decisions underlying macroeconomic mechanisms. This approach provides a unique ability to
generate exogenous variation in the beliefs of actual agents, in a setting where the effects of those

                                                                                                     25
 
changing beliefs on actions can be measured frequently in consecutive months. This specific
application, how inflation expectations affect household decisions, is a central one in
macroeconomic models but it is just one of many settings where this approach can be applied. We
hope that this application serves as a stepping stone for more extensive use of randomized
information treatments to characterize how expectations feed into the decisions of households and
other agents.
       The main result documented here, namely that exogenously higher inflation expectations
lead to lower, rather than higher, spending on the part of households during the ELB has immediate
policy implications. One is that policies that aim to affect expectations can work, in that exogenous
changes in expectations clearly affect the decisions of households. But an immediate second
implication is that doing so is rife with challenges. The way in which households interpret the
information may be more complex than in the usual thought experiment. Changing inflation
expectations, for example, can induce agents to also change their other economic expectations and,
importantly, revise their consumption plans so that the ultimate effects on actions may differ from
those intended. This suggests that communication of policies aimed to move inflation expectations
should be more nuanced. Clearly, more research is needed to understand how agents make
inferences about own financial situation as well as the underlying state of the economy and how
the economy functions.


References
Afrouzi, Hassan, and Choongryul Yang. 2019. "Dynamic Inattention, the Phillips Curve, and
       Forward Guidance," Manuscript.
Andrade, Philippe, and Hervé Le Bihan. 2013. "Inattentive professional forecasters," Journal of
       Monetary Economics 60(8): 967-982.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Chen Lian. 2018. "Forward Guidance without Common
       Knowledge," American Economic Review 108 (9): 2477-2512.
Armona, Luis, Andreas Fuster, and Basit Zafar. forthcoming. "Home Price Expectations and
       Behaviour: Evidence from a Randomized Information Experiment," Review of Economic
       Studies.
Bachmann, Rudiger, Tim O. Berg, and Eric R. Sims. 2015. "Inflation Expectations and Readiness to
       Spend: Cross-Sectional Evidence," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(1): 1-35.

                                                                                                  26
 
Belsley, A. David, Edwin Kuh, and Roy E. Welsch. 1980. Regression Diagnostics: Identifying
       Influential Data and Sources of Collinearity. New York: Wiley.
Bollen, A. Kenneth, and Robert W. Jackman. 1990. Regression diagnostics: An expository treatment
       of outliers and influential cases. In Modern Methods of Data Analysis, ed. J. Fox and J. S.
       Long, 257­291. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Camerer, Colin F. 1997. "Progress in Behavioral Game Theory," Journal of Economic Perspectives
       11(4): 167-188.
Camerer, Colin F., Teck-Hua Ho, and Juin-Kuan Chong. 2004. "A Cognitive Hierarchy Model of
       Games," Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3): 861-898.
Cavallo, Alberto, Guillermo Cruces, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. 2017. "Inflation Expectations,
       Learning, and Supermarket Prices: Evidence from Survey Experiments," American
       Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9(3): 1-35.
Chetty, Raj, and Adam Szeidl. 2007. "Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences," Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 122(2): 831-877.
Christensen, Celine, Peter van Els, and Maarten van Rooij. 2006. "Dutch households' perceptions of
       economic growth and inflation," De Economist 154(2): 277-294.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. "What can survey forecasts tell us about
       informational rigidities?" Journal of Political Economy 120(1): 116-159.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2015. "Information Rigidity and the Expectations
       Formation Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts," American Economic Review
       105(8): 2644-2678.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Dmitri Koustas. 2017. "Consumption Inequality and
       the Frequency of Purchases," NBER Working Paper w23357.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber. 2019. "Monetary Policy
       Communications and their Effects on Household Inflation Expectations," NBER Working
       Paper 25482.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Saten Kumar. 2018. "How Do Firms Form Their
       Expectations? New Survey Evidence," American Economic Review 108(9): 2671-2713.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Tiziano Ropele. 2018. "Inflation Expectations and
       Firm Decisions: New Causal Evidence," NBER Working Paper 25412.



                                                                                               27
 
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Saten Kumar, and Jane Ryngaert. 2018. "Do You Know
       That I Know That You Know...? Higher-Order Beliefs in Survey Data," NBER Working
       Paper 24987.
Crump, Richard K., Stefano Eusepi, Andrea Tambalotti, and Giorgio Topa. 2015. "Subjective
       intertemporal substitution," Staff Reports 734, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
D'Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber. 2016. "Unconventional Fiscal Policy,
       Inflation Expectations, and Consumption Expenditure," CESifo Working Paper Series 5793.
Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni and Christina Patterson. 2015. "The Forward Guidance Puzzle,"
       Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 574.
Dräger, Lena, and Giang Nghiem. 2018. "Are Consumers' Spending Decisions in Line with the
       Euler Equation?" Gutenberg School of Management and Economics & Research Unit
       "Interdisciplinary Public Policy, Discussion Paper Series, 1802.
Duca, Ioana, Geoff Kenny, and Andreas Reuter. 2018. "Inflation Expectations, Consumption and
       the Lower Bound: Empirical Evidence from a Large Euro Area Survey," ECB Working
       Paper 2196.
Fahri, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. 2018. "Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete
       Markets," Mimeo.
García-Schmidt, Mariana, and Michael Woodford. 2019. "Are Low Interest Rates Deflationary? A
       Paradox of Perfect-Foresight Analysis," American Economic Review 109(1): 86-120.
Gelman, Michael, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Shachar Kariv, Dmitri Koustas, Matthew D. Shapiro, Dan
       Silverman, and Steven Tadelis. 2016. "The Response of Consumer Spending to Changes in
       Gasoline Prices," NBER Working Paper 22969.
Ichiue, Hibiki, and Shusaku Nishiguchi. 2013. "Inflation Expectations and Consumer Spending at the
       Zero Bound: Micro Evidence," Bank of Japan Working Paper Series 13-E-11.
Jonung, Lars. 1981. "Perceived and Expected Rates of Inflation in Sweden," American Economic
       Review 71(5): 961-968.
Kamdar, Rupal. 2019. "The Inattentive Consumer: Sentiment and Expectations," manuscript.
Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. "A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
       Stimulus Payments," Econometrica 82(4): 1199-1239.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell. 2011. "Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning in
       the United States," Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10 (4): 509-525.

                                                                                               28
 
McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. 2016. "The Power of Forward Guidance
       Revisited," American Economic Review 106(10): 3133-3158.
Nagel, Rosemarie. 1995. "Unraveling in Guessing Games: An Experimental Study," American
       Economic Review 85(5): 1313-1326.
Nagel, Rosemarie, and John Duffy. 1997. "On the Robustness of Behavior in Experimental Beauty-
       Contest," Economic Journal 107(445): 1684-1700.
Teppa, Federica, and Corrie Vis. 2012. "The CentERpanel and the DNB household survey:
       Methodological aspects," DNB Occasional Studies 10(4). De Nederlandsche Bank.
Vellekoop, Nathanael, and Mirko Wiederholt. 2017. "Inflation Expectations and Choices of
       Households," Mimeo.




                                                                                           29
 
                                           Table 1. Descriptive statistics for various socioeconomic characteristics. 

                                                                                                            Mean         Median       St.Dev.         IQR
                                                                                                             (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)
        Age                                                                                                  49.29         49.00        17.45          30.00
        Female                                                                                                0.49          0.00         0.50           1.00
        Education: Post-secondary                                                                             0.29          0.00         0.45           1.00
        Education: Secondary                                                                                  0.41          0.00         0.49           1.00
        Education: Less than secondary                                                                        0.30          0.00         0.46           1.00
        Number of family members in the household                                                             2.21          2.00         1.14           2.00
        Number of children                                                                                    0.50          0.00         0.90           1.00
        Financial literacy score                                                                              2.01          2.00         1.10           2.00
        Net financial wealth, `000                                                                           38.38         12.24       117.59          36.44
        Household net income,                                                                             2,647.40      2,500.00     1,571.36      1,820.00
        Average monthly spending on non-durable goods over previous three months,                           627.57        480.00       678.65        600.00
        Spending on durable goods over previous three months,                                             1,166.45          0.00     4,134.95        500.00
        Money in checking/saving accounts before receiving the last paycheck:
           `000                                                                                              13.77          2.00        34.19         11.80
           multiple of net monthly income                                                                     6.61          0.88        51.54          4.90
           multiple of monthly spending on non-durable goods                                                 45.80          5.00       225.29         26.17

    Notes: The table reports descriptive statistics for various household characteristics of survey participants. None of the variables is winsorized, censored, etc.
    "Money in checking/saving accounts before receiving the last paycheck" is based on the following question: "How much money did you have in your checking
    and savings accounts and in cash on the day before your last regular paycheck arrived? Please do not include fixed term deposits, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, or
    retirement accounts, etc." The multiple of net monthly income is the ratio of "money in checking/saving accounts..." to net monthly income reported in another
    survey question. The multiple of monthly spending on non-durable goods is the ratio of "money in checking/saving accounts..." to the average monthly spending
    on non-durables goods over the previous three months. IQR stands for interquartile range.




                                                                                                                                                                        30
 
                                                                 Table 2. Descriptive statics for expectations. 

                                                                                                                                          Implied uncertainty (standard
                                                                                                       Implied mean
                                                                                                                                                   deviation)
                                                                                                                          Corr.                                    Corr.
                                                                                             Average        St.Dev.       with           Average    St.Dev.        with
                                                                                                                        inflation                                inflation
    Expectations (12-month ahead) for:                                                           (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)         (5)          (6)
    Inflation                                                                                   1.98          2.14                        1.55        1.49
    Growth rates
        Household spending on non-durable goods                                                 1.33          2.51        0.25             1.95          1.45         0.57
        Economy-level spending on non-durable goods                                             1.65          2.20        0.37             1.86          1.37         0.65
        Higher-order expectations: Economy-level spending on non-durable                        1.79          1.95        0.42             2.03          1.42         0.64
            goods
        Household net income                                                                    0.95          2.95        0.12             1.18          1.20         0.66

Notes: The table reports moments of various expectations elicited before survey participants are treated. All moments are based on the probability distributions reported by survey
participants. Means (columns (1)-(3)) are computed as means implied by the generalized beta distribution fitted to each respondent separately. Uncertainty (columns (4)-(6)) is
computed as standard deviation implied by the generalized beta distribution fitted to each respondent separately. Column (1) reports cross-section averages for implied means.
Column (2) reports cross-sectional standard deviation for implied means. Column (3) reports the correlation between implied mean inflation expectations and implied mean
expectation for another variable. Column (4) reports cross-section averages for implied uncertainty (standard deviation). Column (5) reports cross-sectional standard deviation for
implied uncertainty (standard deviation). Column (6) reports the correlation between implied uncertainty (standard deviation) for inflation expectations and implied uncertainty
(standard deviation) for expectation for another variable. Inflation expectations for various demographics groups are reported in Appendix Table 1.




                                                                                                                                                                                31
 
                                                Table 3. Beliefs about distribution of other households' guesses. 

                                                                     Level of thinking                                        Average
                                                                                                                                               Actual
                                                                                                                              expected
                                            0             0              1              2                3              4                    distribution
                                                                                                                             distribution
                                         (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)
          Share of respondents          42.3            15.2         16.1          15.1            7.5            3.9

          Panel A. Perceived distributions of others' guesses
          Range of Guesses
           From 0 to 9.99          5.7          5.6         5.5                   6.3          11.6           22.2               6.7             3.7
           From 10 to 19.99        6.7          7.3         7.5                  10.4          16.9           10.1               8.3             7.0
           From 20 to 29.99        8.5          9.8        11.8                  19.0          12.3            9.3              11.0            13.4
           From 30 to 39.99       10.3         12.5        21.8                  17.3          12.6           11.4              13.7            16.8
           From 40 to 49.99       12.1         18.4        14.1                  11.9          10.1            8.6              13.1            11.8
           From 50 to 59.99       15.3         17.3        12.6                  11.6          10.5           10.3              14.1            11.3
           From 60 to 69.99       14.9         10.7         9.4                   7.7           8.0            7.2              11.6            15.9
           From 70 to 79.99       11.9          7.5         7.1                   6.0           6.6            8.3               9.2            14.0
           From 80 to 89.99        8.0          5.7         5.4                   5.0           5.7            6.3               6.6             4.5
           From 90 to 100          6.6          5.3         4.8                   4.7           5.9            6.3               5.8             1.4

          Panel B. Consistency of responses
          Dependent variable: 
                                 1.30***     0.93***              0.73***       0.55***        0.31***        0.13***
                                (0.01)      (0.01)               (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)

            Observations                739             254          282           226           118             61
            R2                          0.96            0.97         0.97          0.95          0.87          0.79
            p-value(slope=2/3)          0.00            0.00         0.00          0.00          0.00          0.00
    Notes: The table reports various moments for responses in the "beauty contest" game described in Section 3.3. Because there are many responses not equal to 33,
    22, etc., we group responses in level of thinking as follows.  0 includes everybody who reported a number greater than 50.  0 includes everybody who
    reported a number in 40,50 range.  1 includes everybody who reported a number in 30,40 range.  2 includes everybody who reported a number in
     20,30 range.  3 includes everybody who reported a number in 10,20 range.  4 includes everybody who reported a number in 0,10 range. Panel B
    reports Huber-robust estimates of the slope in the following regression:                                    where                    is the guess submitted by
    person  ,              is person  's average guess for others' guesses.



                                                                                                                                                                      32
 
                              Table 4. Posterior inflation expectations as a function of treatment and prior inflation expectations. 
                                                                  Point prediction                                             Implied mean
                                            Wave 1            Wave 2          Wave 3           Wave 4             Wave 2          Wave 3                                Wave 4
                                               (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)                 (5)              (6)                                (7)
    Panel A. Separate treatments
    Prior                                    0.538***         0.108***         0.257***        0.251***            0.355***        0.297***                              0.369***
                                            (0.030)          (0.030)          (0.029)         (0.033)             (0.041)         (0.034)                               (0.038)
    Prior×Treatment (public)                -0.156***         0.212***         0.039           0.004               0.036           0.120**                              -0.000
                                            (0.045)          (0.047)          (0.043)         (0.048)             (0.056)         (0.050)                               (0.053)
    Treatment (public)                       0.022           -0.450***         0.030           0.015              -0.023          -0.198*                               -0.080
                                            (0.100)          (0.113)          (0.109)         (0.118)             (0.135)         (0.119)                               (0.127)
    Prior×Treatment (private)               -0.210***         0.136***         0.027          -0.025               0.075           0.312***                              0.015
                                            (0.043)          (0.039)          (0.039)         (0.041)             (0.053)         (0.048)                               (0.051)
    Treatment (private)                      0.148           -0.313***        -0.132          -0.042              -0.179          -0.627***                             -0.150
                                            (0.097)          (0.100)          (0.102)         (0.104)             (0.130)         (0.115)                               (0.124)
    Constant                                 1.279***         2.160***         1.771***        1.760***            1.541***        1.579***                              1.455***
                                            (0.071)          (0.077)          (0.076)         (0.081)             (0.099)         (0.084)                               (0.093)
    Observations                             1,778             1,545            1,534          1,500                1,621          1,603                                 1,579
    R-squared                                0.337            0.114             0.170          0.129                0.212          0.297                                 0.238
    F-stat for treatment                     13.79             5.918            1.933          0.906                0.779          11.21                                 0.760

       Panel B. Pooled treatment
       Prior                                            0.540***           0.110***           0.258***           0.250***              0.354***           0.298***           0.370***
                                                       (0.030)            (0.029)            (0.029)            (0.033)               (0.041)            (0.034)            (0.038)
       Prior×Treatment                                 -0.187***           0.161***           0.032             -0.016                 0.057              0.189***           0.007
                                                       (0.037)            (0.036)            (0.036)            (0.039)               (0.049)            (0.042)            (0.046)
       Treatment                                        0.094             -0.357***          -0.057             -0.010                -0.106             -0.370***          -0.116
                                                       (0.085)            (0.091)            (0.091)            (0.096)               (0.117)            (0.102)            (0.110)
       Constant                                         1.272***           2.151***           1.765***           1.760***              1.544***           1.580***           1.454***
                                                       (0.070)            (0.076)            (0.075)            (0.081)               (0.099)            (0.085)            (0.093)
       Observations                                     1,778              1,543              1,533              1,500                 1,621              1,606              1,579
       R-squared                                        0.339              0.112              0.170              0.126                 0.210              0.269              0.238
       F-stat for treatment                             27.16              10.58              0.403              0.276                 0.702              9.965              1.284
Notes: The table reports estimated coefficients for specification (1) in Panel A and specification (1') in Panel B. Panel A distinguishes treatments with private information ("Before
we proceed, we would like to share the following information only with you and a few other households. The Dutch Statistical Office recently reported that the percent increase in
consumer prices compared in February to 12 months earlier in the Netherlands was 1.2%") and with public information ("Before we proceed, we would like to share the following
information with you. In a public release available to all Dutchmen at no charge, the Dutch Statistical Office recently reported that the percent increase in consumer prices in
February compared to 12 months earlier in the Netherlands was 1.2%"). Panel B pools treatments into one. All coefficients are estimated using Huber-robust regressions. F-statistic
for treatment is the F-statistic for the test of coefficients on treatment variables (levels and interactions) being equal to zero. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***,
**, and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.    
                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                         33
 
                             Table 5. Consumption response to changes in inflation expectations. 
    Dep. var. is indicated in the title           Actual spending, horizon, month                 Planned spending
    of the panel                           ln         ln            ln             Pooled              Pooled
                                             (1)        (2)           (3)            (4)                (5)
    Panel A. Spending on non-durable goods, log(spending)*100.

    Posterior inflation expectations            6.91           6.74         26.34*             9.12*                    -0.15
                                               (8.66)         (7.70)       (13.60)            (5.28)                    (5.83)

    Observations                                 945            924             888             2,735                   1,627
    R-squared                                    0.34           0.40            0.25             0.35                    0.36
    1st stage F-stat                            15.69          14.61           12.10            40.27                   27.19

    Panel B. Spending on durable goods, extensive margin, linear probability model.

    Posterior inflation expectations           -0.17*         -0.29**        -0.33***         -0.26***                  -0.13*
                                               (0.10)         (0.11)         (0.11)           (0.06)                    (0.07)

    Observations                                1,088           999             940             3,014                   1,636
    R-squared                                    0.00          -0.23           -0.34            -0.18                    0.11
    1st stage F-stat                            10.78          8.325           11.19            29.09                    8.70

    Panel C. Spending on durable goods, intensive margin, log(spending)*100.

    Posterior inflation expectations                                                           -60.31*
                                                                                               (35.81)

    Observations                                                                                 329
    R-squared                                                                                    0.19
    1st stage F-stat                                                                            12.05

    Panel D. Spending on durable goods, IV Tobit, log(spending)*100. 

    Posterior inflation expectations          -390.40*      -552.89**      -825.64***        -593.43***              -658.36**
                                              (204.25)       (229.24)       (223.23)          (129.91)               (251.32)

    Observations                                 945            924             888             2,735                   1,634
    1st stage F-stat                            15.69          14.61           12.10            40.27                   18.25

    Panel E. Total spending, log(spending)*100. 

    Posterior inflation expectations         -13.41          -7.14         -19.78              -13.95*                   4.07
                                             (11.34)        (11.50)        (18.34)              (7.59)                  (9.83)

    Observations                                 809            762             702             2,262                   1,166
    R-squared                                    0.30           0.33            0.26             0.29                    0.33
    1st stage F-stat                            14.21          10.91           7.996            30.81                   15.65
Notes: The table reports estimated coefficient  in specification (2) for various measures of consumer spending. Panel titles indicate
which measure of consumer spending is used as an outcome variable. Columns (1)-(4) report estimates for actual spending. Column (5)
reports results for spending planned in the second wave of the survey (specification (3')). All specifications are estimated using treatment
and treatment interacted with prior inflation beliefs as instrumental variables (IV). Panel D reports coefficients in the IV Tobit regression.
1st stage F-stat report the F-test for the coefficients on instrumental variables being equal to zero. Outliers and influential observations
are identified and removed according to the procedure described in footnote 11. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***,
**, and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
                                                                                                                                           34
 
                       Table 6. How inflation expectations translate into expectations about other variables. 
                                        (1)                     (2)                      (3)                     (4)
                                             Response of other expectations immediately after the treatment
                                                                                                            Higher-order
                                                                                   Economy-level            expectations:
                                  Household net         Household spending
                                                                                  spending on non-         Economy-level
                                     income            on non-durable goods
                                                                                    durable goods         spending on non-
                                                                                                            durable goods

    Panel A. Point predictions
                                       0.58                    -2.39**                    -2.07*                     -3.19**
                                      (1.10)                    (1.15)                    (1.20)                      (1.48)

    Observations                      1,224                     1,207                      1,141                      1,061
    R-squared                          0.20                     -0.04                      -0.07                      -0.10
    1st stage F-stat                  18.72                     20.66                      18.16                      19.15

                                                  Household income expectations in subsequent waves
                                     Wave 2                 Wave 3                Wave 4                             Pooled

    Panel B. Implied mean
                                       1.10*                    -0.48                      -0.46                      0.13
                                      (0.60)                    (0.58)                     (0.61)                    (0.30)

    Observations                       972                       969                        964                       2,891
    R-squared                          0.23                      0.23                       0.29                      0.29
    1st stage F-stat                   9.17                      9.17                       8.12                      27.85

    Panel C. Implied standard deviation (uncertainty)
                                 -0.62**                        -0.01                      -0.53**                  -0.28***
                                 (0.25)                         (0.15)                     (0.24)                    (0.10)

    Observations                       974                       960                        966                       2,886
    R-squared                          0.00                      0.36                       0.03                      0.25
    1st stage F-stat                   8.18                      8.61                       7.55                      25.27
Notes: The table reports estimated coefficient  in specification (3). Outcome variables on Panel A are measured in the first wave
immediately after the treatment. All outcome variables are measured as point predictions. Panel B reports results for implied mean of
expected growth rate of household income over the next 12 months. Panel C reports results for implied uncertainty (standard deviation)
of expected growth rate of household income over the next 12 months. Outcome variables in Panels B and C are based on probability
distributions reported by respondents. All specifications are estimated using treatment and treatment interacted with prior inflation
beliefs as instrumental variables (IV). Treatments are pooled. 1st stage F-stat report the F-test for the coefficients on instrumental
variables being equal to zero. Outliers and influential observations are identified and removed according to the procedure described in
footnote 11. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent
levels.                                     




                                                                                                                                    35
 
    Table 7.  Heterogeneity in posterior inflation expectations as a function of treatment and prior inflation expectations.  

                                                                      Respondents' characteristic W
                                             Level of          College-     Log gross        Money in liquid               Financial
                                            thinking            level        monthly       accounts enough to              wealth is
                                                              education      income         cover 3 months on               greater
                                                                                                non-durable                  than
                                                                                               consumption                 17,000
                                                (1)              (2)           (3)                  (4)                       (5)

    Prior                                     0.563***          0.459***          0.487***             0.604***             0.582***
                                             (0.036)           (0.037)           (0.031)              (0.047)              (0.042)
    Prior × Treatment                        -0.139***         -0.104**          -0.117***            -0.220***            -0.299***
                                             (0.045)           (0.045)           (0.039)              (0.062)              (0.051)
    W × Treatment                            -0.001             0.310*           -0.367***             0.096               -0.467**
                                             (0.075)           (0.181)           (0.131)              (0.185)              (0.194)
    Prior × W × Treatment                    -0.015            -0.189**           0.266***             0.062                0.329***
                                             (0.034)           (0.083)           (0.057)              (0.082)              (0.084)
    Prior × W                                -0.061**           0.174***         -0.216***            -0.046               -0.195***
                                             (0.028)           (0.066)           (0.053)              (0.064)              (0.069)
    Treatment                                 0.019            -0.057            -0.050                0.044                0.199
                                             (0.107)           (0.108)           (0.088)              (0.141)              (0.124)
    W                                         0.077            -0.371**           0.269**             -0.029                0.384**
                                             (0.063)           (0.149)           (0.121)              (0.149)              (0.164)
    Observations                              1,694             1,780             1,657                 1,323                1,478
    R-squared                                 0.352             0.324             0.366                 0.392                0.328

Notes: The table reports estimated coefficients in specification (4). Posterior inflation expectations are measured in the first wave
immediately after the treatment. The title of each column indicates which variable is used as  in specification (4). Log gross monthly
income (column (3)) is normalized to have zero mean. Variables  in columns (2), (4) and (5) are indicator variables. All specifications
are estimated using treatment and treatment interacted with prior inflation beliefs as instrumental variables (IV). Treatments are pooled.
Outliers and influential observations are identified and removed according to the procedure described in footnote 11. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.




                                                                                                                                       36
 
                                            Table 8. Heterogeneity in consumption response to changes in inflation expectations. 

Dependent variable is indicated in the                                                                   Sample split by:
title of the panel                                                                                                                   Money in liquid
                                                                                                         Gross monthly              accounts enough to
                                                                             College-level                                                                       Financial wealth is
                                              Level of thinking                                       income is greater than        cover 3 months on
                                                                              education                                                                         greater than 17,000
                                                                                                           the mean                     non-durable
                                                                                                                                       consumption
                                                       0            1       No           Yes             No           Yes             No         Yes               No          Yes
                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)             (7)         (8)              (9)         (10)

Panel A. Spending on non-durable goods, log(spending)*100.
Posterior inflation expectations      10.41*      -11.25                 10.05        6.23            -0.14      15.86**           13.17      12.64             13.19**     -0.60
                                      (5.76)      (13.09)                (6.27)     (10.04)           (8.80)      (6.95)           (8.29)      (9.18)           (6.50)     (10.56)
Observations                             1,607      1,083                  1,562       1,173            1,074       1,661             995        1,563            1,048       1,372
p-value equality                               0.13                              0.75                         0.15                         0.97                         0.27
1st stage F-stat                         29.21      9.399                  22.40       25.91            11.00       31.53            17.83       14.89            25.04       13.89

Panel B. Spending on durable goods, extensive margin, linear probability model.
Posterior inflation expectations        -0.23*** -0.44***        -0.29*** -0.20*                      -0.29*** -0.22***            -0.19**     -0.30***         -0.16*** -0.28**
                                        (0.07)      (0.15)       (0.07)       (0.11)                  (0.09)      (0.08)           (0.09)      (0.09)           (0.06)      (0.13)
Observations                              1,746       1,176        1,793        1,221                   1,249       1,765             986        1,544            1,210       1,424
p-value equality                                0.23                      0.51                                0.58                         0.36                         0.36
1st stage F-stat                          17.47       8.151        17.71        16.17                   8.31        26.89            10.90       20.01            20.16       9.210

Panel C. Spending on durable goods, IV Tobit, log(spending)*100.
Posterior inflation expectations (×100) -5.66*** -10.03**        -6.77*** -3.79                       -8.38**    -4.23***          -4.46*      -6.28***         -4.55*** -5.78*
                                        (2.09)      (4.96)       (2.21)      (2.60)                   (3.73)     (1.67)            (2.47)      (2.06)           (1.76)      (2.97)
Observations                              1,743       1,173        1,790       1,218                    1,160      1,848              983        1,537            1,208       1,419
p-value equality                                0.45                     0.37                                0.36                          0.51                         0.70
1st stage F-stat                          12.79       6.588        13.73       13.85                    6.97       21.49             7.576       17.06            14.23       7.333

Panel D. Total spending, log(spending)*100.
Posterior inflation expectations               -2.12      -30.74**        -12.91      -18.63          -22.07**       -7.08*         10.41      -25.31**           -1.89      -39.49**
                                              (10.00)     (13.22)          (8.44)     (17.75)         (11.14)       (10.55)        (12.98)       (12.26)          (7.98)      (17.55)
Observations                                     1,308        919            1,263       999             874         1,388           835          1,297            896         1,108
p-value equality                                       0.08                        0.77                        0.32                        0.05                          0.05
1st stage F-stat                                 16.12       11.97           17.88      16.14            9.96        24.72          11.40         15.81          20.30         11.84
 Notes: The table reports estimated coefficient  in specification (2) for various measures of consumer spending and various subsamples. Panel titles indicate which measure of
 consumer spending is used as an outcome variable. All results are for the case where data are pooled across waves (which corresponds to column (4) in Table 5). All specifications
 are estimated using treatment and treatment interacted with prior inflation beliefs as instrumental variables (IV). Panel C reports coefficients in the IV Tobit regression. 1st stage F-
 stat reports the F-test for the coefficients on instrumental variables being equal to zero. P-value equality shows p-value for the test of equality of estimated coefficients  in each
 sample split. Outliers and influential observations are identified and removed according to the procedure described in footnote 11. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
 ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
                                                                                                                                                                                       37
 
                                        Table 9. Heterogeneity in inflation expectation responses. 

                                                                  Dependent variable: post-treatment expectations (point predictions)
Sample split                                                                                                             Higher-order
                                                                                  Household        Economy-level
                                                                                                                         expectations:
                                                                Household net    spending on         spending on
                                                                                                                        Economy-level
                                                                  income         non-durable         non-durable
                                                                                                                       spending on non-
                                                                                     goods              goods
                                                                                                                         durable goods
                                                                     (1)               (2)                (3)                 (4)
Level of thinking       k=0                                        -0.28             -2.56*             -3.80*               -3.08
                                                                   (1.66)            (1.39)             (2.05)               (1.93)
                                     Observations                   694               676                652                  602
                                     1st stage F-stat              8.132             11.71              8.852                10.14
                        k>0                                        -0.09             -3.12              -1.61                -3.07
                                                                   (1.71)            (2.54)             (2.48)               (3.30)
                                  Observations                      462               462                424                  402
                                  1st stage F-stat                 8.834             6.476              4.652                5.783
                        p-value equal.                             0.937             0.846              0.496                0.996
College-level           No                                         -0.28             -3.62**            -5.68**              -5.03**
education                                                          (1.23)            (1.66)             (2.54)               (2.54)
                                     Observations                   682               665                628                  586
                                     1st stage F-stat              10.44             10.07              6.485                8.341
                        Yes                                         0.91             -1.66               1.33                -0.85
                                                                   (2.45)            (1.95)             (1.81)               (1.71)
                                  Observations                      493               492                465                  432
                                  1st stage F-stat                 9.259             11.85              13.09                15.05
                        p-value equal.                             0.664             0.442              0.024                0.172
Gross monthly           No                                          0.53             -3.74*             -4.31                -3.39
income is greater                                                  (1.63)            (2.04)             (2.63)               (2.54)
than the mean                        Observations                   477               471                439                  401
                                     1st stage F-stat              6.457             7.036              5.113                6.933
                        Yes                                        -0.32             -2.31              -1.54                -2.65
                                                                   (1.60)            (1.64)             (1.75)               (2.24)
                                  Observations                      698               686                654                  617
                                  1st stage F-stat                 11.12             12.23              9.388                11.66
                        p-value equal.                             0.764             0.301              0.735                0.609
Money in liquid         No                                         -2.07             -4.98*             -7.63**              -5.98
accounts enough                                                    (1.96)            (2.57)             (3.33)               (3.73)
to cover 3                           Observations                   405               409                385                  349
months on non-                       1st stage F-stat              8.616             8.784              6.393                6.040
durable                 Yes                                         2.44             -1.40              -1.33                -2.81
consumption                                                        (1.81)            (1.51)             (1.95)               (1.94)
                                  Observations                      643               629                606                  569
                                  1st stage F-stat                 6.609             9.107              6.235                9.273
                        p-value equal.                             0.091             0.230              0.102                0.451
Financial wealth        No                                         -1.82            -2.18*             -3.25**               -3.81**
is greater than                                                    (1.20)            (1.30)             (1.61)               (1.83)
17,000                               Observations                   449               446                410                  384
                                     1st stage F-stat              15.75             19.02              12.82                17.03
                        Yes                                         4.81             -3.31              -4.55                -2.88
                                                                   (3.65)            (3.20)             (3.62)               (3.96)
                                  Observations                      574               551                540                  508
                                  1st stage F-stat                 2.774             3.485              3.121                3.450
                        p-value equal.                             0.085             0.744              0.745                0.830
Notes: The table reports estimated coefficient  in specification (3). All outcome variables are measured in the first wave immediately after the
treatment. The two left columns indicate which sample is used for estimation. All specifications are estimated using treatment and treatment interacted
with prior inflation beliefs as instrumental variables (IV). Treatments are pooled. 1st stage F-stat report the F-test for the coefficients on instrumental
variables being equal to zero. Outliers and influential observations are identified and removed according to the procedure described in footnote 11.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent levels. P-value equality shows
p-value for the test of equality of estimated coefficients  in each sample split.
                                                                                                                                                       38
 
                                                      Figure 1. Levelk responses. 

                                                        Panel A: All responses




                                                      Panel B. Responses by age




Notes: The figure reports the distribution of responses in the "beauty contest" game described in Section 3.3. Red vertical lines indicate
values of , blue lines indicate responses one would observe if individuals pick 3/2        50 (that is, people use (3/2) rather than (2/3)),
and the green line indicates 2/3       100. Panel A reports the histogram for the full sample. Panel B reports kernel densities for sample
splits based on respondents' age.
                                                                                                                                         39
 
                   Figure 2. Relationship between prior and posterior beliefs for control/treatment groups. 


                                                       Panel A. Control group




                                 15    10
                           posterior E
                                50
                                 -5




                                            -5            0                        5                       10
                                                                   prior E
                                                 Panel B. Treatment (public signal)
                                 15    10
                           posterior E
                                50
                                 -5




                                            -5            0                        5                       10
                                                                   prior E
                                                 Panel C. Treatment (private signal)
                                 15    10
                           posterior E
                                50
                                 -5




                                            -5            0                        5                       10
                                                                   prior E
                                                                                                                 
Notes: Each panel presents a scatterplot of post-treatment inflation expectations (point prediction immediately after treatment) and
pre-treatment inflation expectations (implied mean from the reported distribution) by treatment group. The thin blue line is the 45-
degree line. The thick red line is the fitted line.  

                                                                                                                                       40
 
             APPENDIX A
    ADDITIONAL FIGURES AND TABLES




                                    41
 
                        Appendix Table 1. Inflation expectations by respondents' characteristics. 

                                                                                               Implied uncertainty
                                                    Implied mean
                                                                                              (standard deviation)
                                            Average                St.Dev.                 Average             St.Dev.
                                              (1)                    (2)                     (3)                 (4)
 Level of thinking
      0                                       2.09                 2.14                     1.54               1.47
      1                                       1.96                 1.75                     1.36               1.20
      2                                       1.59                 1.95                     1.57               1.45
      3                                       1.94                 2.31                     1.57               1.60
      4                                       2.19                 2.33                     1.95               1.86
 Gender
     Male                                     2.13                 1.91                     1.35               1.29
     Female                                   1.89                 2.34                     1.66               1.59
 Education
     Less than secondary                      2.15                 2.21                     1.66               1.71
     Secondary                                1.97                 2.37                     1.71               1.50
     Post-secondary                           1.87                 1.54                     1.20               1.08
 Liquidity constraint
     Hand-to-mouth                            2.01                 2.03                     1.58               1.48
     Not hand-to-mouth                        2.07                 1.65                     1.24               1.08
 Financial literacy score
    0                                         1.23                 3.42                     2.92               2.09
     1                                        2.14                 2.22                     1.99               1.78
     2                                        2.02                 2.31                     1.62               1.43
     3                                        2.08                 1.55                     1.12               1.00
 Gross monthly income above mean
     No                                       2.00                 2.36                     1.75               1.60
     Yes                                      1.97                 1.96                     1.42               1.39
 Financial wealth above 17,000
     No                                       1.91                 2.35                     1.73               1.59
     Yes                                      2.11                 1.82                     1.20               1.16
Notes: Hand-to-mouth is defined as a household that has liquid wealth smaller than three month of average monthly
spending on non-durable goods. Inflation expectations are for one-year-ahead horizon.




                                                                                                                         42
 
     Appendix Table 2. Heterogeneity in posterior inflation expectations as a function of treatment and prior inflation 
                                                       expectations. 

                                                                Respondents' characteristic X
                                        Level of         College-     Log gross        Money in liquid         Financial
                                       thinking           level        monthly       accounts enough to        wealth is
                                                        education      income        cover 3 months on          greater
                                                                                          non-durable            than
                                                                                         consumption           17,000
                                             (1)           (2)           (3)                  (4)                 (5)

    Prior                                   0.567***      0.458***        0.487***           0.599***           0.581***
                                           (0.035)       (0.037)         (0.032)            (0.048)            (0.042)
    Prior × Treatment (Pub)                -0.132**      -0.007          -0.089**            0.001             -0.260***
                                           (0.053)       (0.053)         (0.045)            (0.068)            (0.064)
    Prior × Treatment (Pri)                -0.158***     -0.159***       -0.128***          -0.362***          -0.325***
                                           (0.050)       (0.050)         (0.044)            (0.065)            (0.057)
    W × Treatment (Pub)                    -0.099         0.464**        -0.210              0.677***          -0.330
                                           (0.087)       (0.207)         (0.142)            (0.200)            (0.225)
    W × Treatment (Pri)                     0.049         0.218          -0.353***          -0.429**           -0.611***
                                           (0.081)       (0.208)         (0.135)            (0.218)            (0.221)
    Prior × W × Treatment (Pub)             0.022        -0.359***        0.150**           -0.227**            0.202**
                                           (0.040)       (0.095)         (0.062)            (0.091)            (0.100)
    Prior × W × Treatment (Pri)            -0.017        -0.072           0.291***           0.283***           0.452***
                                           (0.036)       (0.095)         (0.054)            (0.096)            (0.096)
    Prior × W                              -0.058**       0.176***       -0.218***          -0.025             -0.194***
                                           (0.027)       (0.067)         (0.053)            (0.066)            (0.070)
    Treatment (Pub)                         0.028        -0.186          -0.099             -0.385**            0.147
                                           (0.121)       (0.126)         (0.102)            (0.150)            (0.146)
    Treatment (Pri)                         0.035         0.006          -0.022              0.379**            0.235*
                                           (0.120)       (0.120)         (0.100)            (0.156)            (0.140)
    W                                       0.073        -0.377**         0.270**           -0.067              0.380**
                                           (0.063)       (0.150)         (0.122)            (0.153)            (0.166)
  Observations                              1,688         1,783           1,661               1,323              1,483
  R-squared                                 0.362         0.332           0.372               0.405              0.332
Notes: see notes to Table 4 and Table 7.
                                                               

 

 




                                                                                                                           43
 
      APPENDIX B
    QUESTIONNAIRES




                     44
 
        Wave 1: QUESTIONNAIRE                      (to be fielded: March 30, 2018)


        PROGRAMMING INFORMATION

        QUESTION BLOCK
    12. This question is being asked to all participants in this survey. These participants are representative of the Dutch
        population.

        Please choose a number from zero to 100.

        We will take your number as well as the numbers chosen by other participants to calculate the average number. The
        winning number will be the number that is closest to two-thirds (2/3) of the average number.

        The participant who filled in the winning number will receive 500 euro (if more participants have filled in the
        winning number, the 500 euro will be divided equally among the winners).

        Please take your time to answer this question.

        Your chosen number is:            ..................
        [ ] I do not want participate

    13. Like you, other participants in this survey are asked to choose a number from zero to 100, with the goal of making
        their choice as close as possible to two-thirds (2/3) of the average choice of all participants. What percentage of
        other participants do you think chooses a number that falls in the listed ranges in the table below?

        Chosen numbers                                         Percentage of other participants
        From 0 to 9.99                                         .................. %
        From 10 to 19.99                                       .................. %
        From 20 to 29.99                                       .................. %
        From 30 to 39.99                                       .................. %
        From 40 to 49.99                                       .................. %
        From 50 to 59.99                                       .................. %
        From 60 to 69.99                                       .................. %
        From 70 to 79.99                                       .................. %
        From 80 to 89.99                                       .................. %
        From 90 to 100                                         .................. %
        Total (the percentages should sum to 100):             100                %

        [ ] I do not know



    1. How much did your household spend in total on purchases of durable goods in the last three months (January 2018
       to March 2018)?
       Durable goods are goods that last in time, including for instance cars, electronics, kitchen appliances, furniture,
       house maintenance, jewelries, etc. (please exclude purchases of houses, apartments, etc.). Please provide an answer
       in euros.

        Answer:.................. euros
        ... I did not buy any durables
        ... I do not know


                                                                                                                        45
 
    2. What do you think your household's spending on purchases of durable goods will be per month in the next three
       months (April, May and June)? Please provide an answer in euros.

        April: .................. euros
        ... I do not have plans to buy durables in this month
        ... I do not know

        May: ................ euros
        ... I do not have plans to buy durables in this month
        ... I do not know

        June: .................. euros
        ... I do not have plans to buy durables in this month
        ... I do not know


    3. What was your households' average monthly spending on nondurable goods and services in the last three months
       (January 2018 to March 2018)?
       Nondurable goods and services include for instance food, tobacco, alcohol, gasoline, clothing, haircuts,
       transportation, and other small services and nondurable goods that do not last in time. Please provide an answer in
       euros.

        Answer: ............... euros per month
        ... I do not know


    4. What do you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services will be per month in the next
       three months (April, May and June)? Please provide an answer in euros.

        April: ..................   euros
        ... I do not know

        May: .................. euros
        ... I do not know

        June: .................. euros
        ... I do not know



    5. How much higher or lower do you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services will be in
       the next twelve months compared to the past twelve months?

        Please allocate 100 points in the table below indicating how likely the listed changes are. (Note that the points in
        the column should sum to 100)

                                                                                                   Points
        Spending increases 8% or more                                                              ..................
        Spending increases 4% or more, but less than 8%                                            ..................
        Spending increases 2% or more, but less than 4%                                            ..................
        Spending increases 1% or more, but less than 2%                                            ..................
        Spending increases or decreases less than 1%                                               ..................
        Spending decreases 1% or more, but less than 2%                                            ..................
        Spending decreases 2% or more, but less than 4%                                            ..................
                                                                                                                         46
 
        Spending decreases 4% or more, but less than 8%                                            ..................
        Spending decreases 8% or more                                                              ..................
        Total (the points should sum to 100)                                                       100
        [ ] I do not know


    6. How much higher or lower do you think total spending on nondurable goods and services will be for the Dutch
       economy (that is, all households in the Netherlands) in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months.

        Please allocate 100 points in the table below indicating how likely the listed changes are. (Note that the points in
        the column should sum to 100)

                                                                                                   Points
        Spending increases 8% or more                                                              ..................
        Spending increases 4% or more, but less than 8%                                            ..................
        Spending increases 2% or more, but less than 4%                                            ..................
        Spending increases 1% or more, but less than 2%                                            ..................
        Spending increases or decreases less than 1%                                               ..................
        Spending decreases 1% or more, but less than 2%                                            ..................
        Spending decreases 2% or more, but less than 4%                                            ..................
        Spending decreases 4% or more, but less than 8%                                            ..................
        Spending decreases 8% or more                                                              ..................
        Total (the points should sum to 100)                                                       100
        [ ] I do not know


    7. The previous question was also asked to other households in the Netherlands. We would like to know what
       your opinion is about what other households think will happen to total spending on nondurable goods and services
       in the Dutch economy in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months.

        Please allocate 100 points in the table below indicating how likely you think it is that other households in the
        Netherlands indicated the listed changes. (Note that the points in the column should sum to 100)

                                                                                                   Points
        Spending increases 8% or more                                                              ..................
        Spending increases 4% or more, but less than 8%                                            ..................
        Spending increases 2% or more, but less than 4%                                            ..................
        Spending increases 1% or more, but less than 2%                                            ..................
        Spending increases or decreases less than 1%                                               ..................
        Spending decreases 1% or more, but less than 2%                                            ..................
        Spending decreases 2% or more, but less than 4%                                            ..................
        Spending decreases 4% or more, but less than 8%                                            ..................
        Spending decreases 8% or more                                                              ..................
        Total (the points should sum to 100)                                                       100
        [ ] I do not know




                                                                                                                         47
 
    8. How much higher or lower do you think your household's total net income will be over the next twelve months
       compared to the last twelve months?

        Please allocate 100 points in the table below indicating how likely the listed changes are. (Note that the points in
        the column should sum to 100)

                                                                                                      Points
        Net income increases 8% or more                                                               ..................
        Net income increases 4% or more, but less than 8%                                             ..................
        Net income increases 2% or more, but less than 4%                                             ..................
        Net income increases 1% or more, but less than 2%                                             ..................
        Net income increases or decreases less than 1%                                                ..................
        Net income decreases 1% or more, but less than 2%                                             ..................
        Net income decreases 2% or more, but less than 4%                                             ..................
        Net income decreases 4% or more, but less than 8%                                             ..................
        Net income decreases 8% or more                                                               ..................
        Total (the points should sum to 100)                                                          100
        [ ] I do not know


    9. How much higher or lower do you think consumer prices in general in the Netherlands are now compared to twelve
       months earlier? Please provide a change in percentage terms. If you think prices on average decreased, please fill
       in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think prices on average increased, please fill
       in a positive percentage. If you think prices on average did not change, please fill in 0 (zero).

        Answer:          .................. %


    10. How much do you think consumer prices in general will change in the next twelve months in the Netherlands?
        Please allocate 100 points in the table below indicating how likely the listed changes are. (Note that the probabilities
        in the column should sum to 100)

                                                                                                      Points
        Consumer prices increase 8% or more                                                           ..................
        Consumer prices increase 4% or more, but less than 8%                                         ..................
        Consumer prices increase 2% or more, but less than 4%                                         ..................
        Consumer prices increase 1% or more, but less than 2%                                         ..................
        Consumer prices increase or decreases less than 1%                                            ..................
        Consumer prices decrease 1% or more, but less than 2%                                         ..................
        Consumer prices decrease 2% or more, but less than 4%                                         ..................
        Consumer prices decrease 4% or more, but less than 8%                                         ..................
        Consumer prices decrease 8% or more                                                           ..................
        Total (the points should sum to 100)                                                          100




                                                                                                                             48
 
    11. How much money did you have in your checking and savings accounts and in cash on the day before your last
        regular paycheck arrived? Please do not include fixed term deposits, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, or retirement
        accounts, etc.

        Answer: .................. euros
        ... I do not know

If value: Don't Know
Please provide an estimate of the money you had in your checking and savings accounts and in cash on the day before
your last regular paycheck arrived, using the categories listed below. Please do not include fixed term deposits, stocks,
bonds, mutual funds, or retirement accounts, etc.

       []        0 ­ 249 euro
       []        250 ­ 499 euro
       []        500 ­ 999 euro
       []        1,000 ­ 2,499 euro
       []        2,500 ­ 4,999 euro
       []        5,000 ­ 9,999 euro
       []        10,000 ­ 14,999 euro
       []        15,000 - 19,999 euro
       []        20,000 ­ 29,999 euro
       []        30,000 - 39,999 euro
       []        40,000 - 49,999 euro
       []        50,000 - 59,999 euro
       []        60,000 - 69,999 euro
       []        70,000 ­ 79,999 euro
       []        80,000 ­ 89,999 euro
       []        90,000 ­ 99,999 euro
       []        100,000 ­ 149,999 euro
       []        150,000 ­ 199,999 euro
       []        200,000 ­ 249,999 euro
       []        250,000 ­ 299,999 euro
       []        300,000 ­ 399,999 euro
       []        400,000 ­ 499,999 euro
       []        500,000 euro or more

        [ ] I do not know




                                                                                                                            49
 
EXPERIMENT & Follow-up


3 groups of respondents (~500 each, randomly selected).

    a) Group A is the control group. Skip straight to "Follow-up questions" below.
    b) Group B is first treatment group. They are read INFORMATION 1 below, then are asked follow-up questions below.
    c) Group C is second treatment group. They are read INFORMATION 2 below, then are asked follow-up questions below.

INFORMATION 1 (for respondents in Group B): "Before we proceed, we would like to share the following information
with you. In a public release available to all Dutchmen at no charge, the Dutch Statistical Office recently reported that the
percent increase in consumer prices in February compared to 12 months earlier in the Netherlands was 1.2%".

INFORMATION 2 (for respondents in Group C): "Before we proceed, we would like to share the following information
only with you and a few other households. The Dutch Statistical Office recently reported that the percent increase in
consumer prices compared in February to 12 months earlier in the Netherlands was 1.2%".


Follow-up Questions:

Instructions: (Question 14 is skipped by respondents in group A, but asked to respondents in groups B and C)
    14. What percentage of Dutchmen (aged 18 and older) do you think knows this information?

        Answer:          .................. %
        ... I do not know

    15. How much higher or lower do you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services will be
        in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months?

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and
        services on average will decrease, please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you
        think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services on average will increase, please fill in a
        positive percentage. If you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services on average will not
        change, please fill in 0 (zero).

        Answer:          .................. %
        ... I do not know

    16. How much higher or lower do you think total spending on nondurable goods and services will be for the Dutch
        economy (that is, all households in the Netherlands) in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months.

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think total spending on nondurable goods and services for
        the Dutch economy on average will decrease, please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the
        number). If you think total spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will
        increase, please fill in a positive percentage. If you think total spending on nondurable goods and services for the
        Dutch economy on average will not change, please fill in 0 (zero)

        Answer:         .................. %
        ...I do not know

    17. The previous question was also asked to other households in the Netherlands. We would like to know what
        your opinion is about what other households think will happen to total spending on nondurable goods and
        services in the Dutch economy in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months.

                                                                                                                           50
 
        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think that other households in the Netherlands believe that
        total spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will decrease, please fill in a
        negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think that other households in the Netherlands
        believe that total spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will increase, please
        fill in a positive percentage. If you think that other households in the Netherlands believe that total spending on
        nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will not change, please fill in 0 (zero).

        Answer:         .................. %
        ...I do not know

    18. How much higher or lower do you think your household's total net income will be over the next twelve months
        compared to the last twelve months? Please provide an answer in percentage terms.

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think that your household's total net income will decrease,
        please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think that your household's total
        net income will increase, please fill in a positive percentage. If you think that your household's total net income
        will not change, please fill in 0 (zero).

        Answer:          .................. %
        ... I do not know

    19. How much do you think consumer prices in general will change in the next twelve months in the Netherlands?

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think consumer prices on average will decrease, please fill in
        a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think consumer prices on average will increase,
        please fill in a positive percentage. If you think consumer prices on average will not change, please fill in 0 (zero).

        Answer:          .................. %

    20. Finally, the last three questions. Suppose you had 100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year.
        After 5 years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to grow:  more than
        102, exactly 102, less than 102

        [ ] More than 102
        [ ] Exactly 102
        [ ] Less than 102
        [ ] I do not know

    21. Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was 2% per year. After 1
        year, how much would you be able to buy with the money in this account: more than today; exactly the same, less
        than today?

        [ ] More than today
        [ ] Exactly the same
        [ ] Less than today
        [ ] I do not know

    22. Do you think that the following statement is `true' or `false'? Buying a company stock usually provides a safer
        return than a stock mutual fund.

        [ ] True
        [ ] False
        [ ] I do not know

                                                                                                                            51
 
        WAVE 2: QUESTIONNAIRE (to be fielded in May 2018)

    1. How much did your household spend on purchases of durable goods in the month April 2018?
       Durable goods are goods that last in time, including for instance cars, electronics, kitchen appliances, furniture,
       house maintenance, jewelries, etc. (please exclude purchases of houses, apartments, etc.). Please provide an answer
       in euros.

        Answer:.................. euros
        ... I did not buy any durables... I do not know


    2. What do you think your household's spending on purchases of durable goods will be per month in the next two
       months (May and June)? Please provide an answer in euros.

        May: .................. euros
        ... I do not have plans to buy durables in this month
        ... I do not know

        June: ................ euros
        ... I do not have plans to buy durables in this month
        ... I do not know



    3. What was your households' spending on nondurable goods and services in the month April 2018?
       Nondurable goods and services include for instance food, tobacco, alcohol, gasoline, clothing, haircuts,
       transportation, and other small services and nondurable goods that do not last in time. Please provide an answer in
       euros.

        April: ............... euros
        ... I do not know


    4. What do you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services will be per month in the next
       two months (May and June)? Please provide an answer in euros.

        May: .................. euros
        ... I do not know

        June: .................. euros
        ... I do not know



    15. How much higher or lower do you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services will be
        in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months?

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and
        services on average will decrease, please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you
        think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services on average will increase, please fill in a
        positive percentage. If you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services on average will not
        change, please fill in 0 (zero).


                                                                                                                         52
 
       Answer:          .................. %
       ... I do not know

    16. How much higher or lower do you think total spending on nondurable goods and services will be for the Dutch
        economy (that is, all households in the Netherlands) in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve
        months.

       Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think total spending on nondurable goods and services for
       the Dutch economy on average will decrease, please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the
       number). If you think total spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will
       increase, please fill in a positive percentage. If you think total spending on nondurable goods and services for the
       Dutch economy on average will not change, please fill in 0 (zero)

       Answer:         .................. %
       ...I do not know


    17. The previous question was also asked to other households in the Netherlands. We would like to know what
        your opinion is about what other households think will happen to total spending on nondurable goods and
        services in the Dutch economy in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months.

       Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think that other households in the Netherlands believe that
       total spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will decrease, please fill in a
       negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think that other households in the Netherlands
       believe that total spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will increase,
       please fill in a positive percentage. If you think that other households in the Netherlands believe that total
       spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will not change, please fill in 0
       (zero).

       Answer:         .................. %
       ...I do not know


    18. How much higher or lower do you think your household's total net income will be over the next twelve months
        compared to the last twelve months? Please provide an answer in percentage terms.

       Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think that your household's total net income will decrease,
       please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think that your household's total
       net income will increase, please fill in a positive percentage. If you think that your household's total net income
       will not change, please fill in 0 (zero).

       Answer:          .................. %
       ... I do not know


    8. Now we are interested in how likely you think your income will change. How much higher or lower do you think
       your household's total net income will be over the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months?

       Please allocate 100 points in the table below indicating how likely the listed changes are. (Note that the points in
       the column should sum to 100)

                                                                                                   Points
       Net income increases more than 8%                                                           ..................

                                                                                                                          53
 
        Net income increases more than 4%, but less than 8%                                          ..................
        Net income increases more than 2%, but less than 4%                                          ..................
        Net income increases more than 1%, but less than 2%                                          ..................
        Net income increases or decreases no more than 1%                                            ..................
        Net income decreases more than 1%, but less than 2%                                          ..................
        Net income decreases more than 2%, but less than 4%                                          ..................
        Net income decreases more than 4%, but less than 8%                                          ..................
        Net income decreases more than 8%                                                            ..................
        Total (the points should sum to 100)                                                         100
        [ ] I do not know


    9. How much higher or lower do you think consumer prices in general in the Netherlands are now compared to twelve
       months earlier? Please provide a change in percentage terms. If you think prices on average decreased, please fill
       in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think prices on average increased, please fill
       in a positive percentage. If you think prices on average did not change, please fill in zero.

        Answer:          .................. %



    19. How much do you think consumer prices in general will change in the next twelve months in the Netherlands?

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think consumer prices on average will decrease, please fill in
        a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think consumer prices on average will increase,
        please fill in a positive percentage. If you think consumer prices on average will not change, please fill in 0 (zero).


        Answer:          .................. %


    10. Now we are interested in how likely you think consumer prices will change. How much do you think consumer
        prices in general will change in the next twelve months in the Netherlands? Please allocate 100 points in the table
        below indicating how likely the listed changes are. (Note that the probabilities in the column should sum to 100)

                                                                                                     Points
        Consumer prices increase more than 10%                                                       ..................
        Consumer prices increases more than 5%, but less than 10%                                    ..................
        Consumer prices increases more than 3%, but less than 5%                                     ..................
        Consumer prices increases more than 1%, but less than 3%                                     ..................
        Consumer prices increases or decreases no more than 1%                                       ..................
        Consumer prices decreases more than 1%, but less than 3%                                     ..................
        Consumer prices decreases more than 3%, but less than 5%                                     ..................
        Consumer prices decreases more than 5%, but less than 10%                                    ..................
        Consumer prices decreases more than 10%                                                      ..................
        Total (the points should sum to 100):                                                        100




                                                                                                                            54
 
        WAVE 3: QUESTIONNAIRE (to be fielded in June 2018)

    1. How much did your household spend on purchases of durable goods in the month May 2018?
       Durable goods are goods that last in time, including for instance cars, electronics, kitchen appliances, furniture,
       house maintenance, jewelries, etc. (please exclude purchases of houses, apartments, etc.). Please provide an answer
       in euros.

        Answer:.................. euros
        ... I did not buy any durables... I do not know


    2. What do you think your household's spending on purchases of durable goods will be in June? Please provide an
       answer in euros.


        June: ................ euros
        ... I do not have plans to buy durables in this month
        ... I do not know



    5. What was your households' spending on nondurable goods and services in the month May 2018?
       Nondurable goods and services include for instance food, tobacco, alcohol, gasoline, clothing, haircuts,
       transportation, and other small services and nondurable goods that do not last in time. Please provide an answer in
       euros.

        May: ............... euros
        ... I do not know


    6. What do you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services will be in June? Please provide
       an answer in euros.

        June: .................. euros
        ... I do not know




    20. How much higher or lower do you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services will be
        in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months?

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and
        services on average will decrease, please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you
        think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services on average will increase, please fill in a
        positive percentage. If you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services on average will not
        change, please fill in 0 (zero).

        Answer:          .................. %
        ... I do not know




                                                                                                                         55
 
    21. How much higher or lower do you think total spending on nondurable goods and services will be for the Dutch
        economy (that is, all households in the Netherlands) in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve
        months.

       Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think total spending on nondurable goods and services for
       the Dutch economy on average will decrease, please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the
       number). If you think total spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will
       increase, please fill in a positive percentage. If you think total spending on nondurable goods and services for the
       Dutch economy on average will not change, please fill in 0 (zero)

       Answer:         .................. %
       ...I do not know


    22. The previous question was also asked to other households in the Netherlands. We would like to know what
        your opinion is about what other households think will happen to total spending on nondurable goods and
        services in the Dutch economy in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months.

       Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think that other households in the Netherlands believe that
       total spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will decrease, please fill in a
       negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think that other households in the Netherlands
       believe that total spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will increase,
       please fill in a positive percentage. If you think that other households in the Netherlands believe that total
       spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will not change, please fill in 0
       (zero).

       Answer:         .................. %
       ...I do not know


    23. How much higher or lower do you think your household's total net income will be over the next twelve months
        compared to the last twelve months? Please provide an answer in percentage terms.

       Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think that your household's total net income will decrease,
       please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think that your household's total
       net income will increase, please fill in a positive percentage. If you think that your household's total net income
       will not change, please fill in 0 (zero).

       Answer:          .................. %
       ... I do not know

    10. Now we are interested in how likely you think your income will change. How much higher or lower do you think
        your household's total net income will be over the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months?

       Please allocate 100 points in the table below indicating how likely the listed changes are. (Note that the points in
       the column should sum to 100)

                                                                                                   Points
       Net income increases more than 8%                                                           ..................
       Net income increases more than 4%, but less than 8%                                         ..................
       Net income increases more than 2%, but less than 4%                                         ..................
       Net income increases more than 1%, but less than 2%                                         ..................
       Net income increases or decreases no more than 1%                                           ..................
       Net income decreases more than 1%, but less than 2%                                         ..................
                                                                                                                          56
 
        Net income decreases more than 2%, but less than 4%                                          ..................
        Net income decreases more than 4%, but less than 8%                                          ..................
        Net income decreases more than 8%                                                            ..................
        Total (the points should sum to 100)                                                         100
        [ ] I do not know

    11. How much higher or lower do you think consumer prices in general in the Netherlands are now compared to twelve
        months earlier? Please provide a change in percentage terms. If you think prices on average decreased, please fill
        in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think prices on average increased, please fill
        in a positive percentage. If you think prices on average did not change, please fill in zero.

        Answer:          .................. %


    24. How much do you think consumer prices in general will change in the next twelve months in the Netherlands?

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think consumer prices on average will decrease, please fill in
        a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think consumer prices on average will increase,
        please fill in a positive percentage. If you think consumer prices on average will not change, please fill in 0 (zero).


        Answer:          .................. %


    11. Now we are interested in how likely you think consumer prices will change. How much do you think consumer
        prices in general will change in the next twelve months in the Netherlands? Please allocate 100 points in the table
        below indicating how likely the listed changes are. (Note that the probabilities in the column should sum to 100)

                                                                                                     Points
        Consumer prices increase more than 10%                                                       ..................
        Consumer prices increases more than 5%, but less than 10%                                    ..................
        Consumer prices increases more than 3%, but less than 5%                                     ..................
        Consumer prices increases more than 1%, but less than 3%                                     ..................
        Consumer prices increases or decreases no more than 1%                                       ..................
        Consumer prices decreases more than 1%, but less than 3%                                     ..................
        Consumer prices decreases more than 3%, but less than 5%                                     ..................
        Consumer prices decreases more than 5%, but less than 10%                                    ..................
        Consumer prices decreases more than 10%                                                      ..................
        Total (the points should sum to 100):                                                        100




                                                                                                                            57
 
        WAVE 4: QUESTIONNAIRE (to be fielded in July 2018)

    1. How much did your household spend on purchases of durable goods in the month June 2018?
       Durable goods are goods that last in time, including for instance cars, electronics, kitchen appliances, furniture,
       house maintenance, jewelries, etc. (please exclude purchases of houses, apartments, etc.). Please provide an answer
       in euros.

        Answer:.................. euros
        ... I did not buy any durables
        ... I do not know



    3. What was your households' spending on nondurable goods and services in the month June 2018?
       Nondurable goods and services include for instance food, tobacco, alcohol, gasoline, clothing, haircuts,
       transportation, and other small services and nondurable goods that do not last in time. Please provide an answer in
       euros.

        Answer: ............... euros
        ... I do not know



    15. How much higher or lower do you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services will be
        in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months?

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and
        services on average will decrease, please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you
        think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services on average will increase, please fill in a
        positive percentage. If you think your household's spending on nondurable goods and services on average will not
        change, please fill in 0 (zero).

        Answer:          .................. %
        ... I do not know




    16. How much higher or lower do you think total spending on nondurable goods and services will be for the Dutch
        economy (that is, all households in the Netherlands) in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve
        months.

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think total spending on nondurable goods and services for
        the Dutch economy on average will decrease, please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the
        number). If you think total spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will
        increase, please fill in a positive percentage. If you think total spending on nondurable goods and services for the
        Dutch economy on average will not change, please fill in 0 (zero)

        Answer:         .................. %
        ...I do not know




                                                                                                                           58
 
    17. The previous question was also asked to other households in the Netherlands. We would like to know what
        your opinion is about what other households think will happen to total spending on nondurable goods and
        services in the Dutch economy in the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months.

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think that other households in the Netherlands believe that
        total spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will decrease, please fill in a
        negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think that other households in the Netherlands
        believe that total spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will increase,
        please fill in a positive percentage. If you think that other households in the Netherlands believe that total
        spending on nondurable goods and services for the Dutch economy on average will not change, please fill in 0
        (zero).

        Answer:         .................. %
        ...I do not know


    18. How much higher or lower do you think your household's total net income will be over the next twelve months
        compared to the last twelve months? Please provide an answer in percentage terms.

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think that your household's total net income will decrease,
        please fill in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think that your household's total
        net income will increase, please fill in a positive percentage. If you think that your household's total net income
        will not change, please fill in 0 (zero).

        Answer:          .................. %
        ... I do not know


    8. Now we are interested in how likely you think your income will change. How much higher or lower do you think
       your household's total net income will be over the next twelve months compared to the last twelve months?

        Please allocate 100 points in the table below indicating how likely the listed changes are. (Note that the points in
        the column should sum to 100)

                                                                                                   Points
        Net income increases more than 8%                                                          ..................
        Net income increases more than 4%, but less than 8%                                        ..................
        Net income increases more than 2%, but less than 4%                                        ..................
        Net income increases more than 1%, but less than 2%                                        ..................
        Net income increases or decreases no more than 1%                                          ..................
        Net income decreases more than 1%, but less than 2%                                        ..................
        Net income decreases more than 2%, but less than 4%                                        ..................
        Net income decreases more than 4%, but less than 8%                                        ..................
        Net income decreases more than 8%                                                          ..................
        Total (the points should sum to 100)                                                       100
        [ ] I do not know

    9. How much higher or lower do you think consumer prices in general in the Netherlands are now compared to twelve
       months earlier? Please provide a change in percentage terms. If you think prices on average decreased, please fill
       in a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think prices on average increased, please fill
       in a positive percentage. If you think prices on average did not change, please fill in zero.

        Answer:          .................. %

                                                                                                                          59
 
    19. How much do you think consumer prices in general will change in the next twelve months in the Netherlands?

        Please provide an answer in percentage terms. If you think consumer prices on average will decrease, please fill in
        a negative percentage (insert a minus sign for the number). If you think consumer prices on average will increase,
        please fill in a positive percentage. If you think consumer prices on average will not change, please fill in 0 (zero).


        Answer:          .................. %



    10. Now we are interested in how likely you think consumer prices will change. How much do you think consumer
        prices in general will change in the next twelve months in the Netherlands? Please allocate 100 points in the table
        below indicating how likely the listed changes are. (Note that the probabilities in the column should sum to 100)

                                                                                                     Points
        Consumer prices increase more than 10%                                                       ..................
        Consumer prices increases more than 5%, but less than 10%                                    ..................
        Consumer prices increases more than 3%, but less than 5%                                     ..................
        Consumer prices increases more than 1%, but less than 3%                                     ..................
        Consumer prices increases or decreases no more than 1%                                       ..................
        Consumer prices decreases more than 1%, but less than 3%                                     ..................
        Consumer prices decreases more than 3%, but less than 5%                                     ..................
        Consumer prices decreases more than 5%, but less than 10%                                    ..................
        Consumer prices decreases more than 10%                                                      ..................
        Total (the points should sum to 100):                                                        100




                                                                                                                            60
 
