                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             SIMPLER BETTER MARKET BETAS

                                             Ivo Welch

                                       Working Paper 26105
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26105


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further
information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26105.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ivo Welch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Simpler Better Market Betas
Ivo Welch
NBER Working Paper No. 26105
July 2019
JEL No. G10,G11,G31

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper proposes a robust one-pass estimator that is easy to code: Justified by the market-
model itself and using a prior that market-betas should not be less than ­2 and more than +4, the
market-model is run on daily stock rates of return that have first been winsorized at ­2 and +4
times the contemporaneous market rate of return. The resulting "slope-winsorized" estimates
outperform (all) other known estimators in predicting the future OLS market-beta (on R2
metrics). Adding reasonable age decay, suggesting a half-life of about 3 to 5 months, to
observations entering the market-model further improves it. The estimates outpredict the Vasicek
estimates by about half as much as the Vasicek estimates outpredict the OLS estimates.


Ivo Welch
Anderson School at UCLA (C519)
110 Westwood Place (951481)
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1482
and NBER
ivo.welch@anderson.ucla.edu
    The most important moments in finance are expected rates of return, own volatilities,
and factor exposures.

    Most finance research is dedicated to estimating expected returns. They are both the
most interesting and the most difficult moment to forecast. Lo and MacKinlay (1990),
Harvey, Liu, and Zhu (2016), and others, have pointed out how historical data correlations
have often been spurious. Mclean and Pontiff (2016) have pointed out how investors
research can itself erode past significant associations.

    Volatilities are important not only in the context of pricing financial derivatives but also
because they seem to have an empirical associations with future rates of return. Volatilities
are typically easier to estimate than expected returns because second moments improve
with higher-frequency sampling. Engle (1982), Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993),
and others, have even shown how to predict time-varying volatility.

    My paper assumes that factor exposures in general and market-betas in particular are
the third intrinsically interesting moment worth estimating.

    Interest in the estimation of market-beta began in earnest with portfolio theory in the
1950s. Even today, market-beta plays a special role.1 The market portfolio is typically the
first principal component and many investors start with market-like portfolios. Market beta
is the primary measure of how individual assets contribute risk to the market portfolio.
It informs investors how tilting assets in and out of market portfolios changes their risk
exposures.

    Market-betas can not only help investors assess the diversification contribution but
can also influence the risk-return tradeoff through an associations with expected returns.
The CAPM suggests a positive association, but the evidence against the CAPM is strong.
Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) have claimed a negative empirical association, but there is
now some disagreement.2 Of course, even if there is zero association, risk-averse investors
can still use market-beta estimates to tilt their portfolios towards low market-beta stocks
   1 The  market excess rate of return is one among a number of factors of interest nowadays. Measuring the
exposures of assets to other factor portfolios is an analogous general problem.
   2 The negative association has recently been disputed by Novy-Marx and Velikov (2018) and Han (2019),

who show that the success of "betting-against-beta" was at least in part due to a mixing of time-varying
volatility into the Frazzini-Pedersen estimated betas with accompanying market-timing. Section VI will show
that the Frazzini-Pedersen market-beta estimator is a poor measure of the future OLS market-beta and of its
future self.



                                                    1
and thereby increase their expected returns with lower risk. Finally, there is yet another
category of market-beta users: managers and regulators (often required by law) may want
reasonable estimates of market-beta when they seek to implement the CAPM--regardless
of whether the model holds or not.

   My paper does not explore the association of market-betas with average rates of return;
much less does it take a stance on the CAPM. Instead, it explores only the measurement of
market-betas and only in publicly-traded U.S. stocks. For validation purposes, it predicts
future (OLS and other) market-betas.


   Its recipe for a new type of robust estimator for market-beta, with emphasis on ease of
implementation, is as follows:

  1. Winsorize each rate of return ri,d to [(1 ± s )·rm,d ], where r is a daily (net-of-risk-free)
      rate of return, i is a stock index, m is the stock market index, d is a day index, and
      s is a parameter. A good s is 3, suggesting bounds of ­2·rm,d and +4·rm,d .

  2. Run an OLS market-model regression on these winsorized daily rates of return. I
      refer to this estimator as bsw (for "beta slope-winsorized"). A better version estimates
      a WLS market-model, in which the weight of each observation decays with age. A
      good decay parameter is  =2/252 per day, suggesting a half-life of about 90 trading
      days. I refer to this estimator as bswa (for "beta slope-winsorized aged").

The suggested parameters are low-dimensional, static, and not fragile. The bswa estimator
does not need need two parameters per stock, per time unit, or per stock-time unit, but
literally only two static fixed numbers for the entire CRSP sample, modestly searched from
coarse integer choices only. Winsorization levels of s =2 or s =4, and half-lives from 75
to 120 days give nearly identical performance. The paper also shows that potential gains
from further fine-tuning the two parameters are likely to be small.

   Our estimators share with Bayesian counterparts the need to specify a prior. Here,
it is that stocks have market betas between ­2 or +4. Although our use of the prior is
non-Bayesian, it is also not arbitrary. Its functional form is based on the linear specification
of the market model itself. Most importantly, bswa requires minimal implementation effort
(no memory--stock returns are treated as they enter the market-model regression) and
produces superior empirical results.

                                               2
    In essence, bsw is just another robust estimator in the toolkit (Tukey (1960)). It applies
its prior not to the market-beta but to each and every stock return. In a Bayesian analysis
with a bounded beta prior, only market-betas beyond the bounds would be considered
implausible. Here, each rate of return beyond these bounds (that could cause market-beta
to exceed these bounds) is considered not necessarily implausible but uninformative for
estimating beta.3

    Consider two examples. First, if the excess market rate of return is zero, all stock returns
are winsorized to zero. Yet, this is not because stock returns are viewed as excessive outliers.
They are just useless--they do not influence the parameter of interest, market-beta. Slope
winsorization takes into account not only the implausibility of outlier but also the resulting
effect on the parameter of interest, market-beta. Second, if a firm has a single stock return
outlier of +300% that occurs on a day on which the stock market happened to return
+1.0%, in a Bayesian analysis, this single outlier would likely fix the posterior to its upper
beta limit. (If the prior was not bounded but leptokurtic, the estimated market-beta could
be quite large, regardless of other return observations.) In contrast, bsw works by "defusing"
this single outlier stock return. It moderates its influence. Other stock returns remain more
influential.

    In a different sense, slope winsorization uses the prior in a way that is more akin to
how one would use a functional form for a prior in a classical specification equation. For
example, a classical prior that a variable has zero influence would suggest omitting the
variable from the estimation; a classical prior that the beta is exactly 1.0 would suggest
predicting ri,t ­rm,t as the dependent variable. If there are positive and negative market rates
of return, the winsorization does force the estimated market-betas to obey the specified
bounds.

    Despite their ease of use, bsw and bswa perform not just as well as but better than other
prominent market-beta estimators, when assessed by an ability to predict future realized
   3 The prior is on the prediction-relevant variable, market-beta, not on the "nuisance" parameter . (Indeed,

the winsorizing estimators "destroy" the informativeness of the mean squared residuals.) Specifying market-
beta bounds may be easier and more reliable. For example, many financial economists share the intuition
that market-betas beyond 0 and +3 seem implausible, but have little intuition of whether (market-adjusted)
rates of return beyond 5%, 10%, or 20% per day are unusual. Section III will suggest plausible bounds on
returns. Section III discusses a band winsorizer that performs only modestly worse than the slope winsorizer.
Section VI discusses Martin and Simin (2003), which works with winsorizations based on stock-specific
assessed return variances.



                                                      3
OLS (or other) market-betas. The competitors include the market-beta estimators in Vasicek
(1973), Dimson (1979), Martin and Simin (2003), Frazzini and Pedersen (2014), and
Ait-Sahalia, Kalnina, and Xiu (2014), as well as monthly market betas, industry betas, peer
betas, and many combinations of the aforementioned estimators. The slope-winsorized
betas outperform them in nearly all data partitions--new firms and old firms; big firms
and small firms; high-trading stocks and low-trading stocks; high-volatility stocks and
low-volatility firms; high OLS-beta stocks and low OLS-beta stocks, and so on. Despite
trying, I am unaware of other methods (variants, variables, or estimators) that can further
improve on bswa in a meaningful way.4

    Although "big data" estimators (such as neural nets) based primarily on empirical
performance rather than theory have recently become popular in economics and finance,
bsw and bswa achieve their superior performances with simpler rather than more complex
methods. They are easier to code and their reasoning and effects are easily understood.
Outlier handling through slope priors rather than band priors is just another robust way to
winsorize inputs. Future research may examine whether slope-based winsorization has use
in other application contexts.

                       [Insert Table 1 here: Glossary of Market-Beta Estimators]


    Section I now describes the sample, the data, and OLS market betas. Section II discusses
the Vasicek market beta and its variants, later confirmed to be the best estimators in the
literature to date and thus used for our first comparisons. Section III explains level, band,
and slope winsorizers in the context of market-beta. Section IV predicts the future OLS
market beta using only winsorization (bsw). Section V adds age decay (bswa). It also
describes bswa's performance in separate data partitions and attempts to improve bswa
further using more information (mostly unsuccessfully). Section VI shows how bsw and
bswa outperform other beta estimators predicting the OLS market-beta and their own
future selves. And Section VII concludes with use recommendations and a 10(!)-line code
snippet that implements bsw and bswa in R. A glossary of considered market-betas is in
Table 1.


  4 Some   variables can be used to improve bswa but only by very little and with much specification and
fine-tuning search. The best candidate is trading volume.


                                                   4
I    Data and OLS Market Betas

Our primary concern is measuring the true underlying market-beta of every stock. Because it
is unobservable, we have to estimate an OLS market-beta, typically in a block sampler using
one year5 with daily stock returns (Foster and Nelson (1996) and Ghysels and Jacquier
(2007)). All returns are quoted in excess over the risk-free rate from Ken French's website.

    The paper works with various subsets of the data. The first analysis uses a mid-year to
mid-year data set. Later analysis uses 12-month betas calculated each and every month. In
this case, there are overlapping observations in the predictive "gamma regressions" (i.e., the
regressions in which we forecast future market-betas with current market-betas). However,
there are never observations in which the returns used to calculate the dependent predicted
future market-beta have also been used to calculate the independent predicting current
market-beta.6

    We start with the CRSP data set from 1925/12/31 to 2018/12/31 with 94,402,370
valid stock returns. The key data selection constraints are that stocks have to have share
code 10 or 11 (75,988,595 returns), sometimes that data starts in 1963/07 (66,814,795)
or 1974/01 (61,599,045). To calculate market-beta, we require that a stock has 6 or 20
trading days of data in a year, and (often but not always) the availability of a future one-year
OLS market-beta. The maximum number of valid overlapping one-firm-year bols estimates
is 3,255,424, but only 2,962,015 firm-years have two consecutive bols's (necessary for
validation testing). Using only non-overlapping July to June intervals from 1926 on, there
are 271,861 one-year and 247,426 consecutive observations. Starting in July 1964, there
are 239,923 and 216,126 equivalent observations. None of the data constraints seem to
make any difference in the relative performance ordering of estimators.7

    Because our analysis is equal-weighted and our stock market index is (always) the
value-weighted CRSP market, the average market-beta across stocks in our sample is not
    5A modestly better estimation window than 12 months would be 16-20 months. However, 12-month
windows have a natural calendar relation. Moreover, in Section V, our independent variable uses all historical
data decayed by age.
   6 For example, we may run a predictive regression, in which we have one observation predicting a Jan-2015

to Dec-2015 beta with a Jan-2014 to Dec-2014 beta, followed by another predicting a Feb-2015 to Jan-2016
beta with a Feb-2014 to Jan-2015 beta. TThere is one exception late in the paper, when bswa has overlap
when it predicts the future bswa. This will be noted.
   7 This is also the case for selection biases. Although it is possible that there is systematic survivorship,

Experimentation with different selection criteria suggested no relative effects.


                                                      5
1.0 (as it would be by definition if we used an equal-weighted market or a value-weighted
regression). Instead, the average market-beta was about 0.90, 0.82, and 0.77 in samples
beginning in 1926, 1963, and 1974, respectively. The average market-beta varied (slowly)
with the composition of stocks on CRSP over the years. From 1939 to 1945, it reached
levels of about 1.4.

    Whenever we benchmark market-beta estimators against one another, we always hold
the set of observations (stock-years) strictly the same.



A    The Sample

                  [Insert Figure 1 here: Quasi-CDF: Frequency of Winsorizations]


    Figure 1 plots the empirically observed pooled cumulative frequencies of returns and
OLS market-betas over the entire sample.

Raw Excess Rates of Returns: The top plot shows that about 6.7% of the sample had
      absolute rates of return (always net of the risk-free rate) above 7%; 3.2% above 10%;
      and 0.6% above 20%. Not shown, the average daily rate of return was 6.1 basis
      points, with a standard deviation of 4.4%.

Market-Adjusted Excess Rates of Return: The middle plot shows that about 22% of the
      sample had absolute market-adjusted rates of return above 3%; 3.1% above 10%; and
      0.6% above 20%. Not shown, the equal-weighted average daily rate of return net
      of the contemporaneous value-weighted market rate of return was 3.6 basis points,
      with a standard deviation of 4.3%.

OLS Market Betas: The bottom plot shows absolute distances from 1.0 for one-year OLS
      market-betas. In this panel containing both firms and years, the observed high kurtosis
      is more akin to the kurtosis of a log-normal distribution. However, the skewness is
      more akin to a plain normal distribution. Not shown, there is only modest skewness
      and kurtosis for any given firm. (The average firm's kurtosis is 2.4.) Instead, most of
      the kurtosis comes from the many different firms in the cross-section in any given year.
      (The average year's kurtosis is about 11.0.) The figure shows that few firm-years
      have betas more than s =2 units away from 1.0 (i.e., ­1.0 and +3.0). Under an

                                                6
        equivalent mean-variance matched normal distribution, we would expect about 0.5%
        of the sample. However, the actual number in the data was almost twice as high at
        0.9%. At s =3 units distance from 1.0, there are almost no betas. Nevertheless, the
        actual number was 0.170% observed (two per thousand), compared to a matched
        Gaussian normal frequency of 0.002%. There are market-beta outliers!



B     Current and Future OLS Market-Betas

Examining one-year market-betas, 0.6% are less than ­1.0, 0.06% are less than ­2.0, 0.4%
are greater than +3.0, and 0.03% are greater than +4.0. Conditional on a market-beta less
than ­2.0, only 4.8% of next year's market beta remain less than ­2.0 (30% are positive
and and 2.0% are greater than +4.0!). Conditional on a market-beta greater than +4.0,
only 1.1% of next year's market beta remain greater than +4.0 (35% are negative and and
3.4%(!) are less than ­2). Market-betas beyond what is implied by s = 3 are simply not
very predictive of their future selves.

    [Insert Figure 2 here: Percentiles of Future 1-Year OLS Market-Betas (bols) By Current 1-Year OLS
                                          Market-Beta (bols)]


     In Figure 2, current year's OLS beta estimates, bolsi,y , are first binned into 100 percentiles
in each year (not in the full sample!). The figure then plots means of the OLS market-betas
in the subsequent year, bolsi,y+1 , as well as the bins' one and two standard deviation ranges.
It also plots bolsi,y , i.e., the sort criterion for the X-axis. The shallower slope of the bolsi,y+1
line compared to the bolsi,y line reflects the mean reversion of the OLS beta estimates, due
both to estimation error and mean reversion of the underlying true market-beta.

     Even for the minimum current market-beta percentile (with its market-beta mean
below ­1), the subsequent average market-beta mean does not drop below 0.3, with a two
standard deviation range reaching from about -1.0 to about +2.0. The highest average
future market-beta is about +1.7, with a two standard deviation range reaching from
about +0.0 to about +3.5.

     The monotonic relationship between the current and future OLS market-beta breaks
down below a current bols of just about 0.0. If, anything, more negative betas begin to


                                                   7
forecast higher future betas. Similarly but less stark, the current beta becomes just about
uncorrelated with the future beta for betas above 3.0. However, because the data is a panel
and this plot shows one grand pooled association, it does not mean that there are no stocks
which have persistent predictive market-betas higher or lower than ­1 or greater than +3.8

     Not shown, an equivalent plot for stock volatility shows a relationship between current
and future volatility that is always monotonic. This relationship implies that firms with
stock return outliers are likely to repeat outliers. It seems that high-volatility stocks have
regular and persistent outlier events, but they do not systematically occur either on market
up-days or down-days.



C     Summary

OLS beta estimates below 0 and above 3 are rare and seem not to be predictive of future
beta estimates. Reasonable a-priori bounds on what constitutes non-indicative market-beta
value should allow for truncation that is no less than plus-and-minus =1.5 from 1.0 (i.e.,
market-betas from ­0.5 to +2.5). Market-betas beyond ­2 and +4 are exceedingly rare
aberrations, with consecutive-year incidences just slightly above zero-correlation levels.




    8 Thelack of the monotonic relation towards both edges is even more apparent in Appendix Figure 12,
where we plot the slope of the prediction line. It is negative for negative current betas, and just about zero
for betas above 3.0. This figure also shows that although the details change modestly, the main inference
does not. Below 0 and above 3, there is no meaningful positive monotonic relationship between current and
future market-betas.


                                                      8
II     The Vasicek Market-Beta Estimator

The evidence below will suggest that the best estimators in the literature hitherto were
variants of the Vasicek (1973) estimator, bVCK, when used on daily data and ideally linearly
debiased as in Levi and Welch (2017), bLW. Thus, we use them as exploratory benchmarks.
Other prominent estimators will be explained and compared in Section VI.

     Neither bVCK or bLW are justifiable by decision theory that reflects empirical reality.
Most importantly, neither can account for the facts that the underlying market-betas are
mean-reverting and that there are outliers. Moreover, there is no a-priori known process for
how (underlying true) market-betas mean-revert, nor do we know the distribution of rare
outliers (itself very difficult to estimate because of their rarity). Instead, these estimators
are intuitive methods to adjust for estimation-caused mean reversion and outliers (in the
case of bVCK), and true-beta mean reversion (in the case of bLW).



A     The Unadjusted Vasicek Estimator

The Vasicek (1973) estimator, bVCKi,y , can be viewed either as a Bayesian shrinkage
estimator or as the random-effects panel estimator. It requires first computing the OLS
                                       2 for each stock within the desired unit of time
market-beta bolsi,y and standard error i,y
  2 "). Then it requires calculating cross-sectional statistics over all stocks, bols for
("i                                                                                  t
the cross-sectional mean and "t  2 " for the cross-sectional heterogeneity. (Because the

composition of stocks and with it the average market-beta changes every year, even this
cross-sectionally constant part contributes to the good performance of bVCK.) For each
stock i at time t, the Vasicek estimate is then

                                  2
                                  t                  t 2
                   bVCKi       2 + 2
                                     · bolsi + 1 ­  2 + 2
                                                           · bolst .                       (1)
                               i   t               i     t


     On average, the current Vasicek market-beta seems to predict the future OLS market-
beta better than any other known estimators. Nevertheless, Vasicek estimators have seen
lower rates of adoption than inferior alternatives. The neglect may be for several reasons.
First, Vasicek estimators unintuitively entangle beta estimates with those of unrelated stocks.
Including or excluding unrelated stocks in the sample changes every other beta estimate.

                                              9
Second, there is extra effort involved. Even the simplest versions require running a first-step
OLS regression, calculating cross-sectional statistics, and then going back to readjusting
the OLS estimates based on (cross-sectional and time-series) standard errors. The Vasicek-
derived estimators in Karolyi (1992) and Levi and Welch (2017) require even more steps.
Third, Vasicek betas have never become the standard. They seem to be rarely requested by
referees as best practice. Fourth, in the absence of recent public performance benchmarks,
their superior performance may not have been fully appreciated. Fifth, researchers often
want to investigate another issue and not add effort by first investigating how to estimate
betas. Their interest in market-beta may be perfunctory. Many papers investigate different
issues and are content merely to add some (any) control for market-beta. Worse control
may not necessarily be harmful. Sixth, diversified portfolio betas (rather than stock betas)
are more forgiving.



B   The Adjusted Vasicek (Levi-Welch) Estimator

Blume (1971) first suggested debiasing the OLS estimator using an empirically estimated
linear correction. The Levi and Welch (2017) estimator, bLW, adopts this idea to debias
bVCK. The first step is estimating a relation between lagged bVCKi,y and future bolsi,y+1
estimates, bolsi,y+1 = 0 + 1 · bVCKi,y estimates. The resulting linear empirical debiasing
coefficients are quite stable. By decade, the predictive gamma coefficient estimates were


                        1960s     1970s   1980s    1990s    2000s    2010s    Yr-Avg   Pooled

     0 (Intercept)       0.37      0.19    0.16     0.21     0.22    0.31      0.21     0.19

     1 (on bVCKi,y )     0.71      0.73    0.67     0.65     0.77    0.69      0.73     0.74

Thus, a reasonable Levi-Welch estimator in this sample period was

                                bLWi,y  0.20 + 0.75 · bVCKi,y .                            (2)




                                              10
The use of 0.20 and 0.75 as the two adjustment parameters does introduce a modest
hindsight bias. However, within 5 years of the start of the sample, the biggest in-time-
averaged distance (starting from 1960) from 0.75 was 0.04.9

     Because bLW is merely a linear transformation of bVCK, bLW has the same predictive R2
as bVCK in in-sample regressions predicting any other variable, such as any future market-
beta estimates. However, bLW has lower RMSE than bVCK when used as a direct proxy
of market-beta. A reader who considers the 0.20/0.75 parameters to be excessively data
snooped can ignore bLW and focus solely on bVCK. bLW is included only for benchmarking
purposes.



C     Assessment Preview

My paper will show that bVCK and bLW have predicted so well for a reason hitherto not
widely understood. Their effectiveness was not so much due to shrinkage of normally
distributed panel observations but due to aggressive shrinkage of outliers. The bsw and
bswa estimators can outperform them only because outlier reduction explains most of their
performance. bLW often performs almost as well as bsw, albeit with much more coding
effort. bswa outperforms it easily.




    9 The required 1­0.75= 0.25 shrinkage is not the typical errors-in-variable problem (because the predictive
Vasicek beta remains measured with error) under a normal distribution--the required shrinkage is far too
much. Over-the-envelope calculations suggest that with a standard error of about 0.2 (based on one year of
daily stock returns) and given the cross-sectional dispersion of betas of about 0.7, a one-year Vasicek beta
should predict a future one-year OLS beta with an errors-in-variables bias of under 5%.


                                                     11
III      Estimators Based on Winsorizing Stock Returns

All winsorization schemes must rely on an "aggressiveness" parameter, called , which
trades off type-I and type-II errors: correctly winsorizing unpredictive outliers vs. incor-
rectly winsorizing predictive outliers. Good delta choices trade off being too lax (thereby
not having any effect) and being too strict (thereby pushing all beta estimates too close
towards the same value). Figure 4 in Section IV will show that higher deltas become
progressively more useless and lower deltas are progressively too restrictive to reflect
non-noise realizations of market rates of return.

      Like the shrinking estimators in Section II, the winsorizing estimators are also not based
on decision theory with realistic features. The theoretical properties of all estimators in
realistic samples are therefore largely unknown. However, we are never interested in
the in-sample properties of our estimators. We are interested only in their out-of-sample
forecasting power.



A      Level Winsorization

Common "level" winsorization limits firms' rates of return to absolute levels

                                    rlwi,d     [ ­ l , +l ] ,                               (3)

which is (obvious) shorthand notation to winsorizing stock rates of return from ­l to +l .
The delta here is a single choice parameter. It is static rather than indexed by firm or time.
The "lw" following "r" abbreviates "level winsorization."

      As always, stock returns are daily and always quoted above the risk-free rate. The
intercept can be zero because firm-heterogeneity in daily expected excess returns is negligi-
bly small. The level winsorized market-beta is from a market-model regression, hitherto
analogously denoted "blw"

                                        cov rlwi,d ( l ) , rm,d
                              blwi,y                               .                        (4)
                                              var( rm,d )




                                               12
The typical estimation time period in this paper is one year (y), for any month from
month-end to month-end.

                             [Insert Figure 3 here: Winsorization Techniques]


    The top plot in Figure 3 illustrates level winsorization. By compressing the range of
the dependent variable in the market-model regression, the beta estimate becomes biased
towards zero. This bias is especially undesirable when reasonable hypotheses would center
the prior not on zero.

    It turns out that the "level-winsorized" blw is inferior, because there are days on which
the overall stock market itself had exceptionally positive or negative rates of return. Level
winsorization then incorrectly cuts off too many informative large positive or negative
individual rates of return.



B     Band Winsorization

Model-specific winsorization schemes can do better. Consider an example in which stocks
follow a fat-tailed return distributions with large outliers. Researchers should not want to
reduce such outliers when estimating volatility. However, when estimating market-beta,
researchers would want to recognize that such outliers may randomly and unrelatedly
occur on days when the rest of the stock market happens to go up or down. Thus, one
may want to reduce outliers differently when estimating volatilities than when estimating
market-betas.10

    One model-specific estimator is a "band winsorizer" (bbw). It winsorizes stocks differ-
ently on days on which the market has moved a lot. Specifically, it limits firms' rates of
return to a constant plus or minus the market rate of return (still always quoted above the
risk-free rate):
                                   rbwi,d  rm,d + [ ­ b , +b ] .                                          (5)
  10 In the CRSP sample, large return outliers should not be winsorized the same when estimating stock
volatility as when estimating market-beta. The R2 of predicting next year's standard deviation with this year's
standard deviation is 46%. With level-winsorized rates of return, this drops to 44%, with band-winsorized
returns to 21%, and with slope-winsorized returns to 6%.




                                                     13
As in Martin and Simin (2003), the model is used to winsorize the largest standardized
residuals. Unlike in Martin and Simin (2003), there is no first-stage OLS regression to
estimate b .

    The band winsorized market-beta is

                                          cov rbwi,d ( b ) , rm,d
                              bbwi,y                                      ,                           (6)
                                                var( rm,d )

The middle plot in Figure 3 illustrates "band" winsorization. By compressing the range of
the dependent variable diagonally, each beta estimate becomes biased towards 1.

    Band winsorization has to lean on specification priors about net-of-market rates of
return. It is most aggressive with positive outliers when the market return is negative and
with negative outliers when the market return is positive.



C    Slope Winsorization

My paper focuses on a "slope-winsorized" market-beta estimator (bsw). It performs a little
better than band winsorization and makes it possible to work with priors on market-beta
itself. "Slope" winsorization limits firms' market-model slopes:

                              rswi,d       1.0 + [ ­ s , +s ] · rm,d .                                (7)

This linear structure in the winsorization is provided by the model itself. The slope win-
sorized market-beta is

                                          cov rswi,d ( s ) , rm,d
                               bswi,y                                     .                           (8)
                                                var( rm,d )

The bottom plot in Figure 3 illustrates "slope" winsorization. Beta estimates become biased
towards 1. Slope winsorization is most aggressive where it matters least for regression
coefficient estimates--around market returns of about zero. It is useless to report the
fraction of returns that are winsorized--there are always many returns that are near zero
that are winsorized. However, these winsorized points matter little in the slope estimation.11
 11 Ifall market returns in the sample are positive or negative, pathological cases can arise in which the
estimated bsw exceeds the prior bounds.


                                                   14
IV      Predictive Performance of Undecayed bsw

We begin by describing the performance of winsorized market-beta estimates in predicting
future OLS market-betas without age decay. Section V will add age decay.

     The regressions in this section use a data set with mid-year to mid-year one-year rates of
return from 1927 to 2018. Thus, not only are the market-beta measures never overlapping,
neither are the observations in the predictive gamma regressions.

    We consider two measures of estimation success, both based on the ability of different
                                ^ to predict the one-year-ahead realized OLS market-beta,
estimated current market-betas (b)
bolsi,y+1 . The first comes from predictive "gamma" regressions,

                             R2 bolsi,y+1 = 0 + 1 · b
                                                    ^i,y + i,y+1             .                         (9)

The second measure is the equivalent RMSE


                                                            ^i,y )/N .
                                               (bolsi,y+1 ­ b                                         (10)
                                         i,y


The regression R2 is not affected by bias in the proxy, while the RMSE is.

     The tables typically show the results of pooled panel regressions, but the nature of the
data means that the regressions are mostly cross-sectional. Each year has thousands of
observations in the cross-section and there are fewer than one hundred years. Not shown,
results with Fama-Macbeth-like specifications are always similar.12

     Realized OLS market-betas are a measure of realized diversification benefits for an
investor holding the market portfolio. It could be argued that they are themselves reasonable
estimation bogies. However, they are not the expected OLS market-betas. To the extent
that realized betas differ from expected betas by noise, our estimates suffer from noise (e.g.,
lower R-squareds in the gamma regressions). Noise is a minor concern for the dependent
variable, the future bols. We expect ex-ante estimators that perform better in predicting the
future realized beta bols also to be able to predict better the unknown true and expected
 12 Fama-Macbeth   regressions exploit the fact that stock returns should be uncorrelated over time. Market-
betas are not uncorrelated over time.




                                                     15
market-betas. Put differently, errors in the dependent variable is a benign complication. It
is what OLS was designed for.

    Errors-in-Variables:     It is more problematic that the independent variable is also
measured with error. If the underlying model is stable, then the asymptotic bias in a slope
                                               2 /2 ), where 2 is the squared standard
coefficient of past on future values is 1/(1 + e  b          e
                       2 is the cross-sectional dispersion in the (market-beta) predictor.
error of the noise and b
The average estimated market-beta standard error in the market-model regression is a
                   2 . It is about 0.05 (per day). The average dispersion of estimated
rough estimate for e
                                                          2 . It is about 0.40 (per firm).
market-betas in the cross-section is a rough estimate for e
Thus, an over-the-envelope estimate for the 1 bias is about 1 ­ 1/(1 + 0.05/0.42 )  2%.13
The empirical bias is much larger because the underlying market-beta is also not stable. In
addition to time-varying betas, our sample also has time-varying heterogeneity in firm-size
and with it time-variation in cross-sectional market-beta means and standard deviations.


    Achievable Prediction:        If both the dependent and the independent variable are
proxies drawn with error from an unknown true but stable normal variable, the R2 of a
cross-sectional regression of one proxy on the other yields an R2 that is the square of the
R2 in an (infeasible) regression of the true (unknown) beta parameter on a realized OLS
beta. For example, if the OLS market-beta, bols, can explain 25% of its future self, it would
suggest that bols could explain about        .25  50% of the true unknown market-beta. If
the underlying market-betas are changing, the estimated square root of the R2 is a lower
bound. The association with the true market-beta would be higher.



A    Winsorization Deltas

Section III already outlined the tradeoffs in choosing an appropriate single static parameter
for the winsorization cutoffs. Too strict a winsorization destroys the heterogeneity of betas.
Too lax a winsorization becomes meaningless. There is a golden middle. Section I.B already
hinted at reasonable ranges, for which winsorization would not seem too harsh, cutting
into the main distribution of stock returns or market-betas.


 13 These  approximations have ignored the panel nature of the data. However, unreported simulations
suggest that they are reasonably applicable in our panel sample, too.


                                                16
            [Insert Figure 4 here: Effect of Winsorizing Deltas on Predictive Performance (R2 )]


    Figure 4 plots the R2 s from gamma regressions, predicting bolsi,y+1 with winsorized
market-beta estimates using different deltas. The plots show that variations in the win-
sorization choices are never knife-edge. The predictive R2 s have reasonable ranges. The top
plot shows that level winsorization is better than no winsorization, but blw never reaches
the predictive power of bVCK regardless of l . The middle plot shows that bbw reaches it
when winsorizing net-of-market returns at around 2% to 3%. The bottom plot shows that
bsw modestly exceeds it for s from 1.5 to 3.5.



B    Dynamic Deltas?

The deltas used in my paper are fixed in advance. They consume at most one degree of
freedom and have (nearly) no hindsight.14 In principle, deltas could be chosen based on
data analysis or (in-sample) estimations. They could also be different for the upper or
lower bounds. However, the spirit of a specification-based15 estimate is to keep the deltas
as simple as possible. No first-stage regressions are needed, either. Section V shows that it
is not impossible to improve the parameter estimates dynamically, but the potential gains
are likely to be small for the variables considered.



C    Synopsis

    [Insert Table 2 here: Gamma Regressions Predicting One-Year Ahead OLS Market-Beta (bols)]


    Table 2 describes the characteristics and performance numerically, using good win-
sorization parameters.
  14 When   pinned down in the years before the estimation (e.g., before 1963 for 1963­2018 estimation), they
do not even consume a single degree of freedom or use any hindsight. With modest use of hindsight, they
could also be assessed from the frequency of extreme market-beta estimates. Only 0.17% of all unwinsorized
firm-year OLS market-betas exceed s =3. In defense, note that other estimators also require parameter
choices. For example, although the Vasicek estimator seems to require no extra parameters, it results in such
badly biased beta estimates that it effectively requires the debiasing parameters as in Levi and Welch (2017).
(Otherwise, it is unsuitable for use as a direct market-beta proxy.)
   15 The "specification-based" moniker is intended to suggest that bsw is not based on a multi-step model-

parameter-based estimation, but that it is a much simpler estimator based just on a pre-specified prior.



                                                     17
   The two left columns show the means and standard deviations of the independent
variables. bols and bVCK have similar means (by construction) of about 0.79. There is both
good heterogeneity and time-series variability in their realizations, but the distribution of
the shrinkage bVCK is about 20 percent tighter (0.55 vs. 0.68). The 7%-level-winsorized
beta has a lower mean of 0.71 and reduces the heterogeneity from 0.68 (for bols) to 0.41.
Both the bbw(B = 3%) and the bsw(s = 3) leave the mean at 0.79 but reduce the
heterogeneity to a startling low of 0.44. The means of all estimators considered here are
similar, which makes it a little easier to predict them with one another.

   The columns to the right show the performance predicting the future bols.

   · Model A is a "null" benchmark, in which we predict bols with the cross-sectional bols
      mean from the prior year. This mean reflects the time-varying composition of stocks
      on CRSP and the equal-weighting of stocks in our market-model regression with the
      value-weighted market index. The lagged mean target is also effectively part of the
      estimation of bVCK. Model A has modest bias (1 =0.842) but low R2 (6.09%).

   · Model B predicts with the standard OLS beta, bols. bols is a badly biased predictor of
      its future self. It has an auto-coefficient of only 1  0.565 and an R2 of 27.97%.
      The bias is much too large for a simple error-in-variables problem and points to
      underlying mean reversion in bols over the one-year intervals considered here.

   · Model C predicts with the Vasicek beta, bVCK. bVCK is less biased (1  0.756) and
      has a higher R2 of 33.38%. By construction, the bLW variant in Model D achieves a
      nearly unbiased coefficient of 1  1.008.

   · Model E predicts with the level-winsorized market-betas, blw. It predicted better
      than bols but a little worse than bVCK. Its gamma coefficient was 1  0.721, its R2
      was 31.84%.

The specification-based winsorized market-betas perform well:

   · Model F predicts with the band-winsorized market-beta, bbw. bbw had a predictive
      coefficient of 0.943 and an R2 of 33.27%.

   · Model G predicts with the slope-winsorized market-betas bsw. bsw had a predictive
      coefficient of 0.977 and an R2 of 33.82%.

                                             18
The last rows consider extended estimators:

    · Model H predicts with an estimator which first slope-winsorizes and then Vasicek
        shrinks. It could outperform bsw, but not in an economically meaningful way. The
        R2 of 33.97 improves by only 0.15% relative to Model G.

    · Model I predicts with two independent variables, bsw and bVCK. Its R2 increases
        to 34.51%. The coefficients are 0.56 on bsw and 0.34 on bVCK. Depending on the
        application, this 0.7% increase relative to Model G may or may not be a useful
        improvement.

    · Model J predicts with all estimators from A through G simultaneously. The R2
        increases to 34.77%. (blw could be omitted.)

Where applicable, the RMSE column in Table 2 shows the combined effect of bias and noise.
The RMSE is relevant if a beta estimator is used as a direct 1-to-1 proxy for the true beta.
Because of its bias, bVCK performs poorly. bLW, bbw, and bsw perform better.

    Not shown and well known, all regressions lose some statistical power predicting two-
year-ahead OLS market-betas. It suggests that the underlying market-betas are themselves
not stable but mean-reverting. This deterioration could have been due to outliers, but
investigation shows that this is not the case. It appears as strongly with predictors that
have winsorized the outliers as those that have not. Furthermore, the inference is similar
when running on stocks that have two years of data vs. stocks that disappear in the second
year.



D       Performance Over The Years And Assessing Potential Improvements

                       [Insert Figure 5 here: RMSE by (July-June) Year for bsw]


    Figure 5 plots the RMSE and best s year by year. bsw outperforms bVCK not just on
average, but in 69 out of 92 years (75%). The exceptions are, in order, 1943 (ending June
1943, predicting 1943/07-1944/06), 1942, 1969, 1971, 1944, 2016, 1939, 1947, 2000,
1946, 1965, and 1953. The remaining 11 inferior years were just mildly worse. There is a
modest time-varying pattern to the optimal delta, but the figure shows that even perfectly


                                                 19
knowing the ex-post optimal s one year ahead would not have greatly improved the
predictive performance relative to the fixed s =3 (except in 1942-3 and 1966). The black
dotted line just below the blue line in the bottom plot shows the performance relative to
bLW, essentially removing the bias disadvantage of bVCK. The advantage of bsw shrinks
slightly, but the pattern remains the same, especially after World-War II.

    Not shown, averaged on a year-by-year basis, a bsw with an infeasible (ex-post optimal)
delta yielded a 2.40% average improvement in R2 over bVCK, while the feasible bsw yielded
a 1.52% average improvement. After 1974, the former yielded a 2.67% improvement while
the latter yielded a 2.26% improvement. This 0.4% is the best delta optimization that
could be obtained by a good model of the year-dimension related parameter. However,
the plot also shows that reaching this 0.4% will be difficult: the variance with a simple
time-series analysis prediction on the optimal s is likely to remain large, making it difficult
for researchers to reach this upper bound. Together, it seems unlikely that modeling time
drifts in s will easily yield much improvement when (a) it is difficult to estimate the best
delta and (b) the R2 improvements are modest even if one were to know the best deltas.
Using the same two criteria, Section V.C will show why many other variables are unlikely
to help in choosing good s and age-decay  parameters.



V    Predictive Performance of Age-decayed bswa

It has been known for a long time that the underlying beta drifts, and thus that the
usefulness of historical returns decays with age. The common way to handle this issue is
to use block-samplers (Ghysels and Jacquier (2007)), which is also what we did by using
12-month intervals in the preceding section.

    A smoother alternative is to progressively disregard older observations (i.e., without
suffering "drop off") in the market-model regression itself. A weighted-least-squares
regression (WLS) can smoothly incorporate age decay. Such a regression requires a second
parameter, henceforth named  . (Block sampling also requires a window choice.) The
age-decayed market-beta estimator is named bswa.

    To keep the WLS implementation simple, we investigate only simple exponential age
decay structures with only one single parameter regardless of firm and time. Like bsw,


                                              20
users can calculate bswa in time without the need of a first-stage regression. Each day
should receive a weight of about 0.7% to 0.9% higher than the preceding one. These
weights imply half-lives somewhere between 75 and 120 days, with 90 days a good middle
(1/(1 + 2/256)90  0.5. Ergo, yesterday's stock returns should have about twice the weight
of stock returns from four months ago, eight times the weight of those from one year ago,
and sixty times the weight of those from two years ago. Three-year-old stock returns are
effectively irrelevant.16



A    Contour Plots of Performance by Parameters Delta and Rho

           [Insert Figure 6 here: bswa: Slope-Winsorization and Decay with Entire History ]


    Figure 6 shows contour plots of the RMSE17 predicting the future 1-month-ahead
(typically 21 trading returns) and 1-year-ahead OLS market betas (252 returns).

Winsorization: The optimal winsorization parameter continues to hover around 3, with
       little RMSE performance differences for choices ranging from 2.75 to 4.25.

Age Decay: The optimal age decay ranges from 2/252  0.8% to 3.5/252  1.4% per
       day when predicting the short-term market beta, and 1.5/252  0.6% to 3/252 
      1.2% per day when predicting a long-term market-beta.18 Interestingly, different
       prediction horizons seem to prefer different patience: when forecasting shorter-term
       market-betas, the most recent observations should be considered relatively more
       important.

Not shown, R2 improves and bias worsens with higher (more lax) deltas and lower (more
patient) age decays.

    Because we want to work only with parsimonious integer parameter estimates, we
suggest (s =3,  =2) as our base case for bswa. The performance differences between our
  16 Therapid age decay helps explain why market-beta estimates using monthly rates of returns, which have
to sample more than 12 months, are mostly noise (Section VI.B).
  17 When comparing market-beta performance within subsets, it is easier to work with RMSE's than R2 's. It

makes little sense to work with subset gamma regressions. When subsets become small, as they may well in
100-by-100 contour grid cells, the required de-biasing cell-by-cell advance knowledge exceeds what can be
expected to be known by investors or researchers in-time.
  18 One may want to estimate the instantaneous market-beta instead of the one-year market beta. In this

case, one could inversely decay forward-looking stock returns.


                                                    21
(s =3,  =2) choice and the assessed optimal fractional choices, both in the training and
in the test sample, are statistically but not economically significant.



B   Different Sets

    [Insert Table 3 here: Gamma Regressions Predicting One-Year Ahead OLS Market-Beta (bols)]


    Table 3 shows the relative performance of bswa compared to earlier estimators. Using
the improvement of bVCK over bols as a 100% baseline, After 1964, bsw predicted the
future bols about 14% better than bVCK. bswa improved it by about 48%. (The data set
barely matters.)



C   Categorized Performance and Potential Conditional Parameter Im-
    provements

In the following figures, stocks are first partitioned into separate sets. Each set can be
viewed as its own "out-of-sample" test from the perspective of the other sets--they are
not overlapping. If the association were random, spurious, or driven by outliers, the fact
that an estimator holds in one percentile would not suggest that it should hold similarly in
its neighbor. The figures show that there are clear patterns: nearer partitions have more
similar results. Moreover, the superior performance of bswa is near-universal.

    Similar to the logic in Subsection IV.D, we can assess whether better modeling along
some X dimension is likely to improve the market-beta prediction. In particular, if there are
strong patterns in the optimal parameters across X (i.e., and with little residual variance
when predicting the optimal parameter), and if knowing the ex-post optimal parameter
yields a good improvement in RMSE, then modeling the link from X to optimal parameters
is likely to meaningfully improve predictive performance.

       [Insert Figure 7 here: Various Betas Predicting Future OLS Beta, Categorized By Year]


Year: The gray top lines in the left panel of Figure 7 show the performance and loess-
      smoothed performance of an estimator that uses only the lagged average market-beta
      without cross-sectional discrimination. The gray areas show that there were some

                                                22
     years (e.g., 1998-2000) in which bols was so poor a predictor that the unconditional
     average bols across all stocks from the preceding year predicted the future bols just
     as well or better than the firm's own bols (the black line above 0).

     The zero horizontal line represents the normalized predictive performance of bVCK.
     Because the bols line is above zero, bVCK (almost always) predicted the future bols
     better than bols itself.

     The blue lines below zero show the performances of the following:

        1. bsw, the block-sampled 12-month undecayed slope-winsorized market-beta;

        2. a one-year slope-winsorized beta with decay parameter  =2;

        3. bswa, the age-decayed slope-winsorized market-beta (for which we also show
           the individual year RMSEs with points);

        4. an infeasible hypothetical bswa which uses the ex-post optimal s and  in
           each partition (here year).

     These four lines make it easier to understand how much of the performance is due to
     age decay, how much is due to winsorization, and how much one could potentially
     improve the parameters. Figure 7 shows that the winsorization and the decay were
     roughly equally important over the years. The improvement of bswa over bVCK was
     about half as much as the improvement of bVCK over bols. The improvement was
     fairly stable over the decades. However, there were multiple years before 1963 and a
     few years after, in which bVCK outpredicted bswa.

     The right panel shows that there were time-varying patterns to the best parameters
     from year to year. Unfortunately the large residual year-to-year variability in ex-post
     optimal s and  suggests that it would be difficult to reach the performance of the
     dotted line in the left plot.


   In the next set of figures, observations within each year are first ranked by different
variables. Each observation is then assigned a within-year percentile rank. (This can be
done in time by an investor.) The figures then plot the RMSEs predicting next year's bols
within each percentile.




                                            23
[Insert Figure 8 here: Various Betas Predicting Future OLS Beta, Categorized By Market Capitalization]
  [Insert Figure 9 here: Various Betas Predicting Future OLS Beta, Categorized By Trading Volume]


Market-Cap: The left plot in Figure 8 shows that bols was a poor predictor for firms of any
      size. For the smaller half of stocks, bolsi,y predicted no better than the indiscriminate
      cross-sectional bols average over all stocks bolsy from the prior year.

      Our interest lies more with the relative performance of the slope-winsorized market-
      betas vs. bVCK. The plot shows that this also does not change greatly across market
      cap. bsw and bswa always outperform bVCK, except for the very largest percentile
      where the method of estimation becomes irrelevant. Even bols performs well. The
      right plot shows a modestly useful pattern. For small and large firms, higher (more
      lax) winsorization thresholds and slower age decay could improve performance.
      However, the right plot shows that this would yield a useful prediction improvement
      only for small firms.

Dollar Trading Volume: The equivalent figure for stocks ranked on (lagged) dollar trading
      volume suggests a useful estimation possibility: For the bottom tertile of rarely trading
      stocks, improved patience (lower  ) with laxer winsorization could yield better
      estimates than bswa. The residual variance around predicting better parameters is
      low, and better parameters could improve prediction.

      The left plot also shows the performance of the Dimson beta, bdim (as a solid orange
      line). Because the predicted target is bols, it is not surprising that bdim predicts
      poorly for stocks on the left. However, if bdim's efficiency cost were low, it should
      predict the future bols about as well as the plain bols estimator for the percentiles
      of stocks that trade the most. This is not the case. When non-synchronicity is not
      an issue, bdim significantly underperforms bols. The use of bdim comes with a high
      efficiency cost.



 [Insert Figure 10 here: Various Betas Predicting Future OLS Beta, Categorized By OLS Market Beta]
 [Insert Figure 11 here: Various Betas Predicting Future OLS Beta, Categorized By OLS Market Beta
                                          Standard Error]


    Finally, we can investigate the performance categorized by stock return based statistics:

                                                 24
OLS Market-Beta: Figure 10 shows that when the OLS beta coefficient is near 1, all
      estimators perform about the same. Meaningful improvements can occur only when
      the OLS market-beta is different from 1. For stocks with large OLS market-betas,
      the bswa estimator performs almost as well as an estimator with perfect  and s
      foresight. For stocks with very low (negative) OLS market betas, more patience
      (smaller age decay  1.5) and more aggressive winsorization (s 2) might yield a
      small improvement.

OLS Beta Standard Error: The second critical variable used in bVCK is the standard error
      of bols. Presumably, any attempt to fine-tune the delta parameter with firm-specific
      estimated information would also attempt to estimate the standard error of the OLS
      market-beta, and then use this estimate to decay or winsorize differently.

      The left plot in Figure 11 shows that even an ex-post optimal s and  can barely
      improve the RMSE performance for all but the noisiest decile of stocks. Unfortunately,
      as the right plot shows, these stocks are also the same ones where the optimal
      parameters are all over the place. There is no promising strong pattern here. Thus, it
      is unlikely that modeling uncertainty for the sake of a s parameter improvement is
      likely to work.

Not shown, the plots for stock return volatility and residual market-model volatility look
similar to that for the standard error of bols.

    In sum, it seems that it is more important to choose reasonable winsorization parameters
than to attempt to fine-tune them. The most promising improvement would be to estimate
market-betas with more patience (lower  ) and laxer winsorization (higher s ) when
trading volume (and marketcap) is low.



D    Improvements in the Market-Model (First-Pass) Regressions

I could not identify another variable that could improve the market-model estimation in a
meaningful manner. I investigated only relatively obvious high-frequency daily time-series,
such as daily trading volume, spreads, etc.




                                              25
E   CRSP and Compustat Variables To Improve the Gamma (Second-
    Pass) Prediction Regressions

Low-frequency variables could be useful as additional predictors in the gamma regressions.

             [Insert Table 4 here: Predicting Future 12-Month OLS Market Beta (bols)]


    Panel A of Table 4 shows that including a measure of one-year trading volume--
specifically the within-year rank of total dollar trading volume--can improve the prediction
accuracy from 34.74% to 35.89%. Depending on the application, the 1.2% gain in R2 can
be a meaningful improvement.

    The prediction equation suggests that one should increase the estimated beta for firms
with high trading volume rank, and decrease the estimated beta for firms with low trading
volume. (Not shown, on the margin, the most-frequently traded stock should have a
market-beta estimate about 0.2-0.3 higher than the lowest trading stock.) Marketcap could
be used instead of trading volume, with only a minimal loss of prediction accuracy. Using a
log marketcap may be easier than first percentile ranking trading volume, so we now use it
as our "base model" in Panel B and Table 5. What other variables can usefully predict these
residuals?

    Panel B shows that the other CRSP variables in Table 4 did not greatly improve the
prediction, even in these in-sample regressions. The next best variables are again transforms
of dollar trading and marketcap.

      [Insert Table 5 here: Explaining Base Model Residuals With Compustat-Based Variables]


    Table 5 extends the analysis of base model residuals to include variables obtained from
Compustat. Some of them greatly restrict the sample due to limited data availability. None
of these variables matter.




                                               26
F    Conclusion

The age-decayed slope-winsorized bswa is a superior predictor of the future bols. The
most promising (but not pursued) improvements relate to more use of trading volume.
Stocks with low trading volume could benefit from more patience (slower decay  ) and less
aggressive winsorization (higher s ), and/or be assigned somewhat lower market-betas
than suggested by bswa. These improvements would require substantially more coding
and data snooping than the simple bswa considered here.



VI      Alternative Beta Estimators Post 1974

A     Benchmark Performance

Having explored good s and  parameters, and having come to the conclusion that the
one-size-fits-all values of s =3 and  =2 perform well enough, we now benchmark this
simple bswa to other beta estimators.

     In this section, we restrict the sample to years after 1974 (when Nasdaq was available)
and now use overlapping observations in the gamma regressions. The maximum number of
observations is thus 2,961,446 firm-years. The benchmark comparisons in each table will
use the same set of observations (firm-years), because different estimates have different
sample availabilities.

     We also predict not only bols but also other beta measures. All market-beta estimators
attempt to uncover the true beta signal in noisy stock return data. If the estimation error is
iid, the best estimator should predict not only the OLS market-beta estimates better but
also other noisy estimates of market beta.

     This logic breaks down if there is persistence in the errors (e.g., a persistent alternative
focus), too. The Dimson (1979) beta estimator falls into this category. If trading frequency
is stable and the betas of infrequently trading stocks are downward biased, then the future
Dimson estimate should retain the same bias as the current estimate. The persistent bias
should make it easier for the Dimson beta to predict its future self in competition with
other betas.



                                               27
    Investors care about future market-betas, not current market-betas. For an estimator
to predict its future self well is a necessary but not a sufficient success criterion. If an
estimator does not predict its future self better than bswa (and investors and researchers
typically care about the future market-beta), then one may as well use bswa instead. Yet,
self-prediction is not enough. For example, a "beta estimator" claiming that beta is the
firm's perm number could predict itself perfectly well, but it could not predict the OLS
or other market-beta estimates. This qualification is important, because it is sometimes
argued that industry betas should be used because they are more stable than firm betas.
Although they are indeed more stable, the evidence suggests that industry betas are very
poor predictors of their individual constituent firm betas.

    Not shown, when predicting market-betas over the next month instead of over the next
twelve months, the dependent variable is much noisier. However, the ordering of estimator
performance remains the same.



B   Specific Alternatives

[Insert Figure 6 here: Full Sample Post-1974 Benchmark Performance Comparisons (N = 2, 961, 446)]


    Table 6 shows the performance for all estimators for which the full 2,961,446 (overlap-
ping) market-beta pairs (observations) could be used.


The OLS Market-Beta: When predicting bols, bsw with its R2 of 43.7% modestly outper-
      forms bVCK (R2 44.2%), but bswa outperforms it comfortably (R2 46.2%). As in
      Table 3, bswa outperforms bVCK by about half as much as bVCK outperforms bols.

The Vasicek (1973) Beta: When predicting bVCK, bswa with its R2 53.4% predicts better
      than own lagged bVCK with its R2 50.6%. Ergo, researchers interested in working
      with the future bVCK should use the current bswa rather than the current bVCK.

The Slope-winsorized Market-Beta: When predicting bsw, bswa with its R2 56.3% pre-
      dicts better than own lagged bsw with its R2 53.9%. Ergo, researchers interested
      in working with the future bsw should use the current bswa rather than the current
      bsw. The 56.3% estimate suggests that bsw could predict the true unknown beta



                                               28
       with an R2 of about 75% (see Section IV). (bswa should have an even larger 80-90%
       correlation with the unknown true market-beta.)

The Aged Slope-winsorized Market-Beta: Some of the excellent predictive performance
       of bswa on itself (R2 62.4%) is due to overlapping stock returns in the calculation
       of market-beta (because bswa uses the entire history).

Dimson (1979): The Dimson beta estimator (bdim) corrects for non-synchronous trading
       by including leads and lags of the market rate of return in the market-model regression.
       (bdim is the sum-total of the coefficients on differently timed market rates of return.)

       The Dimson estimator is in wide use. It is easier to implement in practice than the
       Vasicek estimator, because beta estimates are not entangled with those from other
       firms. No cross-sectional statistics are needed.

       The original Dimson (1979) used its namesake estimator only on low-frequency
       (monthly) returns of (typically decile) portfolios. It also suggested Vasicek (1973)
       shrinkage and Blume (1971) regression inspired improvements. However, the subse-
       quent literature has mostly ignored these enhancements and used only the summed
       coefficients. Most papers have also applied bdim in other contexts, such as in the con-
       text of individual stocks and/or daily stock returns. My paper calls bdim the "Dimson
       beta" not because the original papers used bdim in the daily-frequency individual
       stock context, but because the widely-used version had its origin in Dimson (1979).19
       Although bdim is intuitive and appealing, Figure 9 already showed that it suffers
       from a large efficiency loss. There is a large gap between bdim and bols even for the
       most liquid stocks.

       Model A1 .4 of Table 6 showed that bdim predicted bols poorly (as it did also in Levi and
       Welch (2017)). This poor performance is not surprising, because the (synchronicity-
       biased) OLS beta is not its intended target. If the current OLS estimate is biased due
       to non-synchronicity, then the future OLS estimate should be biased, too. A future
       Dimson estimate would be a better bogie. However, Models C.1 and C.2 of the table
       show further problems. When predicting bdim, bswa with its R2 31.6% predicts
       better than own lagged bdim with its R2 22.0%. Ergo, researchers interested in
  19 Fowler and Rorke (1983) point out that the Dimson (1979) estimator is incorrect. It does not yield
inconsistent estimates. However, in practice, this is unlikely to be a big problem, and it is the original Dimson
and not the Fowler-Rorke corrected estimator that remains in wide use.


                                                      29
     working with the future bdim should use the current bswa rather than the current
     bdim. This was unexpected. bswa is so much better extracting the true beta signal
     that it can outpredict despite the persistent bias adjustment provided by bdim. Note
     also that bswa would predict bdim even better on the RMSE metric if one were to
     add the mean difference of 0.91 ­ 0.800.11 to each bswa.

Other Robust Estimators: Robust estimation was pioneered in Tukey (1960). It was first
     used in the market-beta context by Martin and Simin (2003). The latter used a
     band-like shrinker based on first-stage OLS regressions and a non-linear two-equation
     shrinkage solution. Unfortunately, the Martin-Simin betas are difficult to compute.
     Fortunately, Timothy Simin generously shared two alternative robust estimators of
     monthly market-beta estimates. To be included, a firm-year had to have a CRSP share
     code 10 and 11 firms and at least 240 daily observations. His estimates begin in June
     1966 and end in June 2018. They contains 2,023,162 firm-months.

     The first set of betas are "maximum likelihood type estimators," abbreviated bmm.
     They are described in Rousseeuw (1984). These betas are similar to those in Martin
     and Simin (2003), but use a Huber (1964) loss function instead of an optimal one.
     According to Simin, the Huber estimates are typically nearly identical, but their
     computation is five times faster. Nevertheless, it took days running distributed Matlab
     on the Penn State super-computer to obtain the bmm estimates. The second set of
     betas are least-trimmed squares beta based on Yohai (1987), abbreviated blts.

       [Insert Table 7 here: Benchmark Performance Comparisons, Alternative Robust Estimators
                            (Martin and Simin (2003), N = 2, 018, 080)]


     With a different set of observations, we require a new table. Table 7 shows that both
     robust estimators perform well in predicting bols, but not as well as bVCK, bsw, and
     bswa. bmm performs better than blts. Not shown, the difference in means suggests
     that a simple bias adjustment would further improve the RMSE when bswa predicts
     either bmm or blts.

     When predicting bmm, bswa with its R2 52.3% predicts better than own lagged
     bmm with its R2 49.7%. Ergo, researchers interested in working with the future
     bmm should use the current bswa rather than the current bmm. When predicting
     blts, bswa with its R2 49.7% predicts better than own lagged blts with its R2 45.7%.

                                             30
      Ergo, researchers interested in working with the future blts should use the current
      bswa rather than the current blts.

Frazzini-Pedersen: The Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) beta estimator (bfp) uses five years
      of data to calculate correlations and one year of data to calculate standard deviations.
      The estimator is then the correlation multiplied by the ratio of the two standard
                                                                         ^ + 0.4. The origin
      deviations, shrunk with a Blume (1971)-like linear equation, 0.6 · b
      of the estimator is not clear, because Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) did not validate
      or benchmark it. Nevertheless, perhaps due to the success of the paper in predicting
      future average rates of return, bfp has become prominent.20

       [Insert Table 8 here: Benchmark Performance Comparisons, Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) BaB
                                       Market-Betas (N = 1, 440, 636)]


      Again, requiring five years of returns to calculate correlations leading to the differ-
      ent set of observations, we need a new table. When predicting bfp, bswa with its
      R2 31.1% predicts better than own lagged bfp with its R2 20.6%. Ergo, researchers
      interested in working with the future bfp should use the current bswa rather than
      the current bfp. However, because the bfp mean is much higher than the bols mean,
      bfp has a lower RMSE explaining itself than bols or bswa. The RMSE when bswa
      predicts bfp (in Model H.3) can be improved by 0.19 by adding 0.99 ­ 0.800.19 to
      each bswa estimate.

Intra-Day Betas: Ait-Sahalia, Kalnina, and Xiu (2014) also generously shared their beta
      estimates, named btaq1. Because their intra-day TAQ based beta estimates are for
      one month each, we also consider a moving average of the most recent 12 months,
      named btaq12.

         [Insert Figure 9 here: Benchmark Performance Comparisons, Ait-Sahalia, Kalnina, and Xiu
                                          (2014) TAQ Market-Betas]


      Again, we need a new table due to the different set of observations. Panel A of Table 9
      briefly shows that btaq1 does not predict either a one-month bols or itself well. When
 20 Novy-Marx   and Velikov (2018) show how this estimator is biased in the time-series, picking up firm-
specific time-changing volatility patterns. Han (2019) shows that most of the average return performance
comes from the time-series component.


                                                  31
     predicting btaq12, bswa with its R2 50.6% predicts better than own lagged btaq12
     with its R2 48.1%. Ergo, researchers interested in working with the future btaq12
     should use the current bswa rather than the current btaq12.
     A researcher interested in future market betas based on monthly stock returns is still
     better off estimating the predicting beta variable using ordinary daily stock returns.
     However, it may be possible to incorporate the slope-based winsorization technique
     directly into the intra-day estimation to improve it. (Another disadvantage of btaq12
     vs. bswa is that it will remain more difficult to code and compute, likely relegating it
     to niche applications only.)

Monthly-Stock Return-Based OLS Market-Betas: Table 10 considers market-betas ob-
     tained from monthly-frequency stock returns. The window was expanded to 60
     months, empirically a good (self-predictive) window. (Not shown, the following
     conclusions are robust to window lengths from 36 to 60 months.)

       [Insert Figure 10 here: Benchmark Performance Comparisons, Monthly-Return-Frequency
                                    Market-Betas (N = 1, 715, 377)]


     The table shows that future monthly-frequency market-betas are mostly noise. The
     predictive R2 's in the gamma auto-regressions are 1.6% for a monthly-frequency OLS
     market-beta bmols and 3.7% for its Vasicek equivalent bmvck. The own historical
     average, with no attempt at discrimination across stocks, does not perform much
     worse.
     When predicting bmols, bswa with its R2 3.3% predicts better than own lagged bmols
     with its R2 1.6%. Ergo, researchers interested in working with the future bmols
     should use the current bswa rather than the current bmols. When predicting bmvck,
     bswa with its R2 6.1% predicts better than own lagged bmvck with its R2 3.7%.
     Ergo, researchers interested in working with the future bmvck should use the current
     bswa rather than the current bmvck.
     Now shown, in this sample, bswa also has a mean of 0.80. Ergo, the RMSE when
     bswa predicts bmols (in Model A6 .3) can be improved by 0.27 by adding 1.07­0.80 to
     each bswa estimate, and by 0.24 in Model K.3 by adding 0.24 to each bswa estimate.

Industry Betas: Not shown, I also experimented with industry betas. Industry market-
     betas are poor predictors of the market-betas of the stocks in their industries.

                                              32
Peer Betas: Not shown, I also experimented with averaging in the beta of the nearest
      industry-marketcap peer. Unfortunately, this did not improve predictive performance.




C   Distinctiveness of Estimates

Our final concern is the distinctiveness of market-beta estimates. Does it even make a
difference which market-beta is used?

                 [Insert Table 11 here: Distinctiveness of Market-Beta Measures]


    Table 11 shows the root-mean-squared-difference among estimators for the set of
432,426 stock-years where all market-betas were available. The typical difference ranged
from 0.1 to 0.8. The robust estimators (Vasicek, winsorized, and Martin-Simin relayed)
tend to be similar. Their typical distance from one another was about 0.1 to 0.2. The
Vasicek market-beta was most similar to the OLS market-beta.




                                               33
VII    Conclusion

The slope-winsorized beta estimator (bsw) and its age-decayed version (bswa) are easy to
implement. Using at least 12-18 months of historical daily stock return data in ri and rm,
the R code is

  _bswa <- function( ri, rm, Delta, rho ) {
     wins.rel <- function( r, rmin, rmax ) {
        rlo <- pmin(rmin,rmax); rhi <- pmax(rmin,rmax)
        ifelse( r<rlo, rlo, ifelse( r>rhi, rhi, r ) )   }
     wri <- wins.rel( ri, (1-Delta)*rm, (1+Delta)*rm )
     beta <- function(...) coef(lm(...))[2]
     # ri and rm must be increasing in time
     bsw <- beta( wri ~ rm, w=exp(-rho*(length(ri):1)) )
  }

  bsw <- function( ... ) _bswa( ... , Delta=3.0, rho=0.0 )
  bswa <- function( ... ) _bswa( ..., Delta=3.0, rho=2.0/256.0 )



   C code to calculate all bswa at the end of each month for each CRSP stock is available.
Because returns can be added progressively, it takes less than one minute to calculate
monthly market-betas from daily stock returns for the entire CRSP universe.

   Using a computer software analogy, the predictive performance (and modest difference)
suggests that bVCK and bLW are good enough not to require an upgrade for completed
research projects. However, the upgrade is free. The resulting bswa performs much better
and is easier to use. All other market-beta estimators seem inferior. Many are inferior even
to plain OLS market-beta estimate. In their defense, their use can be harmless--mostly in
situations in which one may as well use 1.0 as the unversal market-beta estimate and not
even bother with estimation: (I) Market-betas for individual stocks estimated on monthly
frequency stock returns are mostly noise. Although bswa remains the superior predictor, the
gains (in predicting mostly noise) are small. (II) The estimates of market-betas for many
sufficiently large portfolios do not vary greatly with estimation method. In the extreme,


                                            34
portfolios similar to value-weighted market portfolios should have market-betas of around
1, regardless of beta estimator.




                                           35
References
Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, Ilze Kalnina, and Dacheng Xiu (2014). The Idiosyncratic Volatility Puzzle:
   A Reassessment at High Frequency. Tech. rep. University of Chicago.
Blume, Marshall E. (1971). "On the assessment of risk". In: The Journal of Finance 26.3,
   pp. 1­10.
Bollerslev, Tim, Sophia Zhengzi Li, and Viktor Todorov (June 2016). "Roughing up beta:
   Continuous versus discontinuous betas and the cross section of expected stock returns".
   In: Journal of Financial Economics 120.3, pp. 494­490.
Dimson, Elroy (June 1979). "Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent
   trading". In: Journal of Financial Economics 7.2, pp. 197­226.
Engle, Robert F. (1982). "Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of
   the variance of United Kingdom inflation". In: Econometrica 50, pp. 987­1007.
Foster, Dean P. and Dan B. Nelson (Jan. 1996). "Continuous Record Asymptotics for Rolling
   Sample Variance Estimators". In: Econometrica 64.1, pp. 139­174.
Fowler, David J and C Harvey Rorke (1983). "Risk measurement when shares are subject
   to infrequent trading: Comment". In: Journal of Financial Economics 12.2, pp. 279­283.
Frazzini, Andrea and Lasse Heje Pedersen (2014). "Betting against beta". In: Journal of
   Financial Economics 111.1, pp. 1­25.
Ghysels, Eric and Eric Jacquier (2007). Market Beta Dynamics and Portfolio Efficiency. Tech.
   rep. University of North Carolina and HEC Montreal.
Glosten, Lawrence R., Ravi Jagannathan, and David E. Runkle (Dec. 1993). "On the Relation
   between the Expected Value and the Volatility of the Nominal Excess Return on Stocks".
   In: The Journal of Finance 48.5, pp. 1779­1801.
Han, Xing (2019). Understanding the Performance of Components in Betting Against Beta.
   Tech. rep. University of Otago, NZ.
Harvey, Campbell R., Yan Liu, and Heqing Zhu (Jan. 2016). "...and the Cross-Section of
   Expected Returns". In: Review of Financial Studies 29 (1), pp. 5­68.
Huber, Peter J. (1964). "Robust Estimation of a Location Parameter". In: Annals of Statistics
   53.1, pp. 73­101.
Karolyi, G. Andrew (1992). "Predicting Risk: Some New Generalizations". In: Management
   Science 38, pp. 57­74.




                                             36
Levi, Yaron and Ivo Welch (Apr. 2017). "Best Practice for Cost-of-Capital Estimates". In:
   Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 52 (2), pp. 427­463.
Lo, Andrew W and A Craig MacKinlay (1990). "Data-snooping biases in tests of financial
   asset pricing models". In: The Review of Financial Studies 3.3, pp. 431­467.
Martin, R. Douglas and Timothy T. Simin (Sept. 2003). "Outlier-Resistant Estimates of
   Beta". In: Financial Analysts Journal 59.5, pp. 56­69.
Mclean, R. David and Jeffrey Pontiff (Feb. 2016). "Does Academic Research Destroy Stock
   Return Predictability?" In: The Journal of Finance 71.1, pp. 5­32.
Novy-Marx, Robert and Mikhail Velikov (Nov. 2018). Betting Against Betting Against Beta.
   Tech. rep. University of Rochester and FRB of Richmond.
Rousseeuw, Peter J. (1984). "Least Median of Squares Regression". In: Journal of the
   American Statistical Association 79.388, pp. 871­881.
Tukey, John W. (1960). "A survey of sampling from contaminated distributions". In: Contri-
   butions to Probability and Statistics: Essays in Honor of Harold Hotelling. Ed. by I. Olkin
   et al. Stanford University Press, pp. 448­485.
Vasicek, Oldrich A. (1973). "A Note on Using Cross-Sectional Information in Bayesian
   Estimation of Security Betas". In: The Journal of Finance 28.5, pp. 1233­1239.
Yohai, Victor J. (1987). "High Breakdown-Point and High Efficiency Robust Estimates for
   Regression". In: Annals of Statistics 15.2, pp. 642­656.




                                             37
tbl:glossary in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




                              Table 1: Glossary of Market-Beta Estimators


       Abbrev       Long Name                       Remarks

    12 Months of Daily Stock Return Data
       bols         OLS
       bVCK         Vasicek                         Random-Effects Panel Estimator. Vasicek (1973).
       bLW          Levi-Welch                      0.25 + 0.75·bVCK. Levi and Welch (2017).
       blw          Level-Winsorized                Default Parameter: l = 5%.
       bbw          Band-Winsorized                 Default Parameter: b = 3%.
       bsw          Slope-Winsorized                Default Parameter: s = 3.
       bols         Average bols                    Equal-weighted average over all stocks during preced-
                                                    ing 12 months.
       bdim         Dimson-like                     Sum of three market coefficients. Dimson (1979).
       bmm          Robust Maximum-Likelihood       Martin and Simin (2003), Rousseeuw (1984).
       blts         Robust Least-Trimmed            Martin and Simin (2003), Yohai (1987).

       btaq1        Intra-Day (1 Month!)            TAQ-based. Ait-Sahalia, Kalnina, and Xiu (2014).
       btaq12       Intra-Day (12 Mos)              Average of 12 consecutive btaq1.
    Extended (60 Months) of Stock Return Data
       bfp          Frazzini-Pedersen               Daily-frequency returns only, 12 months for variances,
                                                    60 for correlation. Frazzini and Pedersen (2014).
       bmols        Monthly OLS                     from 60 monthly stock returns.
       bmvck        Monthly VCK                     from 60 monthly stock returns.

    Daily Stock Return Data As Long As Available
       bswa         Slope-Winsorized and Aged       Default Parameters:  =2, s =3. Rho implies (1 +
                                                    2/252) ­ 1  0.8% decay per day past. Uses entire
                                                    prevailing daily stock return history.

When self-computed, the input stock returns are always net of the prevailing risk-free rate from Ken
French's website. The market is always the value-weighted CRSP stock index rate of return, also net
of the risk-free rate of return. The bmm, blts, and btaq1 estimates were provided by the original
authors. The bfp betas were checked against those estimated in Novy-Marx and Velikov (2018).




                                                   38
fig:qcdf in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




                                                                     Figure 1: Quasi-CDF: Frequency of Winsorizations


                                                      1.0



                                                      0.8
                 Freq( |rret| < x )



                                                      0.6



                                                      0.4



                                                      0.2



                                                      0.0
                                                         0.00                                0.05              0.10                  0.15                 0.20

                                                                                                               Delta

                                                      1.0



                                                      0.8
                 Freq( |xmret| < x )




                                                      0.6



                                                      0.4



                                                      0.2



                                                      0.0
                                                         0.00                0.02                0.04   0.06           0.08   0.10          0.12   0.14

                                                                                                               Delta

                                                      1.0
                                                                Empirical (12-Mo) Betas:
                                                                     Mean = 0.79
                   Freq( | 1 - OLS Beta | < Delta )




                                                                   Std.Dev. = 0.68
                                                      0.8          Skewness = 0.47
                                                                   Kurtosis = 15.25


                                                      0.6



                                                      0.4
                                                                                 Normal Dist:
                                                                                Mean = 0.79
                                                                               Std.Dev. = 0.68
                                                      0.2                       Skewness = 0
                                                                                 Kurtosis = 3


                                                      0.0
                                                            0                                    1               2                    3                   4

                                                                                                               Delta




Explanations: In the top two panels, the sample are all valid stock returns (1926 to 2018). These
plots show cumulative frequencies of absolute rates of return, either net of the risk-free rate (top)
or net of the value-weighted market (middle). The red area shows the mass of returns winsorized
at 7% and 3%, respectively. In the bottom panel, the sample are all annual OLS market-betas
(bols). The blue line in the bottom panel shows the bols frequency that are at least a distance of x
deltas away from 1.0. The thin dotted black line on the bottom panel is from a normal distribution
with matched mean and variance. The arrows denote the preferred delta parameters in this paper.
Absolute daily returns above 10% are not rare (3.2% frequency). Annual OLS market-betas below
­1 and +3 are rarer (0.9%). OLS market-betas beyond a  of 3, i.e., below ­2 and +4, are very rare
(0.17%).
Interpretation: The preferred winsorization delta parameters effect different number of stock
returns and market-betas. Warning: s may effect few overall market-betas but can influence many
stock returns (although most will not matter much to the estimated regression slopes, bsw and
bswa).
                                                                 39
Source: fig-qcdf/qcdf-C.Rmd, forbeta-annual.csv.gz, crspdaily-clean.csv.gz  *cdf.pdf
fig:betanowfut in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




Figure 2: Percentiles of Future 1-Year OLS Market-Betas (bols) By Current 1-Year OLS
          Market-Beta (bols)




                                3
     Future/Current OLS Beta




                                2



                                1



                                0



                               -1


                                    0   20                  40                     60                     80   100

                                                           Percentile of OLS Beta



Explanations: The x-axis is the within-year percentile of the current estimated 12-month
OLS market-beta (bols). (With about 2,000-4,000 stocks per year, this implies about 20-40
stocks per bin per year; over 55 years, about 1,000 stock-years.) The y-axis shows primarily
the distributions of the equivalent future bols's. The thick blue line shows the mean of
this next year's OLS market-beta. The blue bands show the one-standard-deviation and
two-standard deviation bounds around this mean (based on realized future market-betas,
not assessed from ex-ante standard errors). The black-white variable is the variable on
which the binning was based. Its monotonic relation is mechanistic. The sample are all
firm-years with valid current and future OLS market betas (bols) from 1926 through 2018.
Interpretation: Although about 5% of stock-years show negative market-betas, for negative
market-beta estimates today, lower current market-betas no longer predict lower future
market-betas on average. A prediction of a future bols of less than ­2 is about 3 standard
deviations below the mean prediction even for the most negative bols percentile today.
Source: fig-ols2fut/plotols2fut.Rmd, forbeta-annual.csv.gz  ols2fut*pdf (slopeols*pdf, olsbetahist.pdf)




                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 3: Winsorization Techniques


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5                                                                                 qq  q   q                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq q         qq          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                        q                    q                      q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq  qq  qq q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q qq                                          q                          q                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q      q      qq qq q q q q     q qq qq q q       qq      q q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                     q                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q       q            qqqq                q q        q                                                                                                              q       q           qqqq                q q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q qq                                                                                                        q                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q q  q                                                                                                                                                            q q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q           q                             q              q                      q                                                                                  q          q                              q             q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q       q q                                                                                                                                                        q       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq q q                          q                     qq                                                                                                          qq q q                           q                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q           q     q               q      q              q                                                                                                             q        q     q               q     q              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq  q      q q         q                                                                                                                                          qq  q      q q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q       q                qq                      q          q q                                                                                                       q    q               qq                       q          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqqq q q            q           q                                                                                                                                  qqq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q     q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q      qq                  q    q                             q                                                                          q    q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q        qq     qq                  q     q                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                         q                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q q qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q                              q q    qq           qq                            q                                                                                  q q                           q q   qq           qq                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q qq       q           q qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q           qq                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q qq       q          q qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q    q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q qq                 q qqq q q                                                                                                                                   q   q  qq             q q q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q     q                  qq q q q qq  qq  q q q q q     q            q                                                                                             q     q                 qq q  q q    qq  qq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q  q    q            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                   q q          q     q qq   qq         q qq            q q q                                                                                     q                   q q          q    q qq   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq q qq            q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq  q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q         qq    q q                  q                                                                                                         qq  q  q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q         qq    q q                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q  q    qq  qq       q q                                 q    q                                                                                                  q q  q    qqq qq      q q                                 q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q               q q          qq q   q       q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q                                                                                                    q               q q          qq q   q      q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q                 q qq   qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq q qq q                                                                                                                          q q                 q qq   qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq q qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                            q         qq q           qq                      qq     qqq                                                                           q                            q         qq q          qq                       qq    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q               q                   q qq        q    q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                        q                                                                  q                q                  q qq        q   q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q q                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q    q     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q  qq   q   q                                                                                                                  q q q               qqq    q     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q  q qq   q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq      q       q         q            q q                                                                                                                         qq      q      q          q           q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q                                                              q                                                                                                 q q                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0                                          q              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q      q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0                                     q              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q      q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q       qq q         q          q q q  q     qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                       q    q                                                                                       q      qq q         q          q q q q     qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                        q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                    q q qq          q        q                q                                                                                                   q                    q q qq          q       q                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq     qqq     q  qq               q q             qq                                                                                                              qq     qqq     q  qq               q q             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                 q     qqq        qq q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q q                                                                                               q                 q     qqq        qq q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqqq q        q qq                   q q      qq                                                                                                                   qqqq q        q qq                  q q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q qq      q q  q                                                                                                                                               q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q qq      q q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                    q    q q            q q           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqq                                                                                                    q                    q    q q            q q           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q q       q       q                                                                                                                                              q q q      q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q              q q q q qq                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                         q              q q q q qq                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q     qq       q   q q        qq     q                                                                                                                              q    qq       q   q q       qq      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q q      qq        q q  q        q                     q                                                                                                         q q q      qq        q q q        q                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                         q                      q                                                                                                                 q                        q                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                 q




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Firm Return
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Firm Return
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q           q qq    q            q                                                                                                                                 q           q qq    q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q qq                                                   q                                                                                                           q qq                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq q            q q      q      qq                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq q            q q      q     qq                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                   q    q qq                                                                                                                                      q                   q    q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq                                         qq q q q                             q                                                                                  qq                                         qq q q q                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q    q                 q q  q q qq                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q     q                q q  q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq                q                       q                                                                                                                        qq                q                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq      q                  q q       q q q                                                                                                                          qq     q                 q q       q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                   q         q     q                                                                                                                              q                   q         q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q         q   q       q           qq    q qqq q              q                    q              q            q                                                         q   q    q       q           q q  q q     qq        q qqq qq                  q             q              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q




                                                                                                                                                                                                "Level"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 blw




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q   qqq             qq                     q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                                                                          ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                     q                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -5                                               q       q                                                                                                              -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q       q            q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                         ¡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                        ¡                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q


                                                                                                                                                                                    ¡                                        -6            -4                -2                                           0                                          2                                               -6       -4                  -2                                        0                                        2

                                                                                                                                                                                   ¡                                                                Market Return                                                                                                                                                      Market Return

                                                                                                                                                                                  ¡
                        q                                                              q                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                              ¡
                                                                                                             q               q                                                                                                                                                                                 q           qq
                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                        q
                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                             q              q
                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                             ¡                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                 q      q                                                                                                                                                                                        q    q q                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                    5                                                                                                         q                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5                                                                                      q    q    q        qq                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5                                                                                                                  q                    q
                                                                                                    q                                                q                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                  q                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq     q                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                        q                 q                                                                                                                                                                          qq   qq q q                                                                                                                                                                        qq           q
                                                                                                        qq                        q q                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq        qq       q                                                                                                                                                                  qq q        q q
                                                                 q                          q                                q                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q        q       q      q                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                q       q           qqqq                q q         q                                                                                                                                              qq      q       qqq            q q                      q                                                                                                                                    q                  q q         q
                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                  q    qqq                                                                                                                                                                        q q qqq
                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                           q   q q                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                      q q  q      qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                            ¡                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq       q q q     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q            q q   q     qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                     q       q q                               q               q                                                                                                                                             qq     q                      q            q                                                                                                                                  qq                             q               q
                                                                                    q          qq q q                                                  qq                                                                                                                                    q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq q q                                                      qq                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q qqq q q                                                 qq
                                                                   q                    q               q                       q                                                                                                                                              q             q  q q        q                q                                                                                                                                     q                 q                      q
                                                                                  q                  q         q        q     q                                                                                                                                                             q q q        q      q     q   q                                                                                                                                      qq              q         q        q    q
                                                                      q           q              qqqq       q q            q          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq     q q       q        q q                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq           qqqq       q q             q         q q
                                                                    q           q         q     qqq
                                                                                                 qqq q q            q     q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q      q qqq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq        q        q    q                                                                                                                          q        q     q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                 q     q    q
                                                             q                  q         q         q
                                                                                                    q q qq qq        q           q                        q                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q   q   q           q       q       q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q         q                               q                                                                               q q            q         q q qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                            q                        q
                                                            q q                                       q           q q                                                                                                                                                                      qq                 q          qqq                                                                                                                   q  q                               q          q qq
                                                                                       q      q q    qq        qq                                q                                                                                                                     q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q      q q  qq         qq                           q                                                                                                             q      q q q qq q        qq                               q
                                                                 q
                                                                         q q qq                    q qq q q       q            q
                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q q                            q qq q q       q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                     qqq       q q qq                   q q q q         q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                       q
                                                                            q     q       q q qq     qq q q q qq
                                                                                                                 q qqq q q
                                                                                                                  qq  q q q q  q    q             q
                                                                                                                                                                        ¡                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q           q     q       q q qq    qq q q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q qqq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq q q q q q     q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q              q     q       q q qq      qq q q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqqq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq   q q q q q    q             q
                                                                            q q          q     q qq   qq         q qq            q q q                                                                                                                            q                  q q          q    q qq  qq         q qq           q q q                                                                                      q                     q q         q     q qq   qq         q  qq           q q q
                                                                                   qq  q  q         q
                                                                                                       q q qq
                                                                                                       q         qq    q q                   q                                                                                                                                              qq  q  q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q        qq   q q                 q                                                                                                             qq q  q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q        qq    q q                   q
                                                                             q q  q    qqq qq       q q         q qq q q                q     q                                                                                                                                       q q  q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq  qq      q q        q qq q q               q   q                                                                                                     q q   q   qqq qq       q q         q qq q q                q     q
                                                      q               q q                        qq          q     q q                                                                                                                                          q               q q                       qq      q       q q                                                                                            q       q                q q                       qq          q     q q
                                                                         q q
                                                                                    qq q q
                                                                                              q     q
                                                                                                    qq q
                                                                                                         qq q qq q                                                                                                                                    q                           q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q qq    q qq qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q     qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq q qq q
                                                                                  q q         q q                      q q         q q     q q q                                                                                                                                           q                                             qq     qqq                                                                                                           q q        q q                       qq         q q     q q q
                                          q         q     q                    q      q     q
                                                                                            q              qq qq q                                                                                                                                  q         q     q                   q qq        qqq q         qq qq q qq                                                                                           q       q      q                    q     q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q              qq  qq q
                                                                        q q q                        q     qqqq   q                        q                                                                                                                                      q q q                      q    qq qq  q                      q                                                                                                   q q q                        q     qqqq   q                       q
                                                                                 qq      q q  qqqq   q     q     q q qq q                                                                                                                                                                 qq      q q qqq q  q    q     q q qq q                                                                                                                             qq     q q  qqqq    q     q     q q qq q
                    0                                      q q                                             qqq qq            q     qq
                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0                                           q q                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq qq           q    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0                                    q q                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq qq                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                          q          q         q q q      q q q qq
                                                                                           q q                        q qq                                                                                                                                          q          q        q q q      q q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q                      q qq                                                                                                    q           q         q q q     q q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q                         q qq q
                                                  q        q       q
                                                                       q q
                                                                          qq
                                                                              qq
                                                                                 q     q
                                                                                         q
                                                                                            qq q   q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                         qq qq  q
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                   q    q
                                                                                                                                                                       ¡                                                                                    q        q       q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqqq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q    q                                                                              q         q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq qq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q    q
                                                                      qq     qqq        qq       q                                                                                                                                                                             qq     qqq        qq      q                                                                                                                                       q q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q        qq      q
                                                            q                  q     q
                                                                                     qqq        qq q     q q              qqq q q                                                                                                                                     q                 q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq       qq q     q q            qq q q q                                                                                               q                  q     qqqq        qq q     q q             qq q q q
                                                                         qqqq q         q qq            q      q q      qq                                                                                                                                                      q  qqqq q        q qq          q      q q      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                     qqqq q        q qq             q     q q       qq               q
                                                               q    qq qq      q q  q                                                                                                                                                                                    q    q         q   qq                                                  q                                                                                          q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q qq       q q q
                                                q                    q     q q             q q          qqq
                                                                                                             qqq                                                                                                                                          q                   q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q          qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq                                                                                                    q                     q     q q            q q           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq                   q
                                                                                   q q q       q       q                                                                                                                                                                                    q q q      qqq     q                                                                                                                                              q q q       q        q           q q         qq
                                                                      q              q q q q qq                 q
                                                                                                                    q q
                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                              q                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q q q qq               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                            q                                        q          q qq
                                                             q     qq        qqq q q        qq     q                                                                                                                                                                   q     qq       qqq q q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq q   q                                                                                                                             q     qq       q qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq      q                   q
                                                                  q  q q                q q  q        q
                                                                                                      q                     q                                                                                                                                               q q q                q q q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                    q                                                                                                           q  q q               q q  q        qq
                                                                            q                            q                    q                                                                                                                                                      q                                              q                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                      ¡                 E                                                                                                                       q




     Firm Return
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Firm Return
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Firm Return


                                                                 q            q qq    q            q                                                                                                                                                                       q           q qq    q      q    q                                                                                                                                 q           q qq    q             q    q qq
                                                                  q                                                    q                                                                                                                                                    q                   qq                            q                                                                                                               q                                      qq
                                                               q q                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q                    q  q qq                                                                                                                                    q q
                                                                        qq q            q q      q      qq                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq q q     q     qq                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq q            q q       q qqq
                                                         q                    q    q qq                                                                                                                                      q                                     q                   q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q qq         q                                                                                           q                              q                    q     q qq        q q
                                                 qq                                          qq q q q                             q                                                                                                                        qq                               qq        qq q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                               q                                                                                   qq                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                        q    q                                                                                                                                                                                                    q    q                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq  qq                                                                                                                                   q     q                       q qq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                        q              q        q q  q q qq
                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                 q              q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq  q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                          q               q        q q  qq
                                                     qq         q  q     q                  q q                                                                                                                                                                qq         qq      q    qq           q q                                                                                                                         qq          q  q    q        q  q
                                            q                   q                q
                                                                                                      q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                   q           qq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q qqq             q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                  q                q
                                 q                                         q          q                                    q                                                                                                                q                                       q          q                                 q                                                                            q                                       q
                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                        q  q   q            q                                                                                                                                              qq




                                                                                                                                                                                                "Band"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 bbw




                                                              q q                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q        q                                                                                                                                                     q q
                                                                                    qq                       q                                                                                                                                                                         q     qq                     q
                                                                                  q        q
                                                                                                                                                                      e                                                                                                                q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q  q                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                       qq                q q q          q                                                                                                                               q
                   -5                                                   q                                                                                                                                               -5                                                       q q                                                                                                            -5
                                      q       q               q                                                                                                                                                                                 q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q               q                                                                                                                                          q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q            q
                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                       e                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q

                                                           q                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                        e
                        -6       -4                -2                                            0                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                            e                                                -6            -4                -2                                           0                                          2                                               -6       -4                  -2                                        0                                        2

                                          Market Return                                                                                                                      e                                                                      Market Return                                                                                                                                                      Market Return
                                                                                                                                                                              e




41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             op




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sl




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                        q                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                   e                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                                           q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q      q       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q            qq q                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5                                                                                                q       q     qq                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                              q                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Slo                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                  q                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                      q q q                                                                                                                                                            qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                            q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                    e                                                 pe                                  q                           q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq q q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q        q                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q         q q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1                                       qq                                           q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q      q                                                                                                                                                 q     qqq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                    qq q q                                        q                                                                                                                      q                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q       q  q                               q              q                                                                                                                                                q              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q       q  qq     qq  q                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q               q    q     qqqq q                   qq                              qq                                                                                                                                        q                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q               q q                    q      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                              q                                                                       qqq     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                        qq          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q qq      q    qqq q qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q     q          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q      q           q                                                                                                                                                    q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q      q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqqqq     q q qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q      q    q                              q                                                                                                                          qq     q                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q           q                  q q                            q                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                        e                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q   q        qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q      qq  qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqq      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq      q  q          q      q    qq    q q qqq  q q            q                                                                                                q qq                                          qq qq            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                      qq q  q q   q q   qqq    q qqq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq  q q q q q                                                                                                     qq                                        q   q qqq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq  q qq q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q       qq q   q            qq   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqqqqq q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq                    q            q                                                                                                                          qqq                     q            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q             qq    qq q         qq q       q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqq q qq   q qq            q q q                                                                                 q                 qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                              qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq q qq           q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q   q   qq  q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q  q      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q       qq    q q                  q                                                                                                   q                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq   q q                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq qqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqqqqqq      q     qq                              q    q                                                                                               q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq                             q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q               q q q      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q qq     qq        q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q       q qq q q                                                                                               q                q q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q  q       qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q qq   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                  q q          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q           q     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q qq   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq q qq                                                                                                                                         q      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                     q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq q    q      qq                       qq      qqq                                                                      q                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q     qq                      qq      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q               q                    q qq         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q           qq q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                        q                                                                q             q                    q qq         q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q q                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q    q     qq                                                                                                                           q q q                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                         e                               0                                           q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq      q q  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q  q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q  q    qq                                                  0                                    q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq      q q  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q  q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q  q     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                    q q q      qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q     qqq    qqqqq        q qq            q                                                                                   q                    q q q      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q qq             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q      q qq           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q       qq q   q      q     q q  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq q   q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqqq                  q    q                                                                                  q       qq q   q      q     q q  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq              q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                    q q qq            q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q    qqq q    qqq    qqqq                                                                                              q                    q q qq            q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq     qqq        qq  q   qq        q       q   q           q                                                                                                    qq     qqq         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                  q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq     qqq qq      q         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq qq        q                                                                                      q                  q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq   q                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqqq q         qq qq q q       qq q   qq  q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q q                                                                                                           qqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q              q    qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q q q  q q q qqq  q        qqq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq        qq     q  q                                                                              q              q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q  q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q             qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqqq              q q   q qqqq                q                                                                                                 q             q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q             qq        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq q q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q       q       q        q                                                                                                      q              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq        q   q   q           q q  q        q           q                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                          e                                                                            q    qqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q            q                    q                                                                                                              q q




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Firm Return
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Firm Return




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q  qq q            qq   q                     q                                                                                                   q            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q qq          q     q q             q                   qq                                                                                                       q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq     qqq                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                    q q  qq    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq   qq q q q   q                        qq                                                                                     q                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq          q           qq          q   q q  q     qq                            q                                                                               qq          q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q              qq       q q  q q       q                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq                  q     q            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q       q                  q   qq q    q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                              q    qq                         qq                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                       q           q                                   qq                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q            q




                                                                                                                                                                                                "Slope"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 bsw




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q q                   q                                                                                                                                            q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                   q                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -5                                                       qq                                                                                                             -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q       q          qq   q                                                                                                                                          q          q         q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                       q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -6            -4                -2                                           0                                          2                                               -6       -4                  -2                                        0                                        2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Market Return                                                                                                                                                      Market Return




     Explanations: The left column shows data drawn from a true ri = 0 + 1 · rm +  (black line). The estimated OLS line (in blue)
     happens to be a little flatter in this draw. The middle column illustrates the method of winsorization. Level winsorization
     truncates the dependent variable (the firm's own stock return). Band winsorization truncates based on the contemporaneous
     market rate of return. Slope winsorization truncates based on a beta prior. The right column shows the winsorized returns
     and the new OLS estimated line.
     Interpretation: Level winsorization flattens the estimated slope. Band winsorization is harshest on positive return outliers
     when the market was bearish and on negative return outliers when the market was bullish. Slope winsorization is harshest
     where it matters least for the regression coefficient estimates, i.e., around rm =0.
     Source: fig-conceptual/conceptualplots.Rmd
fig:rsq-by-delta in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




                                 Figure 4: Effect of Winsorizing Deltas on Predictive Performance (R2 )



                                 0.34
   Level (blw)



                                        VCK
                                                                                                                                                          rit  [ ­ l , l ]
                 Predictive R2




                                 0.32                                     q   q     q    q       q
                                                                  q
                                                                                                                     q

                                 0.30
                                                            q
                                                                                                                                  q                       Parameter Units:
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                             Daily Net-of-Risk-Free Returns.
                                               q
                                        OLS                                                                                                               Reasonable Range: 4 ­ 10%.
                                 0.28
                                                                                                                                                          Basecase: l = 7%.
                                 0.26    q


                                        0.02                    0.05                         0.10                              0.20

                                                                Winsorization Parameter 




                                 0.34
   Band (bbw)




                                                                 q        q
                                        VCK                                    q

                                                                                                                                                          rit  [ rm,t ­ b , rm,t + b ]
                                                    q                                q
                                                                                             q
                 Predictive R2




                                                                                                     q
                                 0.32                                                                    q
                                                                                                             q




                                 0.30
                                         q                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                          Parameter Units:
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                             Daily Net-of-Market Returns.
                                        OLS                                                                                                               Reasonable Range: 2 ­ 5%.
                                 0.28
                                                                                                                                                          Basecase: b = 3%.
                                 0.26

                                        0.01       0.02                       0.05                       0.10                     0.20

                                                                Winsorization Parameter 




                                 0.34
   Slope (bsw)




                                                                               q         q       q
                                                                      q                                  q
                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                     q
                                        VCK                                                                               q

                                                                                                                                                          ri,t  1.0 + [ (­s ) , (+s ) ] · rm,t
                                                                                                                              q
                                                        q                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                          q q
                 Predictive R2




                                 0.32    q
                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                   qq




                                 0.30
                                                                                                                                                          Parameter Units:
                                                                                                                                                             Market-Beta.
                                        OLS                                                                                                               Reasonable Range: 1.5 ­ 4.0.
                                 0.28
                                                                                                                                                          Basecase: s = 3
                                 0.26

                                        0.5          1.0                      2.0                                        5.0                       10.0

                                                                Winsorization Parameter 




Explanations: Variables are defined in Table 1, the sample in Section I. The 317,005
market-betas are for 1927/06 to 2019/12 (including the last half year). These plots show
the R2 's in gamma regressions predicting future OLS market-betas (bols) with current
market-betas when stock returns have first been winsorized, as indicated. The plots also
show the predictive R2 's of the OLS and Vasicek/Levi-Welch market-beta estimators as
horizontal lines. Variables are defined in Table 1, the sample in Section I.
Interpretation: Winsorization deltas are not overly sensitive but have to be reasonable.
Level-winsorized betas predicted worse than band- or slope-winsorized betas.
Source: figs-annualbetas/1mkvarydeltas.Rmd, forbeta-xdaily.csv.gz  results.*/varydeltas.csv.gz, 2plotbydelta.Rmd  results.*/rsq-
by-delta.pdf
                                                                                                                                  42
tbl:key-rsq in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




     Table 2: Gamma Regressions Predicting One-Year Ahead OLS Market-Beta (bols)


      Mean         SD       Abbrev       Predictor bi,t               RMSE       0         1          R2

A       0.80     0.21         bols       Past Year Firm-Average OLS   0.700     0.111    0.842      6.09%
B       0.79     0.68         bols       (Own) OLS Market-Beta        0.680     0.332    0.565     27.97%
C       0.79     0.55        bVCK        Vasicek Market-Beta          0.604     0.184    0.756     33.38%
D       0.79     0.41         bLW        ... Levi-Welch (0.75)        0.589   ­0.017     1.008        ­"­

E       0.71     0.56         blw        Level-Winsorized (l =7%)     0.621     0.271    0.721     31.84%
F       0.79     0.44         bbw        Band-Winsorized (b =3%)      0.590     0.033    0.943     33.27%
G       0.79     0.43         bsw        Slope-Winsorized (s =3)      0.587     0.008    0.977     33.82%

H       0.79     0.42                    Slope-Wins Then Vasicek      0.586   ­0.014     1.008     33.97%

I                                        Multivariate, bsw and bVCK                                34.51%
J                                        Multivariate A to G                                       34.77%


Explanations: Variables are defined in Table 1, the sample in Section I. The 317,005 market-betas
are for 1927/06 to 2019/12 (including the last half year). The first two columns show the mean
and standard deviation of the independent variable.
Each row shows the results of one grand pooled bivariate prediction. (Not shown, averaged year-
by-year statistics (ala Fama-Macbeth) convey similar insights.) The RMSE data column is the direct
proxy prediction error, as in RMSE =      (bolsi,t+1 ­ bi,t )2 . The final three columns are coefficient
estimates and the R2 , as in bolsi,t+1 = 0 + 1 · bi,t + ei,t . Model H is a combination estimator,
first slope-winsorized, then Vasicek-shrunk, which will not be used again elsewhere. (Unreported
Newey-West coefficient standard errors are between 0.0021 and 0.0048, due to the hundreds of
thousands of observations.) Models I and J use multiple independent variables.
Interpretation: The band- and slope-winsorized betas predicted the future OLS betas as well as
the VCK/LW betas. There is not much gain to adding Vasicek shrinkage to the slope-winsorized
market-beta.
Source: tbl-key-rsq.Rmd, forbeta-annual.csv.gz, mbols.csv.gz 




                                                                43
fig:model-fyr in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




                                     Figure 5: RMSE by (July-June) Year for bsw



                            1.2
        RMSE Predicting
        Future OLS-Beta


                            1.0

                            0.8

                            0.6

                            0.4



                                             1940              1960               1980                2000                  2020


                          20.0                          q

                          10.0                  qq                                                                      q
        Parameter
        Best Delta




                                                                            q
                           5.0                q   q q q       q     q       q
                                                                                                        q
                                             q                        q            q
                                         q q            q        q
                                          qq       q   q   q   q     q qqq q            q             q   q     q    q
                           2.0      q
                                   q q qq
                                               qq        qq
                                                            q
                                                                  q
                                                                q q
                                                                              q qqq
                                                                             q q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                    qq q qq
                                                                                            q q
                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                  qqqq qqq qq qq q q
                                                                                                             q      q
                                                                                                                        q

                           1.0        qq                     q                         q q q q   q                q    q

                           0.5                                        q



                                            1940               1960              1980                2000                 2020

                           0.10                      better
        RMSE Relative
        To VCK RMSE




                           0.05
                                  BSW
                           0.00                VCK

                          -0.05
                                  OLS
                                                     worse
                          -0.10


                                             1940              1960               1980                2000                  2020


                                                                          Year


Explanations: Variables are defined in Table 1, the sample in Section I. This figure shows year-
by-year detail about the predictive performance of the bsw estimator. This includes the absolute
RMSE explanatory performance (top panel) and the (ex-post) best s winsorizer parameter (middle
panel). The red line shows the performance of bols, the blue line of bsw, the black line of bVCK. In
the top panel, higher is worse. In the bottom panel, higher is better. The dashed blue line in the
bottom panel presumes foreknowledge of the best delta, as in the middle panel. The dashed black
line is performance relative to bLW, rather than relative to bVCK.
Interpretation: The top plot shows that market-betas were unusually difficult to predict in the
1990s. The middle plot shows that there was only a mild time-pattern to the best s . The bottom
plot shows that even ex-post knowledge of s would not have greatly improved the predictive
performance (except in 1966, when s should have been much lower [stricter]).
                                                               44
Source: figs-annualbetas/1mkvarydeltas.Rmd, forbeta-xdaily.csv.gz  results.*/varydeltas.csv.gz, 2plotbycateg.Rmd  results.*/rmse-
*.pdf
fig:contour in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




                         Figure 6: bswa: Slope-Winsorization and Decay with Entire History


              Forecasting 1-Month OLS Beta (bols, 1mo)                                                                                                                              Forecast 12-Month OLS Beta (bols, 12mo)
                         8   1.59521.57551.5716     1.5687
                                                             1.576       1.574
                                                                                               11.5858
                                                                                                 .5     1.          1.6002                 1.6159   1.6326                  1.65
                                                                                                                                                                                               8   0.60020.55540.5501       0.5507                0.5761
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.        0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6131           0.6524             0.6921   0.7317                     0.7709
                                        8                                                           81 584                                                                                                         0.566                                           58
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6        59
                                   1.5
                                                              1.574                                           1.                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                       1.        58                                                                                                      0.562
                                                                                                          58        5
                                                                1.572                                         1.                                                                                                                                                                        0.
                                                                                                                 58                                                                                                                                                                       59
                                           9
                                1.578 1.57




                                                                                                                   2
                                                                 1.57                                        1.
                                                                                                                57 1.5774
                         7   1.59161.57231.5679     1.5636               1.5643                 1.5701
                                                                                                                  9                        1.5853   1.5937                 1.6024
                                                                                                                                                                                               7   0.59120.54660.5395       0.554
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5354                0.5476                        0.5689           0.5913             0.6139   0.6365                     0.659

                                                                     1.568

                                                                     1.566
                                                                      1.565                                                                                                                                                         0.544
                         6   1.59081.57181.5674     1.5629               1.5632                 1.5683                  1.5748             1.582    1.5896                 1.5973
                                                                                                                                                                                               6   0.58920.54490.5374       0.5328                0.5434                        0.5628           0.5834             0.6041   0.6249                     0.6454
1963 ­ 1973




                                                                         1.563


                         5   1.59011.57131.5669     1.5623               1.562                  1.5663                  1.5719             1.5781   1.5847                 1.5915
                                                                                                                                                                                               5   0.587 0.54310.5353       0.5297                0.5383                        0.5554           0.5737             0.5922   0.6107
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.629

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                                     1.                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                             1.561                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.
                                                                                                                                                                          58                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                                            3                                                                                                                                                                           6
                 Delta




                                                                                                                                                                                       Delta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     59
                         4   1.58951.57131.5667     1.562                1.5609                 1.5642                  1.5688             1.5739   1.5793                 1.5849
                                                                                                                                                                                               4   0.58520.54220.5337       0.5271                0.5328                        0.547            0.5623             0.5779   0.5936                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.6093


                                                                 1.5604
                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                           0.5256
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q

                         3   1.58941.57221.5677     1.5628               1.5609                 1.5631                  1.5664             1.5701   1.5741                 1.5783
                                                                                                                                                                                               3   0.58470.54390.5349       0.527                 0.5293                        0.5395           0.5511             0.5631   0.5752                     0.5874



                                                                                    1.562                                                                                                                                                            0.532

                                                                                    1.564                                                                                                                                                                   0.536
                                                                                  1.567                                                                                                                                                                         0.54
                         2   1.59171.57671.5724     1.5676               1.565       1.567 1.5658
                                                                                         1.569
                                                                                                                        1.5677              1.57    1.5725                  1.575
                                                                                                                                                                                               2   0.59010.55480.5457       0.537                 0.5355                        0.5411           0.5481             0.5556   0.5634                     0.5711

                                                                                  1.571                                                                                                                                                                         0.548
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.55
                                                                               1.575 1.573                                                                                                                                                                      0.558
                                                                     1.579                        7
                                                                                     1.578 1.57                       1.581
                                                                                                                                  1.58
                                                                               1.582                                               1.584                                                                                                          0.574            0.57
                                                                                              1.583
                         1   1.6019 1.592 1.5885    1.5845              1.5817       1.585
                                                                                         1.5814                         1.582              1.5828   1.5838                 1.5848
                                                                                                                                                                                               1   0.61650.59380.5863       0.5783                0.5741          0.582 0.578
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5751                  0.5774   0.586     0.5803   0.5834                     0.5865

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.59 0.594
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.598                                   0.602
                             1.61211.60711.6052     1.6028               1.601                  1.6005                  1.6006             1.6008   1.6012                 1.6015                  0.63430.62350.6194       0.6148                0.6116
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.606
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6113                  0.6118             0.6127   0.6137                     0.6148

                             1.62251.62021.6191     1.6178               1.6168                 1.6165                  1.6164             1.6165   1.6166                 1.6167                  0.65630.65130.6492       0.6467                0.6449                        0.6445           0.6445             0.6448   0.6451                     0.6455



                              0                      1                    2                      3                       4                  5        6                       7                      0                        1                       2                           3                4                  5        6                           7

                                                                                                         Decay                                                                                                                                                                           Decay


                         8   1.42391.40661.4009
                                               1.40
                                                    1.3995 1.4
                                                    9          09 1.41
                                                                     1.4092   1.4
                                                                                  13
                                                                                        1.4
                                                                                       1.4238
                                                                                            17
                                                                                                                        1.4403             1.4576   1.4753                 1.4933
                                                                                                                                                                                               8   0.55170.51690.5091         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5162
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.555
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5988           0.642              0.6837   0.7236                     0.7619
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                    1




                                                        7                                                                                                                                              0.525
                                 41




                                                  1.40 1.406              1.4        1.4                                                                                                                                                                           55
                                                                             08
                              1.




                                                                                         12                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                1.4                                                                                                                                         4
                                                              1.403                           1.4                  15
                                                                                                           11
                                                                1.401                                                    1.4                                                                                     0.515
                         7   1.41971.40291.3966     1.392
                                                                 1.399
                                                                         1.3932                 1.3983                       14
                                                                                                                        1.4048             1.4119   1.4194                  1.427
                                                                                                                                                                                               7   0.53860.50380.4929       0.4899                0.5057                        0.5271           0.549              0.5706   0.5915                     0.6117

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.51
                                                                     1.397

                                                                      1.395
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.502
                         6   1.41921.40271.3964     1.3915             1.394
                                                                       1.3921                   1.3964                  1.4021             1.4084   1.415                  1.4218
                                                                                                                                                                                               6   0.53670.50230.4912       0.4873                0.5008                         0.52            0.5399             0.5595   0.5787                     0.5971
1973 ­ 2018




                                                                          1.393
                                                                                                                                                             1.4
                                                                                                                                                                 16                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             75
                                                                                 1.391
                         5   1.41871.40261.3963     1.3912               1.391                  1.3943                  1.3991             1.4044   1.4101                 1.4159
                                                                                                                                                                                               5   0.53450.50070.4894       0.4844
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.492        0.4952                        0.5117           0.5291             0.5464   0.5634                0.50.5798
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7
                                                                                  1.39                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6
                 Delta




                                                                                                                                                                                       Delta




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                         4   1.41821.40271.3965     1.3913
                                                                 1.3898
                                                                         1.3901                 1.3924                  1.396              1.4003   1.4048                 1.4095
                                                                                                                                                                                               4   0.532 0.49910.4877       0.4815                  0.489                       0.5022           0.5166             0.5311   0.5454                     0.5593


                                                                     q




                         3   1.41811.40351.3976     1.3923               1.3901                 1.3912                  1.3936             1.3965   1.3998                 1.4032
                                                                                                                                                                                               3   0.52980.49850.4872       0.4797
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4792
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4832                        0.4925           0.5032             0.5142   0.5252                     0.5359


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.482

                                                                                     1.392
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.487
                         2   1.41921.40631.4009     1.3958               1.3928
                                                                            1.398
                                                                                      1.395
                                                                                      1.396
                                                                                            1.3927                      1.3937             1.3952   1.397                   1.399
                                                                                                                                                                                               2   0.52960.50140.4908       0.4825                0.4817                        0.4863           0.4925             0.4993   0.5062                     0.5131


                                                                                         1.4                                                                                                                                                                    0.497
                                                                                               1.402                             1.404
                                                                                    1.405                             1.407                                                                                                                                      0.507
                                                                         1.411                           1.408                    1.409
                                                                                               1.41                                        1.412
                                                                                   1.413                                1.414 1.416                                                                                                                                    0.52
                                                                                                       1.415
                         1   1.424 1.41471.4109     1.4069               1.4039                1.417
                                                                                                 1.403                  1.403              1.4033   1.4038                 1.4044
                                                                                                                                                                                               1   0.5374 0.517 0.5091      0.5019                0.4983
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.535
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.4988           0.5005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5029   0.5055                     0.5082


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.55 0.545                           0.555
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.56
                             1.44631.44121.4392     1.437                1.4351                 1.4343                  1.434              1.4339   1.4339                  1.434                  0.58170.57140.5675       0.5637                0.5611
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.565
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5605               0.5607             0.5611   0.5617                     0.5624
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.575 0.57
                             1.46721.46461.4635     1.4624               1.4613                 1.4609                  1.4606             1.4605   1.4604                 1.4604                  0.62580.62080.6189       0.6171                0.6156                        0.6152           0.615              0.6151   0.6152                     0.6153



                              0                      1                    2                      3                       4                  5        6                       7                      0                        1                       2                           3                4                  5        6                           7

                                                                                                         Decay                                                                                                                                                                           Decay




Age Decay Factor  : Use 2.0 to 3.5 for a predictor of the next one-month bols, and 1.5 to
     3.0 for a predictor of the next twelve-month bols.
Slope Winsorization Delta s : Use 2.75 to 4.25.

Explanations: These are contour-plots of the root-mean-squared errors, predicting either the 1-
month-ahead or the 1-year-ahead OLS market-beta with age-decayed and slope-winsorized betas
(bswa). Delta values plotted above 7 did not execute any (slope) winsorization; the unwinsorized
RMSE values were placed as if s = 7. The age decay was exp(­d/256), where d is the number of
trading days. Contourlines in blue (black) show the range where the bswa estimator outperforms
(underperforms) the 1-year bVCK estimator. R's contourplot function interpolates terrain optima to
lie modestly east of the observed best sample point (indicated with a blue dot). The terrain surfaces
are so flat that the optimal parameters are difficult to tell.
Interpretation: Comparing top and bottom figures, the best parameters seemed reasonably stable.
There is no meaningful difference between a 1963­1973 "training" sample and a 1973­2018 "test"
                                              45 shown in Figure 7.
sample. However, this masks year-by-year variation
     tbl:key-rsq-bswa in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




                                  Table 3: Gamma Regressions Predicting One-Year Ahead OLS Market-Beta (bols)

     Panel A: 1927-2018, 2,962,015 Overlapping One-Year Samples

                     Mean        SD       Abbrev      Predictor bi,t                         RMSE       0         1         R2         Rel

              A        0.81    0.64         bols      (Own) OLS Market-Beta                  0.5632    0.304   0.618     38.64%      0.00
              B        0.81    0.54        bVCK       Vasicek Market-Beta                    0.4979    0.170   0.788     43.68%      1.00
              C        0.81    0.49         bsw       Slope-Winsorized (s =3)                0.4860    0.097   0.880     44.15%      1.09
              D        0.81    0.47        bswa       Decayed Slope-Winsorized (s =3,  =2)   0.4753    0.066   0.919     46.15%      1.49


     Panel B: 1964-2018, 217,537 Non-Overlapping One-Year Samples




46
                     Mean        SD       Abbrev      Predictor bi,t                         RMSE       0         1         R2         Rel

              A        0.79    0.65         bols      (Own) OLS Market-Beta                  0.5847    0.315   0.590     35.53%      0.00
              B        0.78    0.53        bVCK       Vasicek Market-Beta                    0.5118    0.173   0.776     40.88%      1.00
              C        0.78    0.48         bsw       Slope-Winsorized (s =3)                0.4985    0.097   0.869     41.62%      1.14
              D        0.78    0.47        bswa       Decayed Slope-Winsorized (s =3,  =2)   0.4886    0.066   0.910     43.44%      1.48


     Explanations: Variables are defined in Table 1, the sample in Section I. This table largely mimicks Table 2, but adds bswa and illustrates
     the effects of using different data sets.
     Interpretation: The slope-winsorized betas predicted the future OLS betas better than the VCK/LW betas.
     Source: tbl-key-rsq-bswa.Rmd, benchmarks/
fig:year in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




                            Figure 7: Various Betas Predicting Future OLS Beta, Categorized By Year


                                                                                                                                                RMSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Best Ex-Post  and 
     0.20
                    1yr bols                                                                        1yr bvck (zero-axis)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7                    ** ***                      *   *           **                                        *delta             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              decay

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
     0.15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6                            *                                                                                                 *

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *

     0.10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5                                 **

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *                                       *                                       *     *




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Decay/Delta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4                        *                                            *                         * *
     0.05                                                   q
  rmse




                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *                      *                                                        * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *                       * *                     *            *                              *           *   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *               *
                           q                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3                                            * * *                        *
                       q      q           q      qq q
                                                                         q      q
                                                                                         q                                                      q                           q q                                                                                                       q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *                          *            * *                     *      *        *
                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q

     0.00                                                                         q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q


                                q qqq q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                       q                               q

                      q
                                                                                                                                                            q

                    qq
                                                                                                                    q

                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *                               *  *                  *                        * *       *  *
                                                                                        q                                                           q



             q qq                              qq q q
                                            q q q

                                                                qq  qqq q
                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q           q                       q
                                                                                                                                                                        q                                     q                                   q


                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q

                                                                  q                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q

                            q qq                                   q q q qq
                                    q                                                                                                                               q                                                                                         q       q           q
                q                                                                                                                   q                                                     q                                                           q                                                                                           q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *         *              *               *           *                        ** *
                                                                                    q       q                                                                                                                                                                                                         q       q

                   q
                            q                                           q                                               q

            q
            q

                         q       q q
                                        q
                                                       q      q               q q   q  q                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q               q               q


                                     q q q                  qq
                                                            q                                   q       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q

                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                           q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     **       *                          *                *                    **         ***                 *          *  *
                                                                                                                                            q                                                                             q

                                                                               q
                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                             q

                                                      q                          q q
                                q

                                                         q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q


                                                   q q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q

                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                q

                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q           q           q                                                                                                           q       q
                                                                            q                                                                                                     q                   q                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q


  -0.05                 q         q                     q                  q q          q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                   q

                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q



              qq        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      * *                                    **       *                *           * *                                    *     *
                    q
                                            q                                                                                                           q



                                                    q                                                                                                                                 q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1        *

  -0.10                     1yr,no decay: delta=3                                                                                            1yr,decay=2; delta=3
                            *yr,decay=2: delta=3                                                                                            *yr,decay=*: delta=*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                               1940                                                                             1960                                                                          1980                                                                            2000                                                                    q   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2020                                           1940                        1960                         1980                     2000                        2020

                                                                                                                                                                                  year                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             year




Explanations: The left panel shows the RMSE predicting the future OLS market beta
calculated either over 12 months of daily stock returns. Lower RMSE values are better.
From top to bottom, the loess-smoothed (span=1) fitted lines are in the following order:

         · The cross-sectional firm-averaged OLS market-beta over the last 12 months (bols, in
           gray, both specific points and loess-fit);
         · The firm-specific OLS market-beta, bols (in black, loess fit only);
         · The Vasicek market-beta, bVCK (the fat black horizontal zero line, actual only);
         · The undecayed slope-winsorized beta bsw (green, loess only);
         · A 12-month age-decayed slope-winsorized beta (red, loess only);
         · bswa, using data from inception of the firm on crsp (solid blue loess line), with the
           blue plotted points being the individual predictions; and
         · a hypothetical equivalent beta estimate with (unavailable) knowledge of the ex-post
           best decay and slope delta parameters (dotted blue, loess only). This is useful to
           assess the max potential improvement from attempts to predict parameters better.

The right panel shows the ex-post best decay and delta parameter points (in each partition)
that are used to obtain the hypothetical dotted blue estimate above (black and blue). In
addition, they also show smoothed loess fits.
Interpretation: The improvement of bswa over bVCK was about half as large as the improvement
of bVCK over bols. The pattern on the right shows that taking into account year-by-year drift in the
optimal parameters could potentially improve the prediction, but only modestly.
Source: baseparms/by/1runstats.R(runbase.R), forbeta-annual.csv.gz, bsws/bsw-all.csv.gz, mean-ols-beta.csv.gz  by-[pctrank|year]-
[dolvol|mcap|...]-w[1|12].csv.gz, plotstats.R, by-[pctrank|year]-[dolvol|mcap|...]-w[1|12].csv.gz




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              47
fig:pctrank-mcap in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




Figure 8: Various Betas Predicting Future OLS Beta, Categorized By Market Capitalization


                                                                                                                                                            RMSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Best Ex-Post  and 
     0.20
                    1yr bols                                                                                  1yr bvck (zero-axis)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7                                                                                delta               *decay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    **

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
     0.15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6                                                                                            **

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *

     0.10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5                                                                                 **** *              *

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           **                                                      * *                    *




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Decay/Delta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4   *     *                                                                 *            *       *
     0.05
  rmse




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *                                                              **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *  * *                 *                        *    *    **                   *                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3          ** * *                                              * * * * **
     0.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               **     *                 *     * **    *
                    q                                           q

                                                                         qq
              q                                                       qq
                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *                 ***** ** * *   **            * ***   ** * **
               q q q      qq                                         q   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q q

                                                                q
                            q

                                                                  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q

               q   q q                                             q
                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                       q

                          q
                                    q                                                                 q

                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q



                                                qq               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q

                        qq     qq          q                  qq q q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            **         * * **     ** *     * *    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q       q q

                 q     q
                                q                                       q

                                                         qq
                                                                                                  q

                q                                                    q
                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                         q q


                 qq   q       q
                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q


                                                             qq
                                                                                    q q                                                   q                                                                 q

                        q                 q                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                             q

                                                           q
                                                                                              q

                      q                 q q
                                               q    qqq q
                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q


                                         qq        qq
                                                                            q                                                 q

                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q


                                                        qq
                                                                                          q

             q             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q

                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q

                   q
                                                                                                                                  q

                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q

                                                     q q
                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                     q q                 q

                            q qq                            q  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                              q                                                                                                                                               q

                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q

                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q

                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q


            qq
                    q
                                 qqq q q q  qq         q
                                                            q                                             q                                                                               q                                     q q                                 q q       q           q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 * *** * ******      *
                                  qq
                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                               q                   q
                                                                                                              q                                   q q       q                     q               q q               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                   q       q

                             q
                        q                                                                                                                                       q                     q
            q

                             q
                                                                                                                                              q

                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                              q

                                    q
                                                                                                                      q                                 q
                                                                                                                          q

            q
                                                                                                                                                                    q q


  -0.05
                q
                                     q                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1

  -0.10                     1yr,no decay: delta=3                                                                                                        1yr,decay=2; delta=3
                            *yr,decay=2: delta=3                                                                                                        *yr,decay=*: delta=*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0   q

            0                                                                       20                                                                          40                                                                     60                                                                     80                                                                100                              0                   20              40                60                80                            100

                                                                                                                                                                                  market cap                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              market cap




Explanations: This figure is identical to Figure 7, except that the x-axis is for 100
percentiles based on the market capitalization (from CRSP) at the end of the year over
which the predictive betas were also estimated (i.e., in the 12 month immediately preceding
the predicted bolsi,t+1 ).
Interpretation: The left plot shows that the R2 ordering of estimators is stable across
marketcap. bswa reliably outpredicts bVCK. The right plot shows that there are clear
patterns to better parameters, but the left plot also shows that the resulting R2 improvements
would only be modest for the larger half of firms.
Source: baseparms/by/1runstats.R(runbase.R), forbeta-annual.csv.gz, bsws/bsw-all.csv.gz, mean-ols-beta.csv.gz  by-[pctrank|year]-
[dolvol|mcap|...]-w[1|12].csv.gz, plotstats.R, by-[pctrank|year]-[dolvol|mcap|...]-w[1|12].csv.gz




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          48
fig:pctrank-dolvol in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




    Figure 9: Various Betas Predicting Future OLS Beta, Categorized By Trading Volume


                                                                                                                                                        RMSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Best Ex-Post  and 
     0.20
                    1yr bols                                                                              1yr bvck (zero-axis)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7                                *                                                                 delta             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 decay



     0.15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6                        *

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *               *                                                                                              *

     0.10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5   ******       *                                                                                         *   * **

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      * *                                                                                               *    *       *




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Decay/Delta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4            * **                                                                                                   *
     0.05
  rmse




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *               **                                                                             *     *   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ** **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3                                ***                                                          * **
              q q
                                              q


     0.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         **                  **                                                          *
                            q



                q q qq qq
                                                      q
                                                                    q
                                                                  qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *                          *          *      *       ** *
             q q q qq
                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q

                     qq
                                                                  q             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q           q

                                q
                                                                      q q q q           q


                         qqqqq q
                                                              q

                        qq
                    q                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                  q

                                                            qq qqq qq
                                                                                                                      q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *            *       * **         *    * *
            q                 q q q qq
                                                                                                      q

               q q                              qq q
                                      q                                             q       q q


            qqq                               qq
                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                             q       q

                                        q                qqq qqq
            q                                                                                                                             q q                                                                                                                                                                         q

                                                        q
                                                                                                              q

                                                     q q
                                                                qq
                                q q                                                                                                                                                                                                       q

                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q

                                      qq qq                  q
                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                     q                                           q q

                          q
                q                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                             q

                                                   q    q
                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                         q                   q q               q q



                             q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q                                                                               q

                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                                               qq q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                        q                                                                                                                               q                       q q               q                                                                                                                       q


                                    qq q   qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q

                                                    qqq qq                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *       * ** * *** *** * ** ** ** ** **** * ****      *
                                                                                                  q                                                                     q                                 q                                                     q                     q q                                     q
                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q

                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                            q             q                   q q       q                     q             q       q                               q                                           q

                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q

                                   q              q
                                                                                                                                                                    q

                                          q      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q q q
                                                                                                                          q

                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                      q                     q q q                                     q                                               q q

                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                          q

  -0.05
                            q                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *      **    *       * **         *

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1

  -0.10                     1yr,no decay: delta=3                                                                                                    1yr,decay=2; delta=3
                            *yr,decay=2: delta=3                                                                                                    *yr,decay=*: delta=*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0   q

            0                                                                   20                                                                          40                                                                   60                                                                     80                                                                    100                                0                        20                          40                60                 80                        100

                                                                                                                                                                trading volume                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             trading volume




Explanations: This figure is identical to Figure 8, except that the x-axis is for 100
percentiles based on the dollar trading volume (during the same year at which the predictive
betas are calculated).
Interpretation: bswa reliably outpredicts bVCK. Modeling parameters for low-trading-
volume stocks seems promising. The orange line on the top right is the OLS prediction
error for bdim. It is large when non-synchronicity is not of concern (100th percentile).
Source: baseparms/by/1runstats.R(runbase.R), forbeta-annual.csv.gz, bsws/bsw-all.csv.gz, mean-ols-beta.csv.gz  by-[pctrank|year]-
[dolvol|mcap|...]-w[1|12].csv.gz, plotstats.R, by-[pctrank|year]-[dolvol|mcap|...]-w[1|12].csv.gz




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          49
fig:pctrank-ols-b in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




 Figure 10: Various Betas Predicting Future OLS Beta, Categorized By OLS Market Beta


                                                                                                                                                        RMSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Best Ex-Post  and 
     0.20
                    1yr bols                                                                                1yr bvck (zero-axis)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7                                                     * *            *        *     **        *                    delta   decay



     0.15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *                   *

     0.10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5                     *

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *                                         *                             *




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Decay/Delta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4                          *                                         *                *               *
     0.05
  rmse




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *                *                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           * * **                * *            *                                *                  * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *      *       ** *     *            *        *                                             **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3         *        * *                *                                   *                       **    *         *   *
     0.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ** *     **            * *             **                          *                          *    *     * *
                                   q         q qq qq q q   qq
                                                                                                                q


                                  qqqqq q                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q

                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ***   *           *                 *   * *        *        *                            * *      ***      *
                               qq       qq    qqq q              q
                                                                                                                                                                            q

                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                           q    q qqq                           q
                                                                q    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                              q

                        qq                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q

                           q                                 qq
                                                              q
                                                                                                                    q

                                                        q         q
                                                                                      q                                                                                                           q                     q           q
                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                       q q q

                      qq                    qq
                                                                                                q

                              q
                                                                                                                                  q

                               q
                                                                                                            q

                                                     q
                                                                                                                        q q

                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                   q

                                                               q
                                                                      q       q q q                                                                                                                           q             q q q

                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q



                     qq
                                                                                                        q                             q q                       q                     q                                                                                 q               q
                                                          q                               q q                                 q                                         q       q q                                                           q

                                      q                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q                                                                           q

                                                                      q qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                     q q

                                                                   q
                                                              q                                                                                     q                                     q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ***                       **         *                                                   *          *
                                                                  q                                 q

                                       qq
                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                               q q             q               q       q         q

                         q
                                                      q                                                                                         q

                                                                          qq q
                                                                       q qq q
                                                                          q                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                         q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *                                                       *                     *                       * ***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q

                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q

                 q  q
                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q



                                                                            qqq
                                                  q

                 q
                                      q


                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q

              q
              q
                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                          q


                                                                               qq
                        q q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q

  -0.05        q              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q       q


                                                                                qq
                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *                                                                          **             *           *        *
             q                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
            q
            q




                1yr,no decay: delta=3    1yr,decay=2; delta=3                      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q


  -0.10
            q *yr,decay=2: delta=3
                q

                                        *yr,decay=*: delta=*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0   q

            0                                                                    20                                                                         40                                                                      60                                                                  80                                                                      100                                0                     20                     40                            60                             80            100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q   q




Explanations: This figure is identical to Figure 8, except that the x-axis is for 100
percentiles based on the (predictive) bols.
Interpretation: bswa reliably outpredicts bVCK. For market betas in the lowest tertiale,
slower decay ( 1) and more lax winsorization ( 2.5) could improve the prediction.
Source: baseparms/by/1runstats.R(runbase.R), forbeta-annual.csv.gz, bsws/bsw-all.csv.gz, mean-ols-beta.csv.gz  by-[pctrank|year]-
[dolvol|mcap|...]-w[1|12].csv.gz, plotstats.R, by-[pctrank|year]-[dolvol|mcap|...]-w[1|12].csv.gz




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50
fig:pctrank-ols-b-se in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




Figure 11: Various Betas Predicting Future OLS Beta, Categorized By OLS Market Beta
           Standard Error


                                                                                                                                    RMSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Best Ex-Post  and 
     0.20
                1yr bols                                                                    1yr bvck (zero-axis)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7                                                                        delta    decay



     0.15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6



     0.10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Decay/Delta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4                                         *     *    * *                    *
     0.05
  rmse




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           * * *    *   *        *     *      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *       *    * *    ** *       ** * **          *
                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3                              ***      ** *      *      *      *         *
     0.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *    ***       * **      *      **     * * ** * * * * *
            q
            qqq
              q
            q q q q

                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                * **** * *                                     **
                q  q
                    q

               q qq
                  q qqq qqqq qq q q
                              q

                    q   q                                         q qq q
                        q q           q q q                           q q                                 q

                      q
                                                    q q

                            q
                                            q                                   q               q


                           qq                                    qq
                                  q

                       q  q
                                                q                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q

                              q
                              qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                * * ** * *** * *                                           *          **** *
                                                          q

                                  q                                         q           q q q                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                             q

                                  q    q
                                                              q

                                    q q
                                                                                                                      q q                 q                                                                                                                                                                         q q

                                               q
                                                                                    q               q q

                                   q   q      q                                                               q q q         q

                                        qq
                                         q       q
                                              q qq                 q q
                                                                                                                                q                         q

                                          qq
                                                                                                                                    q q             q q                                           q       q



                                           qq          q
                                                                                                                                                              q                                                       q                                                                                                   q

                                     q                     q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                          q q                         q

                                     q q    qq q   qqqq
                                                      q qqqqq q      q
                                                                                                                                              q q                 q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q                       q       q                     q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                       q               q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             **** ** * ** **  **                                                           *
                                                  q      qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q q q

                                                                qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                q             q               q                             q                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q       q

                                                                    q q                                                                                                                                                                                             q q                                 q

                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q



  -0.05
                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                           q                         q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                   q




                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                          *                                                                            * *

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                                                                                      **

  -0.10             1yr,no decay: delta=3                                                                                        1yr,decay=2; delta=3
                    *yr,decay=2: delta=3                                                                                        *yr,decay=*: delta=*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0   q

            0                                                         20                                                             40                                                                       60                                                                   80                                                                     100                                0             20               40              60               80                 100




Explanations: This figure is identical to Figure 8, except that the x-axis is for 100
percentiles based on the standard error of the (predictive) bols. Equivalent figures with
OLS market-model residual standard errors or with plain stock volatility look very similar
and are therefore omitted.
Interpretation: bswa reliably outpredicts bVCK. For stocks in the noisest 10%, harsh
winsorization (or just using the past mean) could modestly improve prediction.
Source: baseparms/by/1runstats.R(runbase.R), forbeta-annual.csv.gz, bsws/bsw-all.csv.gz, mean-ols-beta.csv.gz  by-[pctrank|year]-
[dolvol|mcap|...]-w[1|12].csv.gz, plotstats.R, by-[pctrank|year]-[dolvol|mcap|...]-w[1|12].csv.gz




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      51
tbl:betaxsect-crsp in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




                   Table 4: Predicting Future 12-Month OLS Market Beta (bols)


Panel A: Standardized Coefficients, Base Regressions

                                              Standardized Coefficients
                                                                                                2
        Name of V                              bswa             V       bswa×V                R                  N

        (None)                                  0.59                                       34.74               228,754

        Log(Trading Volume)                     0.57        0.05                           34.96
        ... %Rank                               0.53        0.12                           35.89

        Log(Market Cap)                         0.55        0.10                           35.67         (Base Model)
        ... %Rank                               0.55        0.11                           35.71


Panel B: Explaining Base Model Residuals With CRSP-Based Variables

                                                  Standardized Coefficients
                                                                                                    2
           Name of V                            bswa                V      bswa×V                   R             N

           %Rank(ols.b)                         ­0.12        ­0.07           0.19             0.23 %           228,754
           %Rank(ols.xsgm)                      ­0.02          0.05          0.01             0.29 %
           %Rank(ols.b.se)                      ­0.01          0.05          0.01             0.30 %
           %Rank(sdy)                           ­0.03          0.04          0.03             0.28 %
           sdy                                   0.02          0.01        ­0.03              0.01 %
           %Rank(mcap)                          ­0.11        ­0.06           0.16             0.29 %
           %Rank(dolvol)                        ­0.12        ­0.01           0.15             0.46 %
           Log Trading Volume                   ­0.07        ­0.05           0.09             0.06 %
           log Market Cap                       ­0.20        ­0.06           0.23             0.12 %


Explanations: %Rank is the percent rank. The predicted variable is the future bols. The
predicting variables are bswa, the named variable on the left, and the cross-variable. Most
of the CRSP variables were used above. Reported coefficients have been standardized by
multiplying them by the standard deviation of x and dividing by the standard deviation of
y.
Interpretation: Although it would have been possible to improve the prediction statistically,
such gains would have been economically small.
Source: tbl-acctg-xsect.Rmd, baseparms/bsws/bsw-2-3.csv.gz, forbeta-annual.csv.gz, compustat-monthly.csv.gz 



                                                             52
tbl:compustat in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




         Table 5: Explaining Base Model Residuals With Compustat-Based Variables


                                                Standardized Coefficients
                                                                                                  2
            Name of V                          bswa               V      bswa×V                 R                N

            Log(1 + BV AT)                    ­0.09         ­0.09          0.12              0.18 %            213,470
            log(1 + MV AT)                    ­0.12         ­0.08          0.16              0.18 %            203,196
            log(1 + EQ)                       ­0.09         ­0.07          0.13              0.12 %            210,608
            BV TL/AT                          ­0.01         ­0.02        ­0.01               0.07 %            210,596
            MV TL/AT                          ­0.02         ­0.03               0            0.11 %            202,174
            BV FD/(FD+EQ)                     ­0.01         ­0.01          0.01              0.01 %            204,851
            MV FD/(FD+EQ)                     ­0.01         ­0.01          0.02              0.01 %            202,083
            Cash / AT                         ­0.02          0.03          0.01              0.22 %            210,848
            BV EQ/MV EQ                       ­0.02         ­0.04               0            0.13 %            208,767
            Net Income/Sales                  ­0.01         ­0.03          0.01              0.05 %            218,603
            Fin CF/Sales                      ­0.01          0.04               0            0.16 %            133,420
            Opr CF/Sales                      ­0.02         ­0.04          0.03              0.03 %            133,541
            Inv CF/Sales                            0        0.02        ­0.01               0.03 %            133,455


Explanations: BV means book value, MV means market value. The remaining mnemonics
are largely as in the Compustat data base itself. They are lagged by six months.
Interpretation: There is no meaningful further predictive power in these variables.
Source: tbl-acctg-xsect.Rmd, baseparms/bsws/bsw-2-3.csv.gz, forbeta-annual.csv.gz, compustat-monthly.csv.gz 




                                                             53
tbl:benchmark-withall in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




Table 6: Full Sample Post-1974 Benchmark Performance Comparisons (N = 2, 961, 446)


                      (One-Period-Ahead)                         (Lagged)
              Mean          SD       Dependent                Independent                     g0        g1     R2(%)         rmse

    A1         0.81       0.655           bols                       bols                  0.30      0.62      38.8         0.562
                                                                     bols                  0.15      0.82        7.6        0.622
                                                                    bVCK                   0.17      0.79      43.7         0.498
                                                                    bdim                   0.38      0.46      27.9         0.685
                                                                     bsw                   0.10      0.88      44.2         0.486
                                                                    bswa                   0.07      0.92      46.2        0.475

     B         0.80       0.539          bVCK                       bVCK                   0.23      0.71      50.6         0.411
                                                                    bswa                   0.14      0.83      53.4        0.377

     C         0.91       0.731           bdim                      bdim                   0.48      0.47      22.0         0.756
                                                                    bswa                   0.21      0.86      31.6        0.617

     D         0.80       0.485            bsw                       bsw                   0.21      0.73      53.9         0.355
                                                                    bswa                   0.19      0.76      56.3        0.340

     E         0.80       0.474           bswa                      bswa                   0.17      0.78      62.4         0.308

 The rmse can be greater than the SD of the dependent variable, because standard deviations are de-biased unlike RMSEs.



Explanations: Variables are defined in Table 1, the sample in Section I. This sample starts
in 1974, with 2,961,446 overlapping observations (one year of daily stock returns). These
one-year betas were self-computed from CRSP data. (The predicted variable is always
strictly ahead of the predictor variable, except bswa which uses stock return with unlimited
history.) The best estimator for each predicted variable is boldfaced.
Interpretation: bswa is the best predictor for predicted market-beta of any kind. Re-
searchers interested in the future one-year market-beta of any kind should still use bswa
rather than own incarnations today.
Source: benchmarks/1mkbswall.R, mbols.csv.gz, dacheng-sahalia/dacheng-sahalia.csv.gz, simin/simin.csv.gz, frazzini-pedersen.csv.gz,
monthlies/mobetawin60.csv.gz, monthlies/mobetawin12.csv.gz  dall.csv.gz, benchmarks/2runbenchmarks.R  3benchtex.pl




                                                               54
tbl:benchmark-simin in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




Table 7: Benchmark Performance Comparisons, Alternative Robust Estimators (Martin and
         Simin (2003), N = 2, 018, 080)


                     (One-Period-Ahead)                         (Lagged)
             Mean          SD        Dependent               Independent                       g0        g1     R2(%)         rmse

   A2         0.78       0.626            bols                      bols                    0.29      0.62      38.8         0.542
                                                                   bVCK                     0.17      0.78      43.3         0.485
                                                                    bsw                     0.09      0.88      44.0         0.472
                                                                    bswa                    0.06      0.92      46.0        0.461
                                                                    bmm                     0.30      0.69      42.5         0.514
                                                                    blts                    0.33      0.68      40.5         0.533

    F         0.70       0.589           bmm                        bmm                     0.21      0.70      49.7         0.453
                                                                    bswa                  ­0.02       0.92      52.3        0.417

    G         0.66       0.587            blts                      blts                    0.21      0.68      45.7         0.472
                                                                    bswa                  ­0.04       0.89      49.7        0.438


Explanations: These estimators are fr om Martin and Simin (2003). They were available
only for 2,018,080 (overlapping one-year daily market-beta) observations.
Interpretation: bmm and blts perform similar to but somewhat worse than shrunk and
slope-winsorized market betas. A researcher who is interested in the best future bmm or
blts should still rely on bswa and not on current bmm or blts.
Source: benchmarks/1mkbswall.R, mbols.csv.gz, dacheng-sahalia/dacheng-sahalia.csv.gz, simin/simin.csv.gz, frazzini-pedersen.csv.gz,
monthlies/mobetawin60.csv.gz, monthlies/mobetawin12.csv.gz  dall.csv.gz, benchmarks/2runbenchmarks.R  3benchtex.pl




                                                               55
tbl:benchmark-fp in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




Table 8: Benchmark Performance Comparisons, Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) BaB Market-
         Betas (N = 1, 440, 636)


                     (One-Period-Ahead)                         (Lagged)
             Mean          SD        Dependent               Independent                       g0        g1     R2(%)         rmse

   A3         0.80       0.614            bols                      bols                    0.28      0.65      42.8         0.512
                                                                    bfp                   ­0.10       0.92      29.9         0.547
                                                                    bswa                    0.07      0.93      49.2        0.439

    H         0.99       0.370            bfp                       bfp                     0.54      0.46      20.6        0.385
                                                                    bols                    0.74      0.31      27.1         0.564
                                                                    bswa                    0.64      0.44      31.1         0.449


Explanations: This table explores 1,440,636 (daily stock returns, overlapping) observations
in which Frazzini-Pedersen market-betas (bfp) based on daily stock returns could be
computed. The dependent variable (future betas) had to be led by 60 months, because bfp
has an ingredient requiring 60 months of stock returns.
Interpretation: bfp is a poor predictor either of future bols or future bfp.
Source: benchmarks/1mkbswall.R, mbols.csv.gz, dacheng-sahalia/dacheng-sahalia.csv.gz, simin/simin.csv.gz, frazzini-pedersen.csv.gz,
monthlies/mobetawin60.csv.gz, monthlies/mobetawin12.csv.gz  dall.csv.gz, benchmarks/2runbenchmarks.R  3benchtex.pl




                                                               56
tbl:benchmark-xiu-yacine in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




Table 9: Benchmark Performance Comparisons, Ait-Sahalia, Kalnina, and Xiu (2014) TAQ
         Market-Betas


Panel A: One-Month Prediction: 940,801 Observations

             Mean          SD             (Dep)                      (Indep)                   g0          g1      R2(%)      rmse

   A4         0.96       0.608        bols (1 mo)                btaq1 (1 mo)               0.67        0.33        7.4      1.349
                                                                  bswa (1 yr)             ­0.04         1.08      17.1      1.110

     I        0.91       0.995      btaq1 (1 mo)                 btaq1 (1 mo)               0.63        0.31        9.7      1.168
                                                                  bswa (1 yr)               0.01        0.97      20.6      0.887


Panel B: One-Year Prediction: 819,026 Observations

                       Mean         SD         (Dep)             (Indep)             g0           g1     R2(%)      rmse

             A5        0.96       0.610         bols              btaq12          0.36        0.70       40.9      0.502
                                                                    bols          0.36        0.66       42.4      0.505
                                                                    bswa          0.14        0.90      48.1       0.442

              J        0.94       0.560       btaq12              btaq12          0.30        0.70       47.5      0.440
                                                                    bols          0.33        0.62       44.7      0.476
                                                                    bswa          0.13        0.86      50.6       0.399


Explanations: This table explores the subset of months in which Ait-Sahalia-Xiu TAQ-based
market-betas were available. The dependent variable (future daily-frequency one-month
stock-return based market-betas) in Panel A were led only by one month, because the btaq1
independent variable was computed over one month only. btaq12 is averaged btaq1 over the
past twelve months. There were 940,801 one-month and 819,026 one-year observations.
Interpretation: The btaq1and btaq12 variable predicted bols and themselves worse than
bswa.
Source: benchmarks/1mkbswall.R, mbols.csv.gz, dacheng-sahalia/dacheng-sahalia.csv.gz, simin/simin.csv.gz, frazzini-pedersen.csv.gz,
monthlies/mobetawin60.csv.gz, monthlies/mobetawin12.csv.gz  dall.csv.gz, benchmarks/2runbenchmarks.R  3benchtex.pl




                                                               57
tbl:benchmark-monthly in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




Table 10: Benchmark Performance Comparisons, Monthly-Return-Frequency Market-Betas
          (N = 1, 715, 377)


                      (One-Period-Ahead)                         (Lagged)
              Mean          SD        Dependent               Independent                     g0        g1     R2(%)         rmse

    A6         1.07       0.949          bmols                      bmols                  0.61      0.44        1.6       0.955
                                                                     bols                  0.87      0.25        2.7        1.078
                                                                    bswa                   0.77      0.37       3.3         1.013

     K         1.04       0.504          bmvck                      bmvck                  0.46      0.57        3.7       0.500
                                                                     bols                  0.90      0.18        4.8        0.745
                                                                    bswa                   0.82      0.27       6.1         0.639


Explanations: This table explores the subset of months in which market-betas could be
computed using monthly stock rates of return. The dependent variable (future monthly
return based betas) had to be led by 60 months, because the independent variable was
computed over 60 months. bmols is the plain OLS market-beta, bmvck its Vasicek equivalent.
(bols and bswa continue to use daily-frequency stock returns.)
Interpretation: Monthly-return market-betas are almost unpredictable noise. Nevertheless,
a researcher who is interested in a (bias-adjusted) future monthly-frequency market-beta
should still use the daily-frequency-based bswa today.
Source: benchmarks/1mkbswall.R, mbols.csv.gz, dacheng-sahalia/dacheng-sahalia.csv.gz, simin/simin.csv.gz, frazzini-pedersen.csv.gz,
monthlies/mobetawin60.csv.gz, monthlies/mobetawin12.csv.gz  dall.csv.gz, benchmarks/2runbenchmarks.R  3benchtex.pl




                                                               58
        tbl:rmsediffs in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




                                   Table 11: Distinctiveness of Market-Beta Measures




               "Null"     "Base"                              "Robust"                                                 "Monthlies"       "Intraday"




                                                                                                                                                 btaq12
                                                                                                                                bmvck
                                                                                                                       bmols




                                                                                                                                         btaq1
                                      bVCK




                                                                                                     bdim
                                                                                   bmm
                                                                          bswa
                                                        bbw
                 bols


                            bols




                                                                 bsw
                                               blw




                                                                                            blts




                                                                                                              bfp
bols                       0.58      0.52      0.49    0.41     0.48     0.47     0.55     0.55     0.67     0.34     0.33     0.26      0.81    0.53

bols            0.58                 0.08      0.19    0.24     0.15     0.20     0.12     0.21     0.34     0.39     0.56     0.55      0.67    0.24

bVCK            0.52       0.08                0.16    0.18     0.09     0.15     0.12     0.19     0.35     0.34     0.51     0.50      0.66    0.23

blw             0.49       0.19      0.16              0.17     0.15     0.19     0.16     0.19     0.42     0.36     0.53     0.50      0.67    0.25
bbw             0.41       0.24      0.18      0.17             0.13     0.15     0.20     0.23     0.41     0.26     0.42     0.39      0.67    0.26
bsw             0.48       0.15      0.09      0.15    0.13              0.10     0.12     0.18     0.38     0.31     0.48     0.46      0.66    0.24
bswa            0.47       0.20      0.15      0.19    0.15     0.10              0.17     0.21     0.40     0.29     0.46     0.44      0.64    0.25
bmm             0.55       0.12      0.12      0.16    0.20     0.12     0.17              0.10     0.37     0.37     0.55     0.54      0.66    0.22
blts            0.55       0.21      0.19      0.19    0.23     0.18     0.21     0.10              0.41     0.39     0.57     0.55      0.67    0.25

bdim            0.67       0.34      0.35      0.42    0.41     0.38     0.40     0.37     0.41              0.48     0.62     0.62      0.75    0.43
bfp             0.34       0.39      0.34      0.36    0.26     0.31     0.29     0.37     0.39     0.48              0.33     0.29      0.72    0.37

bmols           0.33       0.56      0.51      0.53    0.42     0.48     0.46     0.55     0.57     0.62     0.33              0.13      0.81    0.53
bmvck           0.26       0.55      0.50      0.50    0.39     0.46     0.44     0.54     0.55     0.62     0.29     0.13               0.80    0.51

btaq1           0.81       0.67      0.66      0.67    0.67     0.66     0.64     0.66     0.67     0.75     0.72     0.81     0.80              0.64
btaq12          0.53       0.24      0.23      0.25    0.26     0.24     0.25     0.22     0.25     0.43     0.37     0.53     0.51      0.64
Average         0.46       0.30      0.27      0.29    0.27     0.26     0.27     0.28     0.31     0.44     0.35     0.45     0.44      0.66    0.33



        Explanations: This table is based on the sample of 432,426 firm-months with complete
        information on all market-beta estimates. Beta estimation windows can overlap. Variables
        are defined in Table 1, the sample in Section I.
       Interpretation: The bswa estimate is most similar to bsw. All robust estimates
       (bsw,blw,bbw) and the Vasicek estimates (bVCK) are similar, with mutual RMSE differ-
       ences of 0.2 or less. The constant (bols), dimson (bdim), intraday (btaq1), and monthly
       estimates (bmols, bmvck) are all quite different from the average and from one another.
       The monthly-return-frequency bmols is far from its daily equivalent bols. (Any betas using
       daily returns over 12 months are mutually closer.)
        Source: benchmarks/1mkbswall.R, mbols.csv.gz, dacheng-sahalia/dacheng-sahalia.csv.gz, simin/simin.csv.gz, frazzini-pedersen.csv.gz,
        monthlies/mobetawin60.csv.gz, monthlies/mobetawin12.csv.gz  dall.csv.gz, benchmarks/2runbenchmarks.R  3benchtex.pl




                                                                       59
fig:slopes in beta-exhibits.tex, July 16, 2019




Figure 12: Appendix: Predictive Slopes, Future OLS Market-Betas, By Current OLS Market-
           Beta Percentiles



                                                                                                                                                                 qqqqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                          qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                               qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                    qqqqqq
                                                            0.6                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                               qqq                                                                             qqq




                                     Slope OLS on Fut OLS
                                                                                                             qq                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                           qq                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                         qq                                                                                           qq
                         All Years
                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                    qqq                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                  qq                                                                                                       q
                                                            0.4                                 qq                                                                                                          q
                                                                                               q                                                                                                             q
                                                                                             qq                                                                                                               q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                          q




                                                                                                                           Slope Current OLS from -Inf to Pctl


                                                                                                                                                                 Slope Current OLS from Pctl to +Inf
                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                      q
                                                            0.2                     q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                   q                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                q
                                                                               q
                                                                              q
                                                                             q
                                                            0.0            q
                                                                            q
                                                                         qq
                                                                   qqq qq
                                                                      qq
                                                                  -0.55     -0.06        0.08        0.18        0.26                                                                                  1.31   1.43   1.60   1.85       2.52




                                                                  0                     20                       40                                                                                    60            80                100

                                                                                                                 OLS Beta Percentile




                                                                                                                    qqqqqqqqqq
                                                                                                                              qqqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                      qqqqqqq
                                                            0.6                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                                                qqq
                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                     Slope OLS on Fut OLS




                                                                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                                                        q
                         Pre 2000




                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                  q                                           q
                                                            0.4                                                qqq                                             q
                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                           qqq                                                  q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                       qqq                                                       q
                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                           Slope Current OLS from -Inf to Pctl


                                                                                                                                                                 Slope Current OLS from Pctl to +Inf
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                  qq                                                              q
                                                                                                qq
                                                                                              qq
                                                            0.2                            qq
                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                      qq
                                                                                    qq                                                                              q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                 q
                                                                               qq
                                                            0.0            qq
                                                                             qq
                                                                   qqq qqqq
                                                                      qq
                                                                  -0.64     -0.10        0.03        0.12        0.20                                                                                  1.23   1.36   1.52   1.77       2.43




                                                                  0                     20                       40                                                                                    60            80                100

                                                                                                                 OLS Beta Percentile



                                                                                                                        qqqqqq
                                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                           qq
                                                            0.6                                       q
                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                                               qqqqqq
                                                                                                    q
                         Post 2000




                                                                                                                                     qqqqqq
                                     Slope OLS on Fut OLS




                                                                                                  qq                                        qqqqq
                                                                                                qq                                               qqq
                                                                                               q                                                     qqq
                                                                                              q                                                         qqq
                                                                                             q                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                           q
                                                            0.4                          q                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                       q                                                                            q
                                                                                      q                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                           Slope Current OLS from -Inf to Pctl


                                                                                                                                                                 Slope Current OLS from Pctl to +Inf




                                                                                     q                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                    q                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                            0.2                    q                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                 q                                                                                                 q q
                                                                                q                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                              q
                                                            0.0             q
                                                                           q
                                                                          q
                                                                  -0.35  q 0.03         0.17         0.28         0.38                 1.46       1.59        1.75        2.00        2.69
                                                                        q
                                                                     q
                                                                   q qqq

                                                                  0                     20                       40                                                                                    60            80                100

                                                                                                                 OLS Beta Percentile




Explanations: These are slopes from regressions predicting the future OLS market-beta
with the current OLS market-beta in the set of betas that are above or below a given
percentile (within each year). For example, a regression predicting future OLS betas (bols)
with all stocks binned into the 60th percentile or higher had a slope estimate of about 0.6.
Interpretation: Firm-years with beta estimates below zero no longer monotonically pre-
dicted lower future OLS betas. The relationship between current and future market-beta
estimates was just about zero for current market-beta estimates of three or higher.
Source: fig-ols2fut/plotols2fut.Rmd




                                                                                                            60
