                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




MINIMUM WAGE EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS AND LABOR MARKET CONCENTRATION

                                           José Azar
                                     Emiliano Huet-Vaughn
                                       Ioana Marinescu
                                          Bledi Taska
                                       Till von Wachter

                                      Working Paper 26101
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26101


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




We thank seminar audiences for valuable feedback at the Society of Labor Economics annual
meeting, UCLA, UCSB, UPenn, and the Western Economics Association annual meeting. José
Azar gratefully acknowledges the financial support of Secretaria d'Universitats I Recerca del
Departament d'Empresa I Coneixement de la Generalitat de Catalunya. Ref.2016 BP00358.
Emiliano Huet-Vaughn and Till von Wachter gratefully acknowledge support from a research
grant from Arnold Ventures. José Azar gratefully acknowledges the financial support of
Secretaria d'Universitats I Recerca del Departament d'Empresa I Coneixement de la Generalitat
de Catalunya. Ref. 2016BP00358. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by José Azar, Emiliano Huet-Vaughn, Ioana Marinescu, Bledi Taska, and Till von
Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Minimum Wage Employment Effects and Labor Market Concentration
José Azar, Emiliano Huet-Vaughn, Ioana Marinescu, Bledi Taska, and Till von Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 26101
July 2019
JEL No. J2,J3,J38,J42

                                          ABSTRACT

Why is the employment effect of the minimum wage frequently found to be close to zero? Theory
tells us that when wages are below marginal productivity, as with monopsony, employers are able
to increase wages without laying off workers, but systematic evidence directly supporting this
explanation is lacking. In this paper, we provide empirical support for the monopsony explanation
by studying a key low-wage retail sector and using data on labor market concentration that covers
the entirety of the United States with fine spatial variation at the occupation-level. We find that
more concentrated labor markets ­ where wages are more likely to be below marginal
productivity ­ experience significantly more positive employment effects from the minimum
wage. While increases in the minimum wage are found to significantly decrease employment of
workers in low concentration markets, minimum wage-induced employment changes become less
negative as labor concentration increases, and are even estimated to be positive in the most highly
concentrated markets. Our findings provide direct empirical evidence supporting the monopsony
model as an explanation for the near-zero minimum wage employment effect documented in prior
work. They suggest the aggregate minimum wage employment effects estimated thus far in the
literature may mask heterogeneity across different levels of labor market concentration.


José Azar                                        Bledi Taska
IESE Business School,                            Burning Glass Technologies
Universidad de Navarra                           One Lewis Wharf
Avinguda Perason 21                              Boston, MA 02110
08034 Barcelona, Spain                           btaska@burning-glass.com
jazar@iese.edu
                                                 Till von Wachter
Emiliano Huet-Vaughn                             Department of Economics
University of California ­ Los Angeles           University of California, Los Angeles
4284 School of Public Affairs                    8283 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, California 90095                    MC 147703
ehuetvaughn@ucla.edu                             Los Angeles, CA 90095
                                                 and NBER
Ioana Marinescu                                  tvwachter@econ.ucla.edu
University of Pennsylvania
School of Social Policy & Practice
3701 Locust Walk
Philadelphia PA, 19104-6214
and NBER
ioma@upenn.edu
1     Introduction

    Many papers document the employment effect of the minimum wage (Neumark and Wascher
(1992); Card and Krueger (1994); Dube, Lester and Reich (2010a); Meer and West (2016); Jardim
et al. (2018); Clemens and Wither (2019); Cengiz et al. (2019), to name only a few). Despite the
volume of work there is still considerable debate about whether there is, in fact, an apprecia-
ble disemployment effect of the minimum wage, with many studies finding null results while
many others indeed show a negative employment effect of varying intensity.
    A common explanation for the many null findings is the existence of substantial labor mar-
ket monopsony or oligopsony (Manning, 2011; Naidu, Posner and Weyl, 2018). Under perfect
competition, the expectation is a clear and unambiguous reduction in employment caused by a
binding increase in the minimum wage. While firms' ability to adjust in other ways, e.g. by in-
creasing prices for consumers, may buffer the employment decline, under perfect competition
employment never increases as a result of the minimum wage. However, when one departs
from the assumption of a perfectly competitive labor market, the minimum wage can increase
employment, as Stigler (1946) noted three quarters of a century ago. This is particularly true
in the case of labor market monopsony. More generally, employment under oligopsony may
increase with the minimum wage, and, when it does decrease, it can be shown to fall by less
under monopsonistic competition than perfect competition (Bhaskar, Manning and To, 2002).
    However, to date there has been no strong empirical confirmation of the monopsony ex-
planation for the limited negative employment effects of the minimum wage. In this paper, we
provide the first direct test for the mediating role of labor market concentration - a key source of
monopsony and oligopsony power1 (Azar, Marinescu and Steinbaum, 2019) - on the minimum
    1 Besides employer concentration in the labor market, two other leading sources of monopsony power, job
differentiation and search frictions, imply reductions in the wage elasticity of labor supply (e.g. they result in
wage decreases having a limited effect on workers' quitting). Empirically, Azar, Marinescu and Steinbaum (2019)
show that labor market concentration and the labor supply elasticity are significantly and negatively correlated
across markets - in more concentrated markets, the wage elasticity of job applications is lower - making labor
market concentration not only a direct source of monopsony power in its own right, but, also a proxy for these
other sources as well.


                                                        1
wage employment effect. The prediction we test empirically is that the employment elasticity
of the minimum wage is more positive in cases of greater labor market concentration.
    Such a direct empirical test of the monopsony minimum wage story has been hindered in
the past by the lack of fine grained data on labor market concentration. Traditional data sets
on occupational labor markets (e.g. JOLTS, HWOL) are limited in their granularity. We exploit
an exceptionally rich data set from Burning Glass Technologies that gives us record of all U.S
firms' online job vacancy announcements at the level of the county, month, and occupation
(defined at a six digit standard occupational code level). Based on these data, we can mea-
sure occupational labor market concentration using the standard Herfindahl-Hirschman index
(HHI) defined over these job vacancies (Azar, Marinescu and Steinbaum, 2019; Azar et al., 2018;
Azar, Marinescu and Steinbaum, 2017). This allows us to test whether the employment effects
of the minimum wage are more positive in more concentrated (high-HHI) occupational labor
markets, thus, assessing the common explanation for the above-mentioned null findings.
    The data from Burning Glass Technologies covers the near universe of online US job vacancy
postings, found on some 40,000 websites. While the data is very detailed, a downside of the
data is that for a much-studied sector in the existing minimum wage literature, the restaurant
sector, a good deal of the hiring is done offline, making the Burning Glass data ill-suited to
study this sector.2 To leverage the online job posting data, then, we focus on another key
minimum-wage employing industry that is more likely (we show) to hire online, the general
merchandise store sector (NAICS 452).3 Leading firms in this sector, the largest sector in retail,
include Walmart and Macy's.4 Taken together, the large fraction of very low-wage workers in
   2 InSection 3, we provide evidence from the data grounding the common intuition that restaurants are places
where the canonical "Help Wanted" sign in the window is still a typical form of job advertisement (and/or that
other forms of non-internet-based job posting, e.g. word of mouth search through current employees or worker
drop-ins with paper resumes, are common).
   3 Together, the accommodation/food service and the retail sectors are known to employ 50% of US minimum

wage workers (Dube, Lester and Reich, 2010a), and, as such have been the subject of much of the prior minimum
wage research in the US. Restaurants are contained in the accommodation/food service industry and general
merchandise stores are the largest employer in the retail industry.
   4 Typical general merchandise stores are discount stores like Target and Walmart, and department stores like

Macy's and Kohl's. More specifically, general merchandise stores are defined as firms that sell a wide range of
general merchandise except fresh, perishable foods, and, which have central customer checkout areas, generally


                                                      2
this industry, the tendency of industry hiring managers to post jobs for these minimum wage-
affected occupations online, and, the significant variation we find in the measured local labor
market concentration for these occupations, make the setting an ideal one to test the predictions
of the monopsony model.
    Our results indicate that, consistent with theory, more concentrated labor markets exhibit
more positive employment effects from the minimum wage. This is true for a variety of specifi-
cations, and when separately using concentration measures for three different minimum wage-
heavy occupational labor markets: stock clerks, retail sales, and cashiers. To give a sense of
scale, a standard deviation increase in the measure of labor market concentration is associated
with a significant 0.2 increase in the employment elasticity of the minimum wage. The results
are robust to a number of sensitivity tests. One important concern is omitted variable bias:
there may be a variable correlated with concentration that causally modulates the impact of
the minimum wage on employment. We note that, even if it were the case, concentration is still
a useful proxy for this variable and can allow policy makers to predict the effects of a minimum
wage increase. We are nevertheless interested in testing for potential alternative mechanisms
that explain the heterogeneity of the minimum wage employment effects and we focus on two
key candidates for the omitted variable: population density and productivity, which are both
correlated with HHI and could also modulate minimum wage effects. We find that results are
robust to allowing for a different effect of the minimum wage by both population density and
a productivity proxy (economy-wide earnings in an area conditional on population). This ro-
bustness test supports our main findings: concentration has a significant modulating effect on
the employment elasticity of the minimum wage even after we allow other key variables to
have their own modulating effects.
    Overall, then, our results indicate the size and sign of the minimum wage's employment
effects vary substantially on the basis of underlying labor market concentration. Employment
elasticities of the minimum wage are significantly negative with point estimates of approxi-
in the front of the store, and may have additional cash registers located in one or more individual departments.


                                                        3
mately -0.2 for the 33% of least concentrated labor markets, approximately zero for the middle
concentration group, and significantly positive with point estimates of approximately 0.35 for
the 33% of most concentrated of labor markets (which are very concentrated by typical mea-
sures). The related own-wage elasticity of labor demand, which we also derive, spans the
range of comparable elasticities estimated in the minimum wage literature (see Figure 6), with
the 33% of least concentrated markets on the outer left (i.e. the most negative) of the prior
work's estimate range, the 33% of most concentrated markets forming the outer rightward
bound (most positive) of this range, and, the middle third's estimates being close to zero. This
indicates that differences in the degree of monopsony power could play an important role in
accounting for the divergent elasticity estimates in prior studies, drawn from a wide range of
labor markets that, themselves, have differences in underlying market concentration.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a brief review of the
theoretical considerations motivating the analysis. Section 3 reviews our data and discusses the
design considerations motivating our empirical strategy. Section 4 presents our main results
and robustness checks. Section 5 concludes.



2    Theoretical background

    A brief review of the theory characterizing the interplay between labor market concentra-
tion and minimum wage policy is useful before we further pursue an empirical test of this the-
ory. In the standard treatment under perfect competition, absent other margins of adjustment
by the firm, there is a clear and unambiguous reduction in employment (either on the inten-
sive or extensive margin) caused by a binding increase in the minimum wage. While other
margins of adjustment may indeed exist for an employer operating in a perfectly competitive
labor market - in particular, through the pass through of costs via increased consumer prices,
renegotiation of prices for other inputs and capital, or reduction in profit - even in these cases
there is no prediction that minimum wage increases should result in increases in employment,


                                                4
but, rather, at the boundary, that they simply cause no change in employment.
   In a monopsonistic labor market, however, employment can increase as a result of a mini-
mum wage increase. In the status quo sans minimum wage, workers in such a labor market
are paid below marginal productivity. The firm is assumed to pay all workers the same wage.
Therefore, to hire more workers, it must increase not only wages of new hires, but also the
wages of incumbents. A profit-maximizing firm, given the choice, chooses a wage that will
induce a level of labor input (i.e. employment) such that the marginal cost of that labor in-
put (the wage of the new employee, plus the increase in the wage bill for all incumbents) is
equal to its marginal productivity. Absent a wage floor, under monopsony this optimal wage
is lower than that under perfect competition, ceteris paribus. When a wage floor is introduced,
the same profit maximizing logic applies with one key difference. Assume the minimum wage
is introduced at a level higher than the equilibrium wage under monopsony but equal to or
lower than the equilibrium wage under perfect competition. Now, the profit-maximizing firm
will still only choose to hire additional workers if the productivity of the marginal worker
is equal to their marginal cost. Critically, however, the existence of a minimum wage means
that the marginal cost of hiring a worker (starting from the equilibrium level of employment
under monopsony) is just the minimum wage, and does not include wage increases given to
incumbents (who must already be paid the minimum wage by law). The monopsonist, then,
faces a reduced marginal cost (relative to the pre-minimum-wage status quo) of increasing la-
bor beyond the prior equilibrium level, and, can hire additional workers until the productivity
of the marginal worker is equal to the minimum wage (Bhaskar, Manning and To, 2002). To
summarize, when the minimum wage increases while staying below the competitive level,
employment increases in a monopsonistic labor market.
   In a more general setting, with more than a single firm, the marginal productivity of work-
ers varies across firms within a market. Therefore, the overall employment effect of a minimum
wage increase in a market depends on the distribution of firm types: it could be positive or neg-
ative depending on the level of the minimum wage and the distribution of marginal revenue


                                               5
product curves across firms. With levels of market concentration below monopsony (HHI<1)
but still high, minimum wage increases can also increase employment (Bhaskar and To (1999);
Walsh (2003); Aaronson and French (2007)). Crucially, even when the underlying assumptions
of these models of highly (but not perfectly) oligopsonistic labor markets yield predictions of
disemployment from the minimum wage, it is possible to show that under oligopsony with free
entry employment falls less than under perfect competition (Bhaskar, Manning and To, 2002).
Overall, we should expect the employment elasticity of the minimum wage to become more
positive in more concentrated labor markets, as these are markets where workers are more
likely to be paid less than their marginal productivity. We test this prediction below using the
job vacancies Herfindahl-Hirschman Index as a measure of monopsony power.



3     Data and Design

3.1   Data

    Our outcome measure ­ industry-level employment and weekly wages in the general mer-
chandise store sector ­ comes from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW),
a widely used data set in the minimum wage literature. The QCEW provides a near census of
quarterly, county-level payroll data by detailed industrial classification, including employment
counts and average weekly wages.
    Additional control variables, including the log of county total population, log of total aver-
age weekly earnings (across all sectors) in the county, and the log of total employment (across
all sectors) in the county, also come from the QCEW, while the log of the county unemployment
rate is taken directly from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Minimum wage variation includes all
federal, state, and county-level minimum wage changes.
    Job postings data, used to measure the degree of labor market concentration, comes from
Burning Glass Technologies and covers the near universe of online US job vacancy postings



                                                6
(culled from some 40,000 websites). This data has recently been used in Azar et al. (2018), Her-
shbein and Kahn (2018), Deming and Kahn (2018), Modestino, Shoag and Ballance (2016). Im-
portantly, BGT data is fairly similar in terms of industry composition to all vacancies recorded
in the nationally representative Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) (Hershbein
and Kahn, 2018). Furthermore, the occupational distribution in BGT data is similar to the one
found in the Occupational Employment Statistics (Hershbein and Kahn, 2018).
   The job postings data is cleaned by Burning Glass to remove vacancy duplicates and extract
key characteristics for each vacancy. Of interest to our work are the location of the vacancy
(county), the time of the initial posting for the job, the name of the employer, and the occupa-
tion (categorized by a six digit standard occupation code (SOC) identifier). The name of the
employer is normalized by BGT so that similar employer names are grouped together into a
single employer: for example, "Bausch and Lomb", "Bausch Lomb", and "Bausch & Lomb"
would be grouped together. Still, 35.9% of employer names are missing, partly due to staffing
companies not disclosing on whose behalf they are posting a given job. To calculate concen-
tration, we will assume that all these missing employer names are different, thus providing
a lower bound for labor market concentration. We utilize uninterrupted data from the first
quarter of 2010 until the last quarter of 2016, as there is a gap in the data in 2009.


3.2   Design

   When seeking to test for differential employment effects of a minimum wage policy in more
vis-a-vis less concentrated labor markets, an ideal setting is one where we have 1) an occupa-
tion that earns a low median wage (i.e. the minimum wage "bites" from the workers' per-
spective), 2) where the occupation is a sizable fraction of the associated industry employment,
implying the associated industry is a low median wage industry (i.e. a minimum wage increase
is meaningful, or "bites", from the firm's perspective so that any firm-level employment effects
are detectable), 3) the industry primarily recruits online (so that the Burning Glass data can
yield a valid measure of HHI), and, 4) the labor market has enough natural variation across the

                                                 7
country in HHI to include both concentrated and competitive occupational labor markets (for
meaningful differences in underlying market concentration). This set of criteria can be summa-
rized in the following statement: an ideal design will study a (near) minimum-wage-earning
occupation in a low-wage industry that primarily uses online advertisements to fill jobs and
that has a range of high and low labor market concentration levels.
   Previous work serves as a guide in choosing the ideal setting. It is well documented that
the industries that most intensively use a near-minimum wage workforce are the accommoda-
tion/food service and the retail sectors, accounting for 50% of all employees in the US who are
paid within 10% of the minimum wage (Dube, Lester and Reich (2010a)). The largest (by num-
ber of employees) 3-digit NAICS categories within the food & accommodation and the retail
sectors are the Food Service and Drinking Places sector (NAICS code 722000) and the General
Merchandise Stores sector (NAICS code 452000), respectively.
   The two sectors do not, however, use the internet to recruit low wage jobs at the same rates.
As a benchmark for what is typical usage of online recruitment, we take the ratio of Burning
Glass Technologies (BGT) job postings for an occupation over the total stock of jobs in the
occupation (available from the Occupational Employment Statistics, OES). For the economy as
a whole we have a median ratio of 0.09. For the key minimum wage earning occupations in
the food service sector (contained in SOC 35-3xxx) the ratio is about half the size (0.05), while,
for the key minimum wage earning occupations in the General Merchandise sector (contained
in SOCs 43-5xxx and 41-2xxx) this ratio is 0.08 and 0.09, respectively, suggesting more typical
rates of online hiring, and, making the Burning Glass data more suitable for study of the latter
sector.
   As such, we focus on the main minimum wage-heavy occupations in the General Merchan-
dise sector - stock clerks and order fillers (SOC 43-5081), retail salespersons (SOC 41-2031), and
cashiers (SOC 41-2011) - which each represent between roughly 20-30% of the General Mer-
chandise work force, and, cumulatively, 65% of all employees.5 The Burning Glass data also
  5 This   is based on the 2016 National Industry-Specific Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates from the


                                                       8
reveals that these occupations exhibit significant spatial variation in labor market concentration
levels, with many high and many low concentration areas, an essential feature for our design
and testing the question at hand.
   To demonstrate this final point, we require greater precision regarding what constitutes
high vs. low labor market concentration. This in turn necessitates a measure of concentration,
and, for this we rely on the standard definition of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI):

                                                            J
                                             HH Im,t =      s2
                                                             j,m,t
                                                           j =1

   where for any firm j in a given occupational labor market m and at quarter t, its market
share s of job postings for the occupational labor market is defined as the sum of Burning
Glass vacancies posted by the firm in the market and quarter divided by the total number of
such vacancies posted in that market and quarter. Azar et al. (2018) discuss in more detail the
construction of this measure and its interpretation.
   By construction, HHI measures run from 0 to 1, with larger values indicating greater con-
centration. By Department of Justice/Federal Trade Commission 2010 horizontal merger guide-
lines, an HHI above 0.15 is considered "moderately concentrated" and an HHI above 0.25 is
considered "highly concentrated." As mentioned, an ideal design would include a significant
fraction of labor markets above and below the highly concentrated 0.25 threshold. In fact, the
three SOCs we work with all have distributions for our HHI measure with coverage through-
out the HHI scale's range, so that they are not too skewed in the direction of perfect competition
or monopsony and allow for considerable natural variation in labor market concentration. The
full distribution of these SOCs' HHIs is presented and discussed in the following section.
   In our analysis, we use the average HHI across all available quarters of data in the sample
period to give a broadly representative characterization of the underlying labor market con-
centration. A natural concern this raises, however, is that this may introduce endogeneity if
Bureau of Labor Statistics for the 452000 "General Merchandise Store" NAICS. Within the industry, stock clerks
and order fillers, retail salespersons, and cashiers comprise 17%, 27%, and 21% of total employees, respectively.


                                                       9
minimum wage changes affect HHI. However, the data suggest this is not the case, as there is
no significant relationship at all between minimum wage and HHI level (either at the quarterly
HHI level or for the average of quarterly HHIs we use). Furthermore, if we use the first two
years (2010-2011) to construct an alternative, baseline average HHI measure for each county
and then run the equivalent specifications presented below using this alternative HHI mea-
sure, but, with only 2012-2016 data for all other variables (thus, eliminating the concern that
the analyzed period's minimum wage changes may affect this HHI, since it is defined over the
pre-analysis period) we get very similar results to those presented below, both qualitatively
and in terms of statistical significance.



4        Results

4.1      Main Results

    Before turning to the main results on employment, we begin by exploring the "first-stage"
result of the minimum wage's effect on earnings. A positive and significant earnings elasticity
(with respect to the minimum wage) for workers in the general merchandise store sector is to
be expected given the large fraction of workers in the industry in very low wage occupations
who are likely to have their wages increased as the minimum wage goes up (in particular, the
65% of the workforce referenced in the previous section who work as stock clerks and order
fillers, retail salespersons, and cashiers). However, confirming this empirically is important
for the interpretation of later estimates of the minimum wage employment elasticities, as we
are interested in explaining real employment responses to binding minimum wages (a zero
employment elasticity of the minimum wage means something entirely different in an industry
where there is no detectable earnings elasticity to begin with vis-a-vis one with a significant
earnings elasticity).   6

    6A similar need for a research setting where the studied minimum wage increases have bite (are binding) has
largely motivated the focus in prior work on populations of restaurant workers, retail workers, and teen workers,


                                                       10
    Table 1 reports these minimum wage earnings elasticity estimates for the general merchan-
dise sector. The three columns all have the same outcome: average monthly earnings in the
general merchandise sector. Each column reflects one of the three alternative baseline sam-
ples subsequently used throughout the paper (each constructed using one of our three distinct
SOCs in the industry to compute the HHI measure, thus, yielding somewhat different sample
sizes, as explained further in the discussion of Table 2 that immediately follows). The general
finding in Table 1 is a positive and significant (at the 1% level) earnings elasticity with respect
to the minimum wage, with a point estimate between 0.09 and 0.10; minimum wage increases
are found to yield significant earnings increases in the sector, indicating significant bite of the
minimum wage for general merchandise stores. Thus, as expected, the sector is confirmed to be
an appropriate setting to study potential employment responses by firms to (actual) minimum-
wage-induced increases in labor costs. For further details of the specifications in the table see
the footnotes to Table 1 and the discussion that immediately follows of the related employment
regressions.7
    Turning to the study of the minimum wage's employment effects, we outline our baseline
specifications in greater detail. As above, all regressions are performed at the county-quarter
level of observation. Our left hand side variable is now the log of general merchandise store
employment in the county-quarter. While the log of the governing minimum wage level re-
mains a primary regressor of interest, given our research question, we are especially interested
in the interaction of this variable with our measure of labor market concentration, HHI. We
construct HHIs for each of the three occupational labor markets identified in the previous sec-
tion as being large (in their share of total sectoral employment) and minimum-wage heavy
occupations: stock clerks and order fillers, retail salespersons, and cashiers. The distribution
of county average HHI measures (averaged for each county across the 2010-2016 sample pe-
riod) is presented for each of the occupational labor market in Figures 1 - 3. As each of these
respectively.
   7 Additionally, we find no significant difference in the minimum wage earnings elasticity estimates across high

and low levels of the market concentration measure introduced in Table 2, as can be seen in Appendix Table 4.


                                                       11
labor markets have distinct variation in HHI - while still each being large relative to the sec-
tor's total employment, so that any resulting changes in occupational employment induced by
the minimum wage should yield visible changes in total employment - we separately estimate
regressions with log minimum wage interacted with each occupational HHI. The basic linear
specification takes the form

       ln(Yit ) =  + ln( MWit ) +  HH Ii + ln( MWit )  HH Ii + ln( TotEmployedit )+

             ln( TotEarningsit ) +  ln( Popit ) + t  ln(Unempit ) + i + ct +  Is  t

   where the outcome ln(Yit ) is the log of general merchandise store employment in county i
and quarter t, ln( MWit ) is the log of the governing minimum wage, HH Ii is the labor market's
average HHI over the sample period, and, the interaction term ln( MWit )  HH Ii is the main
variable of interest. Additional control variables include the log of county total population, the
log of total average weekly earnings (across all sectors) in the county, the log of total employ-
ment (across all sectors) in the county, the log of the county unemployment rate, and county
fixed effects i , census division specific quarter fixed effects ct , and state-specific linear time
trends  Is  t. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
   As an alternative specification we also include a binary HHI variable that separates high
and low concentration labor markets using the Department of Justice/ Federal Trade Commis-
sion 2010 horizontal merger guideline threshold of 0.25 for highly concentrated markets.


                        ln(Yit ) =  + ln( MWit ) + 1( HH Ii  0.25)+

          +ln( MWit )  1( HH Ii  0.25) + ln( TotEmployedit ) +  ln( TotEarningsit )

                         ln( Popit ) + t  ln(Unempit ) + i + ct +  Is  t


   Table 2 presents the results using both the linear (odd numbered columns) and binary spec-
ifications (even numbered columns) for the HHI. In Columns 1 and 2, we present estimates



                                                12
using the HHI measure defined over the stock clerks and order fillers labor market (SOC 43-
5081). Columns 3-4 and columns 5-6, respectively, present estimates using the HHI measure
defined over the retail sales labor market (SOC 41-2031) and the cashiers labor market (SOC
41-2011).
   Across specifications and across each of the HHIs defined over the three alternative occu-
pational labor markets, Table 2 shows negative and significant point estimates on the main
effect of the minimum wage employment elasticity (see the first row), which corresponds to a
low level of labor market concentration. In odd numbered columns, this estimate character-
izes the employment effects of the minimum wage in extremely unconcentrated labor markets
(i.e. those approaching the competitive ideal of an infinite number of small firms posting ad-
vertisements in equal number for stock clerk jobs, for instance, to take the example of column
1). In even numbered columns, this estimate characterizes the average employment elasticity
for those occupational labor markets below the DOJ-threshold for concentrated markets (HHI
below 0.25). This negative point estimate is consistent with the standard prediction, based on
a competitive labor market setting, of employment reductions resulting from minimum wage
increases. Quantitatively, we find that in these more competitive labor markets, a 10% increase
in the minimum wage reduces employment in general merchandise stores by just under 2%.
   Across the second and third rows of Table 2, however, there is a consistent finding of a
statistically significant and positive log minimum wage-HHI interaction term. This indicates
that the more concentrated the occupational labor market is, the more positive the employ-
ment elasticity of the minimum wage becomes. To give a sense of scale for the estimates in the
second row, taking column 1 as an example, a standard deviation increase in the stock clerk
labor market HHI makes the employment elasticity increase by 0.21 (for columns 3 and 5, the
equivalent increase is 0.22 and 0.20). The third row estimates indicate the increase in the em-
ployment elasticity for those occupational labor market with HHIs above the DOJ concentrated
markets threshold: the elasticity is higher by about 0.3. In all cases, these estimates indicate a
common finding: as labor markets become more concentrated, the dis-employment effect from


                                               13
minimum wage is significantly reduced.
    Figure 4 presents the estimated employment elasticities for the high and low concentration
areas (again, using the 0.25 HHI threshold) that result from the binary specifications in Table 2.
As can be seen across occupations, when moving from low concentration areas to high concen-
tration areas, the employment elasticity changes dramatically, going from approximately -0.2
to a positive point estimate, though it is only statistically significant at the 5% level for the retail
sales occupation.
    Table 3 and Figure 5 make the pattern even clearer. Here we separate labor markets into
HHI terciles, rather than simply binary bins (otherwise following the specifications of Table 2).
As can be seen across the columns (again, corresponding to the alternative occupational labor
markets) of Table 3, we estimate a negative point estimate for the minimum wage employment
elasticity in the lowest HHI tercile, with the elasticity significantly increasing (becoming more
positive) for upper terciles, and the size of that increase being considerably larger in magnitude
for the upper HHI tercile-log minimum wage interaction.8
    Figure 5 plots the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for the minimum wage em-
ployment elasticities in each HHI tercile group (based on the specifications of Table 3). For the
bottom HHI tercile group, the employment elasticity is significantly negative (at or very near
the 5% level) across each panel of the figure, at about -0.2. For the middle HHI tercile group,
the employment elasticity is not significantly different than zero (with a point estimate that is
essentially zero across all panels). For the top HHI tercile group, the employment elasticity in-
creases further, with positive point estimates of about 0.35 that are significantly different than
0 at the 5% level in all panels.
    Figure 6 presents a comparison of our estimates, taking labor market concentration into
consideration, and estimates from the existing literature, that do not explicitly account for the
level of labor market concentration. For the survey of the existing literature, we make use of
   8 For stock clerks, the terciles run from 0 to 0.346, 0.346 to 0.713, and, 0.713 to 1. For retail sales, the terciles run
from 0 to 0.144, 0.144 to 0.507, and, 0.507 to 1. For cashiers, the terciles run from 0 to 0.362, 0.362 to 0.690, and,
0.690 to 1.


                                                            14
estimates provided by Harasztosi and Lindner (2019) (see their Web Appendix), who report the
employment elasticity with respect to the wage (own-wage elasticity of labor demand) derived
from minimum wage-based research designs published in peer-reviewed academic journals.
This elasticity is distinct from the canonical employment elasticity with respect to the minimum
wage focused on so far, but, it can easily be computed using both the employment elasticity
with respect to the minimum wage and the earnings elasticity with respect to the minimum
wage (it is effectively, the ratio of the two). In the figure, we present the own-wage employment
elasticity for each HHI tercile and for each occupation that results from our above estimates.9
A general pattern emerges. In comparison to the estimates from the broader literature, our low
concentration estimates are on the outer left (most negative) of the range of prior work's point
estimates, and include only prior estimates with negative elasticites in their 95% confidence
intervals. Our middle-range concentration estimates are centered around zero and are not
significant. Our upper-range concentration estimates, representing very highly concentrated
labor markets, are to the far right of the existing range of estimates from the prior literature
and have 95% confidence intervals that include only positive values. Such a pattern is to be
expected if indeed labor market concentration is an important, previously unobserved and
unaccounted for, factor in determining the employment effects of the minimum wage.


4.2       Robustness

    We now consider the robustness of the above-reported findings. We first consider a simpli-
fied version of the specifications in Table 2.
    In recent years, there has been debate in the minimum wage literature over the appropriate-
ness of including census-division-by-period fixed effects and linear state-specific time trends a
la Dube, Lester and Reich (2010a) (Neumark, Salas and Wascher (2014) Allegretto et al. (2013)
   9 To construct our HHI-tercile-specific own-wage employment elasticities for Figure 6 we utilize the minimum
wage earnings elasticity estimates from Table 1, which are averaged for the entire HHI distribution, because,
as with the binary HHI measure-log minimum wage interactions presented in Appendix Table 4, there is no
significant difference in the minimum wage earnings elasticity estimates across HHI terciles.



                                                      15
Allegretto et al. (2017)). Neumark, Salas and Wascher (2014) have been particularly critical of
this approach, and, have instead argued for the basic two-way fixed-effect estimator commonly
used in the literature in the 2000s and before. In Table 5 in the Appendix, we report a two-way
fixed-effect version of Table 2. Results are similar across the two tables, and reveal the same
pattern of significantly more positive employment effects of the minimum wage as labor mar-
ket concentration increases. This convergence across specifications is consistent with the recent
work of Cengiz et al. (2019), who find that differences across specifications disappear when fo-
cusing on minimum wage changes in recent years (as we do given our reliance on the Burning
Glass data).
   In Table 6 of the Appendix we explore the robustness of our main results to the exclusion of
counties where Burning Glass data is more limited. Specifically, Appendix Table 6 uses in the
analysis only the counties for which an occupational average HHI can be formed from at least 8
quarters of BG job advertisement data. This adjustment can be thought of as a way of getting an
HHI average that is potentially more reflective of the overall time period. The downside is that
the exclusion of counties with limited Burning Glass data reduces the sample size somewhat.
However, the change has little effect on the results. The specifications of Table 2 are repeated
on this revised sample in Appendix Table 6, with estimates being very similar in size and
significance, and, a repeat of the main finding of a significantly more positive employment
effect of the minimum wage as labor market concentration increases.
   Next, as a minimal test to reveal a possible spurious correlation we perform a placebo
test in a relatively high wage industry that has virtually no minimum wage jobs. To guide
the selection of industry and occupation, we start by focusing on the highest paid of the 10
largest (by employment) occupations in the US, registered nurses (SOC 291141). BLS Occu-
pational Employment Statistics data on the distribution of this occupation's wages indicates
that under no circumstances should we expect these workers to be affected by minimum wage
increases, either marginally or inframarginally. OES occupation-industry matrices further in-
dicate that the largest industry to employ this occupation while also employing essentially


                                               16
no minimum wage-level workers10 is the offices of physicians (NAICS code 621100), which
is also the second-largest employer of the occupation overall. This setting is ideal because
we can focus on the non-minimum wage occupation in the sector without any likelihood that
firm adjustments to pay for other minimum wage-level occupations will have ripple effects on
the former group's employment. Our placebo test explores whether variation in labor market
concentration for this non-minimum wage occupation mediates the way sectoral employment
correlates with the minimum wage, looking to see if we find the same relationship observed in
the general merchandise store sector. If so, our prior results would be called into question as
evidence of labor market concentration's effect on the minimum wage employment elasticity.
   Table 7 in the Appendix presents equivalent specifications to those in Table 2 using the
physicians' office employment numbers as the outcome and registered nurse HHI in columns 1
and 2. In the other columns of the table, we also include two other HHIs for two related medical
occupations in the sector that also have moderate, above-minimum-wage earnings. These are
medical assistants (SOC 319092) and Licensed Practical and Licensed Vocational Nurses (SOC
292061). The former has the advantage of being the largest detailed occupational category in
the physician's office industrial sector, comprising 15% of the workforce (compared to 8% for
registered nurses), making it non-trivial to firms in the industry and another attractive placebo
setting; on the other hand, its median wage of $15 an hour in 2016 is closer (than the $30 an
hour for registered nurses) to the range of concern for possible minimum wage ripple effects
from upward wage pressure in the broader economy. The LPN/LVN occupation enjoys an
intermediate wage ($19 an hour) but is a smaller fraction of the industry workforce (4%).
   In all three cases, across all specifications of Table 7 of the Appendix, the results do not
yield a positive, significant interaction term between HHI and the minimum wage - just as we
would expect in a setting where the underlying theoretical considerations governing monop-
sony and minimum wage do not apply. These results provide some additional confidence that
in the validity of the positive interaction term seen in the main results of Table 2 and related
 10 No   minimum-wage level occupation makes up more than 1 percent of the work force


                                                     17
specifications.


4.3   Discussion and Interpretation

   Throughout the paper, we are estimating minimum wage effects on employment as a func-
tion of labor market concentration. The variation in labor market concentration is cross-sectional,
and, unlike the variation in the minimum wage, this variation cannot be easily mapped to sud-
den policy shocks. Therefore, the question arises as to whether HHI is correlated with some
other omitted variable in the market that is the true reason behind the variation in the impact
of the minimum wage on employment. We address this concern below, but, first note that,
from a policy perspective, even if the differential employment effects of the minimum wage
are ultimately caused by something else than concentration, concentration measures still allow
policy makers to assess which markets are likely to have zero or even positive employment
effects when the minimum wage is increased.
   One possible area of concern for an omitted variable bias arises from the fact that HHIs tend
to be higher in more rural areas (Azar et al., 2018) while rural areas are plausibly less produc-
tive. Independent of labor market concentration measures, then, this productivity difference
might affect employment responses to the minimum wage. Our expectation, however, would
be that the minimum wage depresses employment more in less productive areas because in-
creases in the minimum wage above the federal level are more likely to result in local minimum
wages above workers' marginal productivity. This kind of bias goes against our finding that
the minimum wage tends to increase employment in the most concentrated areas.
   However, this is something that can be assessed empirically. In Appendix Table 8, we at-
tempt to control for the main factors we believe to determine wages and be correlated with
HHI: productivity and population density. We control for population density directly and ap-
proximate productivity through the log of total average weekly earnings in the county across
all sectors.11 We find that there are no marked changes to the estimated coefficients, as can be
 11 The   log of total average weekly earnings in the county across all sectors is already included in the set of


                                                       18
seen in Appendix Table 8 which yields results that are very similar in magnitude and signifi-
cance to our main results in Table 2.
    While including these controls in the main results allows the employment level to be dif-
ferent in lower density or lower productivity counties, and partially addresses the omitted
variable bias channel, there is an additional question of whether the minimum wage-HHI in-
teractions remain significant and positive when also controlling for the way these additional
characteristics moderate the minimum wage employment response. Appendix Table 9 allows
for interactions of the minimum wage with population density as well as total earnings in the
county. Our main finding remains: a higher HHI is associated with a more positive minimum
wage effect on employment. These results lend further credence to the idea that labor market
concentration is not merely a proxy for other factors like productivity or population density,
but can by itself modulate the employment effect of the minimum wage.
    From a policy perspective, our findings suggest that the potential employment costs of a
minimum wage policy are reduced when monopsony power is pervasive, while the benefits
are especially great (because monopsony already depresses wages below the competitive level).
As the latter feature of concentrated labor markets motivates policies that address monopsony
power in its own right ­ such as antitrust enforcement ­ the indirect consequence of such reg-
ulation is to increase the cost (reduced employment) of minimum wage policy. Of course, if
regulations to reduce monopsony power cause wages to rise, as intended, minimum wage
policies become less necessary.



5     Conclusion

    Economic theory predicts that the minimum wage reduces employment in a competitive
labor market. However, empirical evidence has often failed to find a negative impact. The
common explanation: monopsony power by the firm. In this paper, we present the first direct
regressors for our baseline results as well.



                                               19
empirical evidence showing labor market concentration ­ a key determinant of monopsony
power ­ modulates the impact of the minimum wage on employment in the general merchan-
dise sector in the US, a key employer of workers affected by the minimum wage. We find a
robust and significant increase in the employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage
in more concentrated occupational labor markets. In the most concentrated third of these, the
minimum wage employment elasticity is even estimated to be significantly positive. Com-
pared to the existing literature, these results yield related own-wage elasticity of labor demand
estimates for the lowest tercile of labor market concentration on par with the lowest estimates
from the minimum wage literature, effects close to zero and statistically insignificant for the
middle tercile, and, positive estimates that are larger than most in the literature for the highest
tercile. The findings, thus, offer an empirically-founded candidate explanation as to why null
employment effects from the minimum wage abound in the literature (due to the averaging of
real underlying positive and negative effects), as well as insight into why we may see signifi-
cant variation in the employment effect of the minimum wage across studies (due, in part, to
differing underlying levels of labor market concentration in a studies' settings).
   In total, these results suggest that labor market concentration, unmeasured and (empiri-
cally) overlooked in prior minimum wage research, is a key variable in moderating the cost of
minimum wage policy, and, that the employment effects of a minimum wage increase should
be assessed with this heterogeneity in mind. Additionally, the results bolster the evidence for
monopsony power in the labor market by demonstrating that key policy effects conform to the
predictions of the monopsony model.




                                                20
References

Aaronson, Daniel, and Eric French. 2007. "Product market evidence on the employment effects
  of the minimum wage." Journal of Labor Economics, 25(1): 167­200.

Addison, John T., McKinley L. Blackburn, and Chad D. Cotti. 2012. "The Effect of Minimum
  Wages on Labour Market Outcomes: County-Level Estimates from the Restaurant-and-Bar
  Sector." 50(3): 412­435.

Allegretto, Sylvia A, Arindrajit Dube, Michael Reich, and Ben Zipperer. 2013. "Credible re-
  search designs for minimum wage studies."

Allegretto, Sylvia, Arindrajit Dube, Michael Reich, and Ben Zipperer. 2017. "Credible re-
  search designs for minimum wage studies: A response to Neumark, Salas, and Wascher."
  ILR Review, 70(3): 559­592.

Azar, José A., Ioana Marinescu, Marshall I. Steinbaum, and Bledi Taska. 2018. "Concentra-
  tion in US labor markets: Evidence from online vacancy data." National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Azar, José, Ioana Marinescu, and Marshall I. Steinbaum. 2017. "Labor Market Concentra-
  tion." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24147.

Azar, José, Ioana Marinescu, and Marshall Steinbaum. 2019. "Measuring Labor Market Power
  Two Ways." AEA Papers and Proceedings, 109: 317­321.

Bell, Linda A. 1997. "The Impact of Minimum Wages in Mexico and Colombia." 15: S102­S135.

Bhaskar, Venkataraman, Alan Manning, and Ted To. 2002. "Oligopsony and monopsonistic
  competition in labor markets." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(2): 155­174.

Bhaskar, Venkataraman, and Ted To. 1999. "Minimum wages for Ronald McDonald monop-
  sonies: A theory of monopsonistic competition." The Economic Journal, 109(455): 190­203.

                                               21
Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and David C. Wittenburg. 2000. "A Reassessment
  of the New Economics of the Minimum Wage Literature with Monthly Data from the Current
  Population Survey." 18(4): 653­680.

Campolieti, Michele, Morley Gunderson, and Chris Riddell. 2006. "Minimum Wage Impacts
  from a Prespecified Research Design: Canada 1981­1997." 45(2): 195­216.

Card, David. 1992a. "Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of California,
  1987­89." 46(1): 38­54.

Card, David. 1992b. "Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the Federal
  Minimum Wage." 46(1): 22­37.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. "Minimum wages and employment: a case study
  of the fast-food industry in new jersey and pennsylvania." American Economic Review,
  84(4): 772­793.

Card, David, Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. "Comment on David Neumark
  and William Wascher, "Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum Wages: Panel
  Data on State Minimum Wage Laws"." 47(3): 487­497.

Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, Ben Zipperer, IZA CEP, et al. 2019. "The
  Effect of Minimum Wages on Low-Wage Jobs." Forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael Wither. 2019. "The minimum wage and the Great Recession:
  Evidence of effects on the employment and income trajectories of low-skilled workers." Jour-
  nal of Public Economics.

Currie, Janet Marion, and Bruce C. Fallick. 1996. "The minimum wage and the employment
  of youth: Evidence from the NLSY." 31(2): 404­428.

Deming, David, and Lisa B. Kahn. 2018. "Skill requirements across firms and labor markets:
  Evidence from job postings for professionals." Journal of Labor Economics, 36(S1): S337­S369.

                                              22
Draca, Mirko, Stephen Machin, and John Van Reenen. 2011. "Minimum Wages and Firm
  Profitability." 3(1): 129­151.

Dube, Arindrajit, Suresh Naidu, and Michael Reich. 2007. "The Economic Effects of a City-
  wide Minimum Wage." 60(4): 522­543.

Dube, Arindrajit, T William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010a. "Minimum wage effects across
  state borders: Estimates using contiguous counties." The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  92(4): 945­964.

Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010b. "Minimum Wage Effects
  Across State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties." 92(4): 945­964.

Eriksson, Tor, and Mariola Pytlikova. 2004. "Firm-level Consequences of Large Minimum-
  wage Increases in the Czech and Slovak Republics." 18(1): 75­103.

Fang, Tony, and Carl Lin. 2015. "Minimum wages and employment in China." 4(1): 22.

Giuliano, Laura. 2013. "Minimum Wage Effects on Employment, Substitution, and the Teenage
  Labor Supply: Evidence from Personnel Data." 31(1): 155­194.

Harasztosi, Péter, and Attila Lindner. 2019. "Who Pays for the minimum Wage?" Forthcoming,
  American Economic Review.

Hershbein, Brad, and Lisa B Kahn. 2018. "Do recessions accelerate routine-biased technologi-
  cal change? Evidence from vacancy postings." American Economic Review, 108(7): 1737­72.

Hirsch, Barry T., Bruce E. Kaufman, and Tetyana Zelenska. 2015. "Minimum Wage Channels
  of Adjustment." 54(2): 199­239.

Jardim, Ekaterina, Mark C Long, Robert Plotnick, Emma Van Inwegen, Jacob Vigdor, and
  Hilary Wething. 2018. "Minimum wage increases, wages, and low-wage employment: evi-
  dence from Seattle." National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                             23
Kim, Taeil, and Lowell J. Taylor. 1995. "The Employment Effect in Retail Trade of California's
  1988 Minimum Wage Increase." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 13(2): 175­182.

Machin, Stephen, Alan Manning, and Lupin Rahman. 2003. "Where the Minimum Wage Bites
  Hard: Introduction of Minimum Wages to a Low Wage Sector." 1(1): 154­180.

Manning, Alan. 2011. "Imperfect competition in the labor market." Handbook of labor economics,
  4: 973­1041.

Meer, Jonathan, and Jeremy West. 2016. "Effects of the minimum wage on employment dy-
  namics." Journal of Human Resources, 51(2): 500­522.

Modestino, Alicia Sasser, Daniel Shoag, and Joshua Ballance. 2016. "Downskilling: changes
  in employer skill requirements over the business cycle." Labour Economics, 41: 333­347.

Naidu, Suresh, Eric N. Posner, and E. Glen Weyl. 2018. "Antitrust Remedies for Labor Market
  Power." Harvard Law Review, 132(2).

Neumark, David, and Olena Nizalova. 2007. "Minimum Wage Effects in the Longer Run."
  XLII(2): 435­452.

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1992. "Employment effects of minimum and submin-
  imum wages: panel data on state minimum wage laws." ILR Review, 46(1): 55­81.

Neumark, David, JM Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014. "More on recent evidence on the
  effects of minimum wages in the United States." IZA Journal of Labor policy, 3(1): 24.

Pereira, Sonia C. 2003. "The impact of minimum wages on youth employment in Portugal."
  47(2): 229­244.

Sabia, Joseph J. 2009. "The Effects of Minimum Wage Increases on Retail Employment and
  Hours: New Evidence from Monthly CPS Data." 30(1): 75­97.



                                               24
Sabia, Joseph J., Richard V. Burkhauser, and Benjamin Hansen. 2012. "Are the Effects of
  Minimum Wage Increases Always Small? New Evidence from a Case Study of New York
  State." 65(2): 350­376.

Stigler, George. 1946. "The economics of minimum wage legislation." American Economic Re-
  view, 36: 358­365.

Walsh, Frank. 2003. "Comment on `minimum wages for Ronald McDonald monopsonies: a
  theory of monopsonistic competition'." The Economic Journal, 113(489): 718­722.




                                             25
                   Table 1. Minimum Wage Effect on Earnings

                                        Dependent Variable: Log Earnings

                                            (1)           (2)             (3)
Log Min Wage                            0.0901        0.0923          0.0949
                                         (0.0309)      (0.0307)        (0.0323)
County Fixed Effects                         Y             Y               Y
Cen. Div. Period Fixed Effects               Y             Y               Y
State-Specific Time Trends                   Y             Y               Y
Additional Controls                          Y             Y               Y
adj. R2                                    0.839         0.840           0.841
N                                         56536         57280           56592
Notes: The table presents estimates of the earnings elasticity with respect to the
minimum wage in the General Merchandise Store industrial sector (NAICS in-
dustry code 452). All specifications in the table take the log of county-quarter
general merchandise store average monthly earnings as the outcome. The three
columns report estimates using the alternative baseline samples subsequently
used throughout the paper (see Table 2) to compute HHI. Each sample is con-
structed using information from a different low-wage occupational labor mar-
ket in the industry, resulting in different sample sizes. Column 1 corresponds
to the sample for stock clerks and order fillers (SOC 435081); Column 2 to retail
salespersons (SOC 412031); Column 3 to cashiers (SOC 412011). In addition to
the log of the governing minimum wage as a regressor, all specifications include
county fixed effects, census division specific period fixed effects, state-specific
linear time trends, and, the following additional control variables: log of county
total population, the log of total average weekly earnings (across all sectors) in
the county, the log of total employment (across all sectors) in the county, the log
of the county unemployment rate. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered
at the state level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                        26
       Table 2. Minimum Wage Effect on Employment by Concentration in Occupational Labor Market

                                                       Dependent Variable: Log Employment

                                    Stock Clerks                         Retail Sales                 Cashiers
                                   (1)        (2)                       (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)
Log Min Wage                   -0.312      -0.179                   -0.220       -0.168        -0.311      -0.184
                                (0.0814) (0.0738)                    (0.0629) (0.0706)          (0.0925) (0.0749)
Log Min Wage * Avg HHI         0.702                                0.802                      0.729
                                 (0.152)                              (0.220)                    (0.194)
Log Min Wage × High HHI                    0.291                                 0.432                     0.309
                                           (0.0600)                              (0.0820)                  (0.0668)
County Fixed Effects                Y          Y                         Y           Y              Y          Y
Cen. Div. Period Fixed Effects      Y          Y                         Y           Y              Y          Y
State-Specific Time Trends          Y          Y                         Y           Y              Y          Y
Additional Controls                 Y          Y                         Y           Y              Y          Y
adj. R2                           0.994      0.994                     0.994       0.994          0.994      0.994
N                                 56536      56536                     57280      57280           56592     56592
Notes: The table presents estimates of the employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage, and, variation
in this estimate across places with differing levels of labor market concentration for key low-wage occupations. All
specifications in the table take the log of county-quarter general merchandise store employment as the outcome.
In addition to the log of the governing minimum wage as a regressor, all specifications include the interaction
of this variable with labor market concentration (HHI). We construct HHI for each of the three key low-wage
occupational labor markets in the industry: stock clerks and order fillers (SOC 435081) in columns 1-2; retail
salespersons (SOC 412031) in columns 3-4; cashiers (SOC 412011) in columns 5-6. In odd-numbered columns, this
concentration measure is the county's Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) for the relevant labor market (averaged
across all quarters of the 2010-2016 sample period), and, we report its interaction with the log minimum wage.
In even-numbered columns, we instead report the interaction of log minimum wage with a binary concentration
measure that separates high and low concentration labor markets based on whether their labor market HHI is
above or below 0.25 (the Department of Justice/ Federal Trade Commission threshold for highly concentrated
markets). All specifications further include county fixed effects, census division specific period fixed effects, state-
specific linear time trends, and, the following additional control variables: log of county total population, the log
of total average weekly earnings (across all sectors) in the county, the log of total employment (across all sectors)
in the county, the log of the county unemployment rate. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the state
level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                          27
           Table 3. Minimum Wage Effect on Employment by HHI Terciles

                                         Dependent Variable: Log Employment

                                    (1)                        (2)               (3)
                               Stock Clerks                Retail Sales       Cashiers
Log Min Wage                     -0.201                     -0.190             -0.154
                                 (0.0772)                   (0.0720)          (0.0772)
Log Min Wage * Mid HHI            0.161                      0.232             0.177
                                 (0.0742)                   (0.0949)          (0.0939)
Log Min Wage × High HHI          0.586                      0.554             0.475
                                  (0.138)                    (0.139)           (0.150)
County Fixed Effects                 Y                          Y                 Y
Cen. Div. Period Fixed Effects       Y                          Y                 Y
State-Specific Time Trends           Y                          Y                 Y
Additional Controls                  Y                          Y                 Y
adj. R2                            0.994                      0.994             0.994
N                                  56536                      57280             56592
Notes: The table presents estimates of the employment elasticity with respect to the
minimum wage by labor market concentration (HHI) terciles. HHI is constructed
for each of the three key low-wage occupational labor markets in the general mer-
chandise store industry: stock clerks and order fillers (SOC 435081) in column 1; re-
tail salespersons (SOC 412031) in column 2; cashiers (SOC 412011) in column 3. All
specifications in the table take the log of county-quarter general merchandise store
employment as the outcome. Specifications 1-3 are identical to specifications 2,4,6,
respectively, in Table 2 with the exception that log minimum wage is here interacted
with two indicator variables identifying high and medium HHI terciles (rather than
simply a binary measure as in Table 2). All specifications include county fixed effects,
census division specific period fixed effects, state-specific linear time trends, and, the
following additional control variables: log of county total population, the log of total
average weekly earnings (across all sectors) in the county, the log of total employment
(across all sectors) in the county, the log of the county unemployment rate. Standard
errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the state level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05, 
p < 0.01




                                           28
      8
      6
   Percent
     42
      0




             0                .2                 .4                 .6                 .8                 1
                                                      Average HHI

Figure 1. Distribution of County Avg. HHI Measure for Stock Clerks Occupational Labor Market
Notes: The figure plots the distribution across counties of the average HHI measure used in the "Stock Clerks"
regressions (Columns 1 and 2 of Table 2 and equivalent samples in other tables).




                                                       29
             10
             8
             6
   Percent
             4
             2
             0




                  0           .2                 .4                 .6                 .8                 1
                                                      Average HHI

Figure 2. Distribution of County Avg. HHI Measure for Retail Sales Occupational Labor Market
Notes: The figure plots the distribution across counties of the average HHI measure used in the "Retail Sales"
regressions (Columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 and equivalent samples in other tables).




                                                       30
      5
      4
   Percent
      2
      1
      0 3




             0                 .2                  .4                 .6                  .8                  1
                                                        Average HHI

Figure 3. Distribution of County Avg. HHI Measure for Cashiers Occupational Labor Market
Notes: The figure plots the distribution across counties of the average HHI measure used in the "Cashiers" regres-
sions (Columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 and equivalent samples in other tables).




                                                         31
                  Stock Clerks                           Retail Sales                            Cashiers
    .4
    .2
    0
    -.2
    -.4




          HHI<0.25              HHI0.25         HHI<0.25              HHI0.25          HHI<0.25             HHI0.25
                                             HHI Above or Below 0.25
                                 Point Estimate                          CI (Lower)/CI (Upper)


Figure 4. Employment Elasticities by High/Low Occupational Labor Market Concentration
Notes: The figure reports the estimated employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage for occupational
labor markets having high (HHI above 0.25) and low (HHI below 0.25) concentration. Each panel represents es-
timates using a different low-earning occupational labor market, with estimates corresponding to specifications
in columns 2, 4, and, 6 of Table 2. As a reminder, Table 2 presents estimates of the employment elasticity with
respect to the minimum wage, and, variation in this estimate across places with differing levels of labor market
concentration for key low-wage occupations. All specifications in the table take the log of county-quarter gen-
eral merchandise store employment as the outcome. In addition to the log of the governing minimum wage as
a regressor, all specifications include the interaction of this variable with labor market concentration (HHI). We
construct HHI for each of the three key low-wage occupational labor markets in the industry: stock clerks and
order fillers (SOC 435081) in columns 1-2; retail salespersons (SOC 412031) in columns 3-4; cashiers (SOC 412011)
in columns 5-6. In odd-numbered columns, this concentration measure is the county's Herfindahl-Hirschman
Index (HHI) for the relevant labor market (averaged across all quarters of the 2010-2016 sample period), and, we
report its interaction with the log minimum wage. In even-numbered columns, we instead report the interaction
of log minimum wage with a binary concentration measure that separates high and low concentration labor mar-
kets based on whether their labor market HHI is above or below 0.25 (the Department of Justice/ Federal Trade
Commission threshold for highly concentrated markets). All specifications further include county fixed effects,
census division specific period fixed effects, state-specific linear time trends, and, the following additional control
variables: log of county total population, the log of total average weekly earnings (across all sectors) in the county,
the log of total employment (across all sectors) in the county, the log of the county unemployment rate. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level. 95% confidence intervals are shown.


                                                          32
                   Stock Clerks                           Retail Sales                             Cashiers
    1
    .5
    0
    -.5




          Bottom       Middle         Top       Bottom          Middle       Top       Bottom        Middle         Top
                                                      Tercile of HHI
                                  Point Estimate                           CI (Lower)/CI (Upper)


Figure 5. Employment Elasticities by Terciles of Occupational Labor Market Concentration
Notes: The figure reports the estimated employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage for occupational
labor markets having high, medium, and low concentration, as indicated by HHI tercile. Each panel represents
estimates using a different low-earning occupational labor market, with estimates corresponding to specifications
in columns 1, 2, and, 3 of Table 3. As a reminder, Table 3 presents estimates of the employment elasticity with
respect to the minimum wage by labor market concentration (HHI) terciles. HHI is constructed for each of the
three key low-wage occupational labor markets in the general merchandise store industry: stock clerks and order
fillers (SOC 435081) in column 1; retail salespersons (SOC 412031) in column 2; cashiers (SOC 412011) in column
3. All specifications in the table take the log of county-quarter general merchandise store employment as the
outcome. Specifications 1-3 are identical to specifications 2,4,6, respectively, in Table 2 with the exception that
log minimum wage is here interacted with two indicator variables identifying high and medium HHI terciles
(rather than simply a binary measure as in Table 2). All specifications include county fixed effects, census division
specific period fixed effects, state-specific linear time trends, and, the following additional control variables: log of
county total population, the log of total average weekly earnings (across all sectors) in the county, the log of total
employment (across all sectors) in the county, the log of the county unemployment rate. 95% confidence intervals
are shown.




                                                           33
                              Stock Clerks - Low HHI
                                    Sabia et al. (2012)
                               Retail Sales - Low HHI
                                   Cashiers - Low HHI
                                        Pereira (2003)
                                  Bell (1997) - Mexico
                       Neumark and Nizalova (2007)
                               Bell (1997) - Colombia
                                Kim and Taylor (1995)
                            Currie and Fallick (1996)
                                       Giuliano (2013)
                                          Sabia (2008)
                              Campolieti et al. (2006)
                             Burkhauser et al. (2000)
                               Stock Clerks - Mid HHI
                                  Machin et al. (2003)
                                 Fang and Lin (2015)
                                     Card et al. (1994)
                                    Draca et al. (2011)
             Eriksson and Pytlikova (2004) - Slovakia
                                 Addison et al. (2010)
                                    Dube et al. (2007)
                                    Dube et al. (2010)
                                   Hirsch et al. (2015)
                                Allegretto et al. (2011)
      Eriksson and Pytlikova (2004) - Czech Republic
                                   Cashiers - Mid HHI
                               Retail Sales - Mid HHI
                                         Card (1992a)
                                         Card (1992b)
                                  Cashiers - High HHI
                              Retail Sales - High HHI
                              Stock Clerks - High HHI

                                                           -4    -3     -2       -1     0      1      2       3       4   5     6
                                                                                  Employment Elasticity w.r.t. Wage


                                                            Low HHI - Estimate                            CI Lower Bound/CI Upper Bound

                                                            Mid HHI - Estimate                            CI Lower Bound/CI Upper Bound

                                                            High HHI - Estimate                           CI Lower Bound/CI Upper Bound

                                                            Literature - Estimate                         CI Lower Bound/CI Upper Bound




Figure 6. Our Elasticities Compared to Those in the Literature
Notes: The figure presents the employment elasticity with respect to the wage from other studies in the minimum
wage literature (own wage elasticity of labor demand), as well as those estimated in this study based on Table 3
for the employment effect and Table 1 for the earnings effect. We utilize the review of the literature by Harasztosi
and Lindner (2019). The estimates come from: Sabia, Burkhauser and Hansen (2012); Pereira (2003); Bell (1997);
Neumark and Nizalova (2007); Kim and Taylor (1995); Currie and Fallick (1996); Giuliano (2013); Sabia (2009);
Campolieti, Gunderson and Riddell (2006); Burkhauser, Couch and Wittenburg (2000); Machin, Manning and
Rahman (2003); Fang and Lin (2015); Card, Katz and Krueger (1994); Draca, Machin and Van Reenen (2011);
Eriksson and Pytlikova (2004); Addison, Blackburn and Cotti (2012); Dube, Naidu and Reich (2007); Dube, Lester
and Reich (2010b); Hirsch, Kaufman and Zelenska (2015); Card (1992b,a).




                                                                   34
6   Appendix

              Table 4. Minimum Wage Effect on Earnings by High and Low HHI

                                                 Dependent Variable: Log Earnings

                                                      (1)           (2)             (3)
        Low HHI Earnings Elasticity               0.0784         0.0686        0.0895
                                                  (0.0405)      (0.0409)        (0.0351)
        High HHI Earnings Elasticity             0.0972        0.1236          0.0974
                                                  (0.0314)      (0.0314)        (0.0349)
        P-Value on Low=High                          0.58          0.20            0.79
        County Fixed Effects                           Y             Y               Y
        Cen. Div. Period Fixed Effects                 Y             Y               Y
        State-Specific Time Trends                     Y             Y               Y
        Additional Controls                            Y             Y               Y
        adj. R2                                     0.839         0.840           0.841
        N                                          56536         57280           56592
        Notes: The table replicates the specification of Table 1 with the addition of an
        interaction term between log minimum wage and an indicator for high HHI (
        HHI above or equal to 0.25), and reports the resulting earnings elasticity with
        respect to the minimum wage for the high and low HHI groups. See the notes
        to Table 2 for further discussion of this variable and the notes to 1 for additional
        details of the specifications.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. The row 1
        column 2 coefficient has a p-value of 0.100.




                                                 35
Table 5. Minimum Wage Effect on Employment by Occupational Labor Market Concentration - No Sub-National
                                   Time Trends (Simple Two Way FE)

                                                      Dependent Variable: Log Employment

                                   Stock Clerks       Retail Sales                              Cashiers
                                   (1)       (2)     (3)        (4)                         (5)         (6)
 Log Min Wage                   -0.194     -0.116  -0.147     -0.134                     -0.194       -0.119
                                (0.0841) (0.0761) (0.0821) (0.0811)                      (0.0895)    (0.0716)
 Log Min Wage * Avg HHI         0.418              0.502                                 0.419
                                 (0.137)           (0.193)                                (0.179)
 Log Min Wage × HHI0.25                   0.166              0.309                                   0.169
                                          (0.0662)           (0.0793)                                (0.0706)
 County Fixed Effects               Y         Y       Y          Y                           Y           Y
 Cen. Div. Period Fixed Effects     N         N       N          N                           N           N
 State-Specific Time Trends         N         N       N          N                           N           N
 Additional Controls                Y         Y       Y          Y                           Y           Y
 adj. R 2                         0.994    0.994    0.994      0.994                       0.994       0.994
 N                                56536    56536    57280     57280                        56592      56592
 Notes: The table replicates Table 2 without the inclusion of census division period fixed effects or state-specific
 linear time trends. See the Table 2 notes for further details.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                         36
Table 6. Minimum Wage Effect on Employment by Concentration in Occupational Labor Market - Using Only
                             Counties with 8 Quarters or More of HHI Data

                                                      Dependent Variable: Log Employment

                                    Stock Clerks                      Retail Sales                 Cashiers
                                   (1)        (2)                    (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)
Log Min Wage                   -0.300       -0.122               -0.223       -0.165        -0.315       -0.142
                                (0.0971) (0.0764)                 (0.0660) (0.0707)          (0.0876) (0.0779)
Log Min Wage * Avg HHI         0.886                             0.824                      0.871
                                 (0.180)                           (0.236)                    (0.151)
Log Min Wage × HHI0.25                     0.278                              0.425                     0.288
                                           (0.0585)                           (0.0828)                  (0.0670)
County Fixed Effects                Y          Y                      Y           Y              Y          Y
Cen. Div. Period Fixed Effects      Y          Y                      Y           Y              Y          Y
State-Specific Time Trends          Y          Y                      Y           Y              Y          Y
Additional Controls                 Y          Y                      Y           Y              Y          Y
adj. R2                           0.994      0.994                  0.994       0.994          0.994      0.994
N                                 47209      47209                  56316      56316           49325      49325
Notes: The table replicates Table 2 on the sample of counties for which the average occupational HHI in the county
is formed from at least 8 quarters of Burning Glass data (all other specification details are the same). See Table 2
notes for further information.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                        37
Table 7. Placebo Test Using Occupational Labor Market Concentration in Moderate Income, Above-Minimum
                                         Wage Medical Professions

                                                  Dependent Variable: Log Employment

                                     Registered Nurses Medical Assistants               Vocational Nurses
                                       (1)        (2)      (3)     (4)                    (5)        (6)
Log Min Wage                         -0.195    -0.163  -0.00970 -0.0260                 -0.131   -0.0964
                                     (0.102) (0.0892)   (0.152)  (0.105)                (0.123) (0.0917)
Log Min Wage * Avg HHI               0.0201              -0.377                         -0.153
                                     (0.384)            (0.246)                         (0.332)
Log Min Wage × HHI  0.25                       -0.0684          -0.265                             -0.157
                                               (0.149)           (0.109)                          (0.117)
adj. R2                               0.990     0.990    0.990    0.990                  0.990     0.990
N                                     58025     58025    53677    53677                  57817     57817
Notes: The table presents estimates of the employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage in a sector
with virtually no minimum wage workers - physicians' offices - reporting variation in this estimate across
places with differing levels of labor market concentration for three moderate income, non-minimum-wage
occupations - registered nurses (SOC 291141) in columns1-2, medical assistants (SOC 319092) in columns 3-4,
and, practical and licensed vocational nurses (SOC 292061) in columns 5-6. All specifications in the table
take the log of county-quarter employment in physicians' offices as the outcome. In addition to the log of
the governing minimum wage as a regressor, all specifications include the interaction of this variable with
either the average HHI for the occupation (in odd-numbered columns) or an indicator for whether this HHI
is above 0.25 (in even-numbered columns), with everything else the same as in Table 2 (see notes).  p < 0.10,
 p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                     38
Table 8. Minimum Wage Effect on Employment by Occupational Labor Market Concentration Controlling for
                              Productivity Proxy and Population Density

                                                    Dependent Variable: Log Employment

                                    Stock Clerks                     Retail Sales               Cashiers
                                   (1)        (2)                   (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)
Log Min Wage                   -0.315      -0.181               -0.220       -0.169      -0.314      -0.187
                                (0.0826) (0.0758)                (0.0633) (0.0707)        (0.0948) (0.0770)
Log Min Wage * Avg HHI         0.709                            0.804                    0.736
                                 (0.153)                          (0.221)                  (0.197)
Log Min Wage × HHI0.25                     0.296                             0.433                   0.314
                                           (0.0617)                          (0.0810)                (0.0680)
County Fixed Effects                Y          Y                     Y           Y            Y          Y
Cen. Div. Period Fixed Effects      Y          Y                     Y           Y            Y          Y
State-Specific Time Trends          Y          Y                     Y           Y            Y          Y
Additional Controls                 Y          Y                     Y           Y            Y          Y
adj. R2                           0.994      0.994                 0.994       0.994        0.994      0.994
N                                 56536      56536                 57280      57280         56592     56592
Notes: The table replicates Table 2 with the inclusion of population density as a regressor  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,
 p < 0.01




                                                       39
  Table 9. Minimum Wage Effect on Employment by Occupational Labor Market Concentration - MW Also
                         Interacted with Productivity and Population Density

                                                      Dependent Variable: Log Employment

                                    Stock Clerks                        Retail Sales              Cashiers
                                   (1)         (2)                     (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
Log Min Wage                     -1.553      -0.301                  -0.814      -0.515      -1.226     -0.366
                                 (1.193)    (1.280)                 (0.902)     (1.022)      (1.157)    (1.239)
Log Min Wage * Avg HHI          0.802                              0.854                    0.815
                                 (0.174)                            (0.228)                  (0.231)
Log Min Wage × HHI0.25                     0.315                               0.451                   0.334
                                           (0.0773)                            (0.0856)                (0.0841)
County Fixed Effects                Y           Y                       Y           Y           Y          Y
Cen. Div. Period Fixed Effects      Y           Y                       Y           Y           Y          Y
State-Specific Time Trends          Y           Y                       Y           Y           Y          Y
Additional Controls                 Y           Y                       Y           Y           Y          Y
MW * Density Interaction            Y           Y                       Y           Y           Y          Y
MW * Total Earnings Interaction     Y           Y                       Y           Y           Y          Y
adj. R2                           0.994      0.994                   0.994       0.994        0.994      0.994
N                                 56536      56536                   57280       57280        56592      56592
Notes: The table replicates Table 2 with the addition of the following: an interaction term between log minimum
wage and the proxy for productivity, the log of total employment (across all sectors) in the county; and, an inter-
action term between log minimum wage and population density.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                        40
