                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ARE SYRINGE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS HELPFUL OR HARMFUL? NEW EVIDENCE IN
                  THE WAKE OF THE OPIOID EPIDEMIC

                                      Analisa Packham

                                     Working Paper 26111
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26111


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019




I am especially grateful to Katherine Wells, who provided substantial data work and excellent
research assistance. I am also grateful to Lisa Roberts for providing data and for many useful
conversations about the interworkings of the Portsmouth syringe exchange program. I thank
Jennifer Doleac, Erin Krupka, Jevay Grooms, Ajin Lee, Michelle Segovia, Chuck Moul, Jeffrey
DeSimone, David Powell, Barton Willage and participants of the Southern Economics
Association 2018 Meeting and 2019 Texas Economics Crime Workshop for useful feedback on
work in progress. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Analisa Packham. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Are Syringe Exchange Programs Helpful or Harmful? New Evidence in the Wake of the Opioid
Epidemic
Analisa Packham
NBER Working Paper No. 26111
July 2019
JEL No. I10,I18,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

In light of the recent opioid crisis, many public health entities have called for an expansion in
syringe exchange programs (SEPs), which provide access to sterile syringes and facilitate safe
needle disposal for injection drug users. This paper investigates the effects of recent SEP
openings on HIV diagnoses and drug-related overdoses in the wake of the opioid crisis. I find that
SEP openings decrease HIV diagnoses by up to 18.2 percent. However, I present new evidence
that SEPs increase rates of opioid-related mortality and hospitalizations, suggesting that needle
exchanges alone may be less effective than other interventions at stimulating recovery.


Analisa Packham
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER
analisa.packham@vanderbilt.edu
1 Introduction
In 2016, over 64,000 people in the United States died of a drug overdose, with two-thirds of overdoses involving


opioids. The US is in the midst of an opioid crisis, with the US Drug Enforcement Agency declaring in 2015


that drug overdose deaths had reached epidemic levels" (U.S. Department of Justice, 2015). Consequently,


the increase in injection drug use has led to greater risk of illness due to needle sharing. In recent years,


acute cases of hepatitis C infections increased by 150 percent, and HIV diagnoses for white males aged 2534


increased in 2013, reversing a decades-long trend (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015).


   In light of this epidemic, many public health entities, including the CDC and some state and local health


departments, have called for an expansion in syringe exchange programs (SEPs), which provide access to


sterile syringes and facilitate safe disposal of used needles for injection drug users.   Given that HIV and


hepatitis C are both spread via shared needles, and that over one-third of injection drug users report having


shared a needle in the past year, proponents of SEPs argue that there is scope for such programs to reduce the


spread of bloodborne illness and create new opportunities for drug counseling (Centers for Disease Control


and Prevention, 2016).


   From an economic standpoint, SEPs have the potential to create large positive externalities by reducing


the stock of used needles on the streets and preventing the spread of disease.       Conversely, by providing


clean needles to drug users, reducing the stigma of using drugs and/or creating a safe environment for


networking with other users, SEPs may also generate untended consequences. In particular, lowering the


cost of obtaining needles and other supplies incentivizes drug users to inject more frequently, potentially


exacerbating rates of opioid misuse and abuse.


   In this paper, I test the causal relationships between SEP openings and drug-related health and crime


outcomes. Because no ocial national directory of SEPs exist, I construct a handcollected dataset on program


locations and opening dates to identify areas exposed to SEPs within the last ten years. In particular, using


health outcomes data from the CDC, I compare rates of HIV, drug- and opioid-related deaths, opioid-related


overdoses, and drug-related crime in counties with SEP openings to other counties without SEPs before and


after the initial year of implementation. I nd that SEPs decrease the number of HIV cases in some areas,


and that this eect grows over time.     However, estimates also indicate that SEP openings increase drug-


related mortality. Most notably, I nd that SEPs increase drug-related mortality rates by 11.6 percent and


opioid-related mortality rates by 25.4 percent, and provide some evidence that SEPs lead to a higher rate of


emergency room visits and in-patient stays for drug-related complications. Eects are largest in rural and


high-poverty areas, suggesting that those with larger geographic or nancial obstacles to substance abuse


treatment are most aected by such programs. I also nd that arrests for drug possession increase 12 years




                                                       1
after an opening, further indicating that SEPs may lead to more drug use and do not necessarily create a


more accepting legal environment for injection drug users.


    These ndings contribute to a recent and growing literature on policies targeting opioid availability and


abuse. In the past two decades, a number of state-level policies have been implemented with varying degrees


of eectiveness.        In particular, recent work has documented that prescription drug monitoring programs


(PDMPs), which electronically record patients receiving opioids into a state-wide registry, decrease the


number of oxycodone shipments, opioid abuse among young adults, and misuse for Medicare Part D patients


(Buchmueller and Carey, 2018; Dave, Grecu, and Saer, 2017; Mallatt, 2017). On the other hand, there is


some evidence that PDMPs cause patients to substitute towards heroin and fentanyl when prescription pills


become unavailable, implying that PDMPs lead to increases in illicit drug use (Mallatt, 2017).


    In an eort to prevent misdoses from leading to death, all states have legalized civilian access to naloxone,


a drug that can reverse the symptoms of opioid use when administered during an overdose. While Rees, Sabia,


Argys, Latshaw, and Dave (2017) nds that Naloxone Access Laws, which allow lay people to administer


naloxone, lead to signicant reductions in opioid-related deaths, Doleac and Mukherjee (2018) nds that


naloxone access leads to more opioid-related ER visits and increases in drug-related crimes, with no average


eects on mortality.


    Other state-level legal restrictions, including prescription limits, patient ID laws, doctor shopping restric-


tions, and pain clinic regulations have been ineective at preventing opioid use (Meara, Horwitz, Powell,


McClelland, Zhou, O'Malley, and Morden, 2016; Bao, Pan, Taylor, Radakrishnan, Luo, Pincus, and Schack-

                 1
man, 2016).          Despite this limited success of state-level policies, new studies show that policies aimed at


physician training may be a promising way to prevent overprescribing; for example, Schnell and Currie


(2017) documents that physician education plays a role in prescribing behavior, suggesting that better med-

                                                               2
ical training can lead to fewer opioid prescriptions.


    While much of the current literature has focused on the availability of opioids and other supply-side


restrictions, this paper analyzes the causal eects of demand-side policies and estimate to what extent


providing sterile needles, hygiene kits, and referral options for drug counseling in a non-judgmental setting


can address the spread bloodborne illness and opioid misuse. More specically, this paper builds on existing


studies by using a unique dataset on SEP openings to measure the eects of SEPs on HIV diagnoses, drug-


related mortality, opioid-related hospitalizations, and drug-related crime in the wake of the opioid crisis.

   1 For   a comprehensive review of earlier studies analyzing the eectiveness of state policies, see Haegerich, Paulozzi, Manns,
and Jones (2014).      Less than 10% of the studies evaluating the eects of PDMPs, clinical guidelines, naloxone distribution
programs, use experimental or quasi-experimental approaches to evaluate provider or patient behavior. Findings on the eects
of PDMPs on are mixed, and there is little evidence that insurance interventions, drug take-back events, pill mill legislation,
clinical guidelines, or education campaigns aect prescribing behavior or drug use.
   2 Moreover,   there is some evidence to suggest that marijuana legalization can reduce opioid prescriptions for Medicare patients
(Bradford, Bradford, Abraham, and Adams, 2018).




                                                                   2
   Previous research on SEPs is largely correlational, and focuses on syringe sharing during the AIDS crisis


in the 1980s and 1990s. These studies generally nd that the programs are associated with reductions in


the spread of HIV and reduced syringe sharing behavior, and are not correlated with an increase in the


amount of drugs used by current drug users or an increase in new drug users (General Accounting Oce,


1993; World Health Organization, 2004; DeSimone, 2005). Moreover, some studies report that SEPs result


in fewer discarded contaminated syringes, indicating that the benets of preventing the spread of HIV


through contaminated syringes are not limited to people who inject drugs (General Accounting Oce, 1993;

                     3
DeSimone, 2005).         However, SEPs are documented to be less eective in reducing hepatitis C, implying that


existing conclusions regarding SEP cost-eectiveness to date may be overstated (Pollack, 2001).


   Importantly, the data from the complied studies include small sample sizes (often looking at data from


only one syringe exchange clinic) and self-reported data regarding individuals' drug use rates, and do not


typically consider spillover eects or externalities on those not directly treated. Additionally, many studies


use data from other countries, such as Canada, Sweden, or New Zealand to serve as a comparison group for


drug rates in the US. These ndings are problematic for addressing causality, given that other developed


countries have diering policies on the operations of SEPs.              For example, New Zealand's syringe services


are fee-based while Australia distributes syringes free-of-charge and supplies syringe vending machines that


allow injection-drug users to obtain clean syringes at any time of the day (Sean Cahill and Nathan Schaefer,


2009).   And many countries, including Canada, provide free substance abuse treatment to injection drug


users, obscuring the true eects of needle exchange.


   Moreover, the recent opioid crisis diers from the AIDS crisis in many ways, provoking a need for


the reexamination of the eectiveness of harm reduction policies.                  For example, the opioid epidemic is


dramatically escalating; among men aged 2544, opioid-related mortality more than doubled every year


from 20132016, representing a sharper increase than any year during the AIDS epidemic. The eects of


the opioid epidemic are larger-reaching and are more broadly distributed among US counties than the AIDS


epidemic, aecting not only cities, but rural and suburban areas as well.                And increases in opioid-related


mortality have been exacerbated by the inux of illicit fentanyl in the US, a drug that is 80 to 100 times


stronger than morphine and up to 50 times more potent than heroin (Waitemata District Health Borad,


2014).


   Lastly, although many studies attribute SEPs with reductions in bloodborne illness over time, since HIV

  3 Specically,   General Accounting Oce (1993) includes information on various compilations of medical studies that had been
performed throughout the 1990s in the United States, Australia, Canada, the Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.
DeSimone (2005) uses survey data from 1989-1995 to analyze the causal eect of the introduction of needle exchange programs
(NEPs) in 9 large US cities. Using a probit regression analysis, he nds that the presence of a NEP is associated with a 13
percent reduction in drug injection, and argues that these estimates may be reective of broader public health interventions
occurring concurrently with the introduction of NEPs, while also noting that contact with NEPs can serve as a gateway to drug
counseling and/or substance abuse treatment.




                                                              3
rates have been falling signicantly throughout the US during the last two decades, other factors likely also


contributed to the decline in disease. The goal of this paper is to separate out the eects of a SEP opening


from the eects of these other factors to better understand the way in which SEPs can aect health. To do


so, I use administrative data on health and crime outcomes from 20082016 to estimate the eects of SEPs


on HIV diagnoses, mortality, opioid-related hospital visits, and drug-related crimes using an approach that


compares changes in counties with a recent SEP opening to changes observed in other US counties without


SEPs.   The results of these analyses indicate that SEPs can lead to signicant reductions in HIV rates.


However, I also nd that SEPs lead to increases in drug-related overdoses. Estimates indicate that a SEP


opening corresponds to a 11.6 percent increase in drug-related mortality, driven by increases in synthetic


opioid-related mortality, with larger eects in rural and high-poverty areas.     These ndings indicate that


while SEPs are successful at reducing bloodborne illness, they may unintentionally encourage more opioid


use by reducing the physical, mental, or networking costs of injecting drugs.


   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section I provide background information


on the history and daily operations of syringe exchange programs. Next I describe the empirical approach


I use to estimate the eects of SEPs on HIV cases and drug-related overdoses. I then discuss the results of


my analysis before providing some concluding thoughts.




2 Background on Syringe Exchange Programs (SEPs)
SEPs, also known as syringe services programs, are community-based public health programs that provide


harm reduction services and supplies such as sterile needles, syringes, and other injection and disposal equip-


ment and safe needle disposal. Comprehensive programs also oer HIV counseling, testing, and education,


as well as referrals to substance treatment facilities or other medical and mental health services. Because


such programs serve as a branch for harm reduction and are not designed to treat addiction or other medical


conditions, few SEPs provide medically assisted treatment or any type of in-patient care (Jarlais, Guardino,


Nugent, and Solberg, 2014).


   In the US, clients are not required to provide proof of income, health insurance, or drug usage to receive


supplies, and nearly all programs allow clients to receive more syringes than deposited. About 82 percent


of SEP budgets are from public funding sources, through provisions from city, county, or state governments


(Jarlais, Guardino, Nugent, and Solberg, 2014). While the federal government has the ability to prohibit


federal funding to support SEPs, states have authority to determine regulations for the existence, operation,


and local funding of SEPs. Currently, SEPs are legal in 26 states and the District of Columbia, permitted




                                                      4
                                                               4
in 9 states, and illegal in 15 states (LawAtlas, 2017).


   Since the early 2000s, more communities have opened SEPs in an eort to curtail the spread of HIV and


hepatitis C. Figure 1 shows how the number of SEPs has changed over time, according to the most recent


data from the North American Syringe Exchange Network. In 1998, there were 131 SEPs, but by the end of


2013, there were 204 known SEPs. This trend is mirrored in new locales; in 1998 only 77 cities had an SEP,


but by 2013, 116 did, suggesting that over half of SEPs opened in areas that previously had no program


(Jarlais, Guardino, Nugent, and Solberg, 2014).


   To further demonstrate how the usage of SEPs has changed over time, Figure 1 also shows the number of


syringes exchanged, in millions. Since 1998, the number of needles exchanged has increased by 155%, with


the largest increases occurring from 2005-2013. That both the number of SEPs and syringes exchanged has


increased dramatically over the course of the last twenty years has important implications for the eects on


drug use and spread of bloodborne illness. Most obviously, one would expect that the exchanges reduce the


proportion and/or number of used syringes improperly disposed. However, if the cost of obtaining needles


is substantially lower, drug use could increase as a result, potentially leading to more misdoses and more


needle sharing. Given that both the number of opioid-related deaths have been increasing steadily over time


and that the number of new HIV cases has in recent years reversed a decades-long downwards trend for some


groups (see Figure 2), it is important to disentangle outside factors simultaneously contributing to these


trends to determine how much these health outcomes would be aected in the                     absence   of SEPs.


   Because there is no national reporting system for SEPs or their clients, I cannot track how a SEP opening


aects the number or composition of patients at each center. Nonetheless, in an attempt to speak to the


daily activities of SEPs and visitor characteristics, in Table A1, I present 2018 visit-level data on client


attributes and equipment and services received for a rural, Midwest SEP located in Portsmouth, Ohio. I


note that these data are not representative of the entire US, but may shed light on program-level operations


in an area of the country that has been largely aected by the opioid epidemic.


   Overall, client characteristics mirror those of the population of Portsmouth, with the SEP assisting almost

                                                                   5
all white clients and client age averaging 37.8 years old.             Notably, over 22 percent of clients report having


previously sought addiction treatment, with approximately one-third of patients reporting having previously


overdosed.


   Like many other SEPs, the Portsmouth program is open only one day of the week (Fridays). Although a

  4 States   with permitted programs include those states where local units have interpreted state laws to allow syringe access
services or where no law explicitly prohibits syringe exchange. States where SEPs remain illegal include Alabama, Arkansas,
Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Mississippi, Nebraska, Oklahoma, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, and
Wyoming (LawAtlas, 2017).
  5 The   median age in Portsmouth is 36.8, and the city is 90.0 percent White (United States Census Bureau, 2016).




                                                               5
                                                                                                                   6
majority of clients are from the city of Portsmouth, nearly one-third travel from other areas.                         This implies


that spillovers may exist to nearby counties. Therefore, in all analyses I use county of residence to determine


rates of HIV diagnoses and mortality.


    According to self-reported survey data, most users inject heroin, although those reporting having injected


fentanyl has been increasing over time, which reect trends in the general US population. Of those visiting


the SEP, one-fth have been diagnosed with hepatitis C, and 1 percent have been diagnosed with HIV.


Despite the fact that SEPs oer drug counseling and referrals to substance treatment facilities, only 1


percent of clients in Portsmouth accepted a referral during the sample period, suggesting that clients are


either not interested in treating their addiction, have little resources to aord medical care, are not able to


access facilities due to capacity constraints, and/or that referrals are not the main focus of SEP facilities.




3 Empirical Approach
In this section I provide a detailed description of the data used in my analysis as well as strategies for


estimating the causal eects of SEPs.




3.1 Data
Data on SEP locations as of 2017 is from the North American Syringe Exchange Network (NASEN), a non-


prot organization that previously maintained a directory of SEPs by state as a public health information

             7
resource.            In particular, these data contain the name and address of the program, as well as contact


information, when available. To gather data on the timing of SEP openings, I used these listings to hand


collect information on program dates by recording open dates listed on the NASEN website, researching the


history of individual programs when they provided a website, contacting listed representatives for programs,


and comparing yearly coverage maps of United States syringe service programs provided by the Foundation

                                       8
for AIDS Research (AMFAR).                 I then geocoded each clinic location to identify which counties were oering


SEP programs before 2009, and those that experienced openings in the following 8 years, which serve as


the treatment group for this analysis.             In doing so, I identied 86 SEP openings in 79 counties between

                 9
20092016.            Figure A2 depicts US counties identied as having, versus not having, SEPs by 2016 using this


approach, while Figure A3 maps SEPs that opened between 20092016 and those that opened prior to 2009

   6 See   Figure A1 for a map of client zip codes. Almost all clients that disclose their zip code during a SEP visit report living
in Portsmouth or West Portsmouth. However, some visitors travel from nearby zip codes in Ohio and Kentucky. The largest
travel distance recorded is 250 miles, with nearly 200 records of visitors traveling over 100 miles to the SEP.
   7 These   data were available only for a 23 years before they were removed from the website and NASEN does not release
these data upon request. Therefore, previous and more current directories are unavailable.
   8 Excellent research assistance,   provided by Katherine Wells, was highly valuable in this venture.
   9 Refer to Figure 1 for a visual   representation of the variation in county SEP openings during this period.




                                                                  6
to show the variation in recent SEP openings.


    One shortcoming of these data is that if a clinic opened and closed before 2017,                    and   is not uniquely

                                                                                                         10
identiable from the city-level AMFAR maps, I do not observe that location in the data.                        Moreover, since


there are programs that have not authorized NASEN to release their records due to dierences in state law


that may provide partial funding to SEPs, allow their operation, or prohibit them altogether, my data do


not capture any programs that are working without an address, undetected, and/or in deance with state

       11
law.        I note that if I am not able to observe other SEP openings, this limitation in the data will bias the


estimates towards zero.


    I use data on HIV cases and drug overdose deaths from two main administrative datasets. To measure


the eect of a SEP opening on county-level HIV diagnoses, I use data from the Center for Disease Control


and Prevention's NCHHSTP Atlas, which is the only comprehensive source of annual, county-level sexually


transmitted infection data to date. The data include counts of HIV diagnoses per county of residence and

                                         12
are available only for 20082016.              The primary advantage of these data is that I am able to observe new


HIV diagnoses instead of existing cases to analyze how SEPs change the spread of disease over time.


    One limitation of the CDC Atlas is that HIV data for counties with less than 5 HIV cases or populations


less than 100 are censored to ensure condentiality of personally identiable information. Because HIV is


a relatively rare event, this results in suppression for approximately 75 percent of county-year observations.


To improve the quality of the data and reduce the number of censored cells, I additionally include available


data from each state's HIV Surveillance Program separately. Of the 50 states in which I requested data, 34

                                        13
states provided uncensored data.


    Notably, data on HIV diagnoses does not contain information on transmission at the county-level. Ac-


cording to the CDC, transmission via injection drug use comprises nearly 10 percent of total HIV cases.


However, if syringe sharing leads to greater probability of HIV contraction via needles, it would also increase


the chances of contracting the disease through contact with improperly disposed needles and sexual inter-


course. Therefore, estimates using all available HIV diagnoses data could overstate the true eects of SEP


on HIV spread through this method but also maintain the advantage of picking up any potential spillover

  10 Although    data on closures is unavailable, the net increase in SEPs and client caseloads over time combined with a web
search of news articles of existing SEPs suggests that very few programs shuttered during this sample period.
  11 There    is no ocial national registry of SEPs in the United States, and some do not disclose their operational status to
NASEN publicly to avoid shut down. Seventeen states prohibit syringe distribution (AL, AZ, AR, FL, GA, ID, KS, MS, MO,
NE, ND, OH, OK, PA, SD, TX, WV) with some exceptions for local laws (LawAtlas, 2017).
  12 HIV    cases are classied as those with conrmed diagnoses of infection or infection classied as stage 3 (AIDS) in a given
year.
  13 These    states include Alabama, Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas,
Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, Montana, Minnesota, Mississippi, Nevada, New Hampshire, New
York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia,
Washington, and Wisconsin.      In instances where a state did not provide data, and the observation is censored, I assign the
number of new counts to be zero, although I note that the results are not sensitive to this choice. Because South Dakota does
not report HIV diagnoses to the CDC in any year, this state is dropped for all analysis of HIV rates.




                                                                7
        14
eects.


    Data on drug- and opioid-related fatal overdoses is from restricted-use CDC mortality les.                              These


individual-level data contain information on county of residence, cause of death, as well as age, race, ethnicity,


and gender.        Drug-related deaths are dened and categorized by ICD-10 underlying cause of death codes

                                                           15
X40-X44, X60-X64, X85, Y10-Y14 and Y352.                        To identify opioid- and other drug-related deaths, I use


death certicate data on immediate or contributory causes of death, referred to as T-codes". In particular,

                                                                                                                     16
to measure eects of SEPs on opioid-related overdoses, I consider T-codes 40.040.4 and T40.6.                              Because


drug-related deaths are a relatively rare event in some areas, I omit from the analysis counties that experience

                                                                               17
zero reported occurrences in any year during the sample period.


    While nearly all of the analysis focuses on HIV cases and drug-related deaths, I also consider eects on


opioid-related emergency room visits, in-patient stays, and drug-related crimes, to estimate more compre-


hensive eects of SEPs. By focusing on hospitalization outcomes, I evaluate to what extent SEPs increase


drug misuse but do not result in death, which may serve as a better proxy for drug use than mortality. This


is especially important given that a large majority of SEPs distribute naloxone to prevent fatal overdoses.


Annual, state-level hospitalization data is from the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Program (HCUP) State


Emergency Department Databases (SEDD) and State Inpatient Databases (SID). The SEDD contain dis-


charge information on all emergency department visits that do not result in admission, while the SID contain


information on patients initially seen in the emergency room then admitted to the hospital. HCUP data is


not available for every state, and I therefore drop some states in these analyses.


    To address whether SEPs change the legal climate surrounding drug use and/or increase arrests due to


the concentration of injection drug users, I additionally test the eects of SEP openings on drug-related


arrests. These variables may also serve as a proxy for drug use if possession or sales arrests increase after


a SEP opening, assuming police attitudes remain unchanged. Crime data is from the FBI Uniform Crime


Reports (UCR), which represent an annual compilation of crime statistics reported by local law-enforcement

  14 Conversely,   if SEPs increase awareness and HIV testing, any estimated reductions in HIV rates may be understated. While
87 percent of SEPs report oering HIV testing, data on takeup is not available (Jarlais, Guardino, Nugent, and Solberg, 2014).
  15 In particular,   codes X40-X44 represent accidental poisoning by and exposure to analgesics, antipyretics, and antirheumatics,
antiepileptic, sedative-hypnotic, antiparkinsonism, and psychotropic drugs, narcotics and psychodysleptics [hallucinogens], and
other unspecied drugs not elsewhere classied, X60-X64 accounts for intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to analgesics,
antipyretics and antirheumatics, antiepileptic, sedative-hypnotic, antiparkinsonism and psychotropic drugs, narcotics and psy-
chodysleptics [hallucinogens], and other and unspecied drugs not elsewhere classied, X85 is assault by drugs, medicaments
and biological substances, and Y11-Y14 represent poisoning by and exposure to sedative-hypnotic, antiepileptic, antiparkinson-
ism psychotropic drugs, psychodysleptics [hallucinogens], narcotics, and other and unspecied drugs not elsewhere classied,
undetermined intent.
  16 Specically,   T40.0 includes opium, T40.1 includes heroin, T40.2 includes semisynthetic opioids, such as oxycodone and
hydrocodone, T40.3 includes methadone, T40.4 includes synethetic opioids, such as fentanyl, and T40.6 includes other and/or
unspecied opioids. I refer to Ruhm (2017) on how to properly account for and impute drug-related mortality where at least
one specic drug category is identied on a death certicate, although I note that the main results are not sensitive to these
adjustments.
  17 Estimates   across all columns in Tables 2 and 3 are insensitive to this omission. Reported magnitudes are more conservative
when using this approach.




                                                                  8
agencies that cover 95 percent of the US population. I focus on the UCR county-level dataset, comprised only


of reported crimes that ended in arrest. In particular, I limit my analysis to drug-related arrests, including


sale or manufacturing of opium and drug possession.


   Using data in conjunction with population counts from the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance,


Epidemiology, and End Results Program (SEER), I construct rates of HIV diagnoses and all drug-related


outcome variables for my analysis. I additionally include population counts from SEER to construct county-


level measures of demographics, including the fraction of the county population that are black and the fraction


Hispanic. To control for economic conditions over time, including those related to economic despair, I use


data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics on county-level unemployment rates and poverty rates. Finally,


I construct several policy indicator variables using data from Meara, Horwitz, Powell, McClelland, Zhou,


O'Malley, and Morden (2016) to help capture the broader policy environment surrounding opioid access in


a given state and year. Specically, these policy controls are state-by-year indicator variables that account


for opioid prescription limits, prescription drug monitoring programs, and other requirements to prevent


illicit opioid-seeking behavior, including tamper resistant prescription forms, ID requirements, pharmacist


verication, and laws to prevent doctor shopping". I also control for good Samaritan laws, which legally


protect individuals while they are assisting others in danger, paraphernalia laws, in which a state bans


drug paraphernalia with no exceptions related to syringes or SEPs, using data from the LawAtlas Policy


Surveillance Program, and Naloxone Access Laws, using information on state policy changes from Doleac


and Mukherjee (2018).


   Summary statistics for variables used in the county-level analysis are shown in Table 1. In Column 1,


I display means for counties that experienced SEP openings from 20092016 (i.e. treated counties), and in


Column 2 I display means for counties without SEPs (i.e. comparison counties). Means for all HIV cases,


opioid-related deaths and hospitalization are all larger for the treatment counties; however drug-related crime


is lower in these areas, suggesting that SEPs are more likely to exist in areas with more drug use   and   more


legal leniency.




3.2 Identication Strategies
My primary approach for estimating the eects of SEPs is a dynamic dierence-in-dierences design that


compares counties with a SEP opening from 20092016 to other US counties without a SEP, although below I


provide evidence that my results are robust to various other comparison groups. The identifying assumption


underlying this approach is that changes in health and crime outcomes in the comparison counties provide


a good counterfactual for the changes that would have been observed in the treated counties in the absence




                                                      9
of the SEP.


   In particular, the main results are based on OLS models of the following form:




                                 yct = c + t + Xct + SEPct + sst + Cc  t + uct                                  (1)




where    yct   is the HIV rate, drug- or opioid-related mortality rate, or crime rate in a county     c   in year   t,

SEPc,t-k       is an indicator variable that takes a value of one for counties with a SEP opening from 20092016


during and after the rst SEP opening and zero otherwise,          c   are county xed eects to control for any


systematic, time-invariant dierences across counties,     t   are year xed eects to control for shocks to health


and crime outcomes that are common to all counties in a year, and      Xct   can include time-varying county-level


economic variables, county-level demographic controls, and state-level policy controls. These controls help


address the possibility that the opening of a SEP and my outcomes of interest are related to local economic


conditions and/or state-level initiatives that may aect the supply or demand of opioids. Additionally,          sst

represents state-by-year interaction terms to account for aggregate time-varying shocks, like changes in the


national drug policy, as well as state-specic shocks, including state funding for drug-related initiatives,


Medicaid generosity, or state-level strategies for law enforcement. To more directly account for the concern


that dierences in the pre-existing trends between counties with SEPs and those without SEPs might bias


the estimations derived from the above equation, in some specications I also include county-specic linear


time trends,     Cc  t.   All county-level analyses allow errors to be correlated within counties over time when


constructing standard-error estimates.


   Importantly, I include only counties that have an opening between 20092016 in the treatment group, as


a way to ensure that all treated counties contain at least one year of pre-period data to test for diverging pre-


trends. In some specications, I additionally show results from OLS models that include indicator variables


for treated counties prior to the SEP opening. I do so in an eort to verify that mortality rates and HIV


rates did not deviate from expected levels relative to other US counties with SEPs in the years before the


clinic opening, which would otherwise cast doubt on the notion that the latter provide a good comparison


group.


   Some outcome variables, such as opioid-related emergency room visit rates and in-patient stay rates, are


only available at the state level. Therefore, when analyzing these outcomes, I estimate analogues to Equation


1, collapsing my dataset to a state-by-year panel. In doing so, I dene the treatment year to be the year in


which the rst SEP opens during the sample period, and compare changes in hospitalization outcomes in


states with a SEP opening to changes in hospitalization outcomes in other US states.


   Given the discrete nature of HIV cases and overdose deaths, and because I sometimes have county-year




                                                         10
cells with zeroes, I additionally show estimates from a Poisson model, as well as models that convert outcome

                                                                        18
variables using an Inverse Hyperbolic Sine transformation.                   I also present weighted-least squares estimates


to further consider how these eects vary by population size. Moreover, I show results from models that


partial out pre-treatment trends from the full panel, in an eort to construct outcome variables that are


robust to county-specic linear trends while avoiding weighting issues present in some dynamic dierence-


in-dierences model (Borusyak and Jaravel, 2017).


   I also present estimates which allow the estimated eects to vary across years with a set of indicator


variables rather than considering the coecient on a single post-treatment" indicator for three main reasons.


First, the nature of disease and addiction would suggest that any eect on the spread of HIV and/or mortality


could appear some time after the program's implementation.                     Second, I may expect that as a SEP gains


clients and notoriety over time, eects accumulate as drug users continue to use SEPs and share fewer


needles, leading to both a lower propensity for disease to spread and fewer individuals that have contracted


the disease. Lagged indicator variables therefore will allow us to trace the dynamic pattern of the spread of


illness and drug-related overdoses as a result of the opening of a SEP. Third, I estimate models that include


county-specic linear time trends.             Since estimating a time-varying treatment eect implies an eect on


trends, by allowing the estimated eects to vary over time in a non-parametric fashion, I attempt to mitigate


bias from overcontrolling," as suggested by Wolfers (2006). Finally, I also present event-study gures for


eects on mortality rates using additional years of pre-period data to better inform these estimates and


provide support for the notion that including county-specic trends is reasonable in this setting.




4 Main Results
4.1 HIV Diagnoses
To show the eects of SEP openings on HIV rates, I rst present graphical analyses that correspond to the


preferred dierence-in-dierences identication strategy. Figure 3 plots the dierence-in-dierences coe-


cient estimates and their corresponding 95% condence intervals from Equation 1, comparing HIV rates in


counties with a SEP opening to other US counties without a SEP. Since every treated county has at least one


year of data before the SEP opening in my sample, I estimate eects relative to the year before treatment,


t = -1.    Points left of the vertical line indicate the dierences in treatment and control counties prior to the


introduction of a SEP. Notably, these estimates are statistically indistinguishable from zero, providing some


evidence to support the notion that trends in HIV rates were not diverging in the years before treatment,

 18 This
                                                               
           transformation takes on the form   sinh-1
                                                  z = ln(z +      1 + z2 )




                                                               11
i.e. that counties without SEPs provide a good counterfactual for counties with SEP openings. Figure 3 also


provides initial evidence that the HIV rate in counties with SEP openings decreased relative to other counties

                                                                                                                   19
following an opening, although lagged estimates from the preferred specication are fairly imprecise.


    In Table 2, I provide model-based estimates from Equation 1. Column 1 shows the estimated eects from


a baseline model which controls for year and county xed eects. Estimates indicate that the introduction


of a SEP reduced HIV diagnoses rates by 12.7 percent, corresponding to approximately 1 fewer HIV case


per county per year, on average.


    In Column 2, I present estimates after adding demographic and economic controls. Estimates are sta-


tistically similar to the ones in Column 1, and indicate a reduction of 11.2 percent.                   Column 3 addresses


the fact that other state-level policies aecting access to opioid prescriptions and the legal climate of drug


paraphernalia changed during the sample period, 20082016, which could bias the results. To account for


these changes, I control for time-varying indicator variables for states with prescription limits, tamper re-


sistant prescription forms, ID requirements, prescription drug monitoring programs, good Samaritan laws,


paraphernalia laws, and other physician requirements, including required verication, and exams.                     These


estimates are smaller than those in Column 1, implying that states with higher HIV rates are more likely to


implement opioid-related policies. Due to the fact that state-level initiatives appear relevant in this context,


in Column 4 I include state-by-year xed eects to control for shocks common to areas within a state. Esti-


mates are similar to those reported in Columns 23 and indicate a statistically insignicant decrease of 8.5


percent.


    Columns 5 and 6 include county-specic linear time trends that account for pre-existing trends in HIV


rates. These trends may be especially important to account for, if, for example, treated counties have dierent


outcomes levels pre-adoption and are following a dierent trajectory than comparison counties prior to SEP


adoption. Estimates in Columns 5 and 6 are smaller in magnitude than those in Columns 14. However, I


note that the estimated eect in Column 5 is statistically similar to that in Column 1, and, based on these


estimates, I cannot rule out reductions in HIV rates smaller than 18.1 percent. Finally, Column 6 presents


estimates controlling for a one-year leading indicator variable to more formally address the idea that the


trends in HIV rates in treated and comparison counties are not diverging in the year prior to the SEP


opening. Indeed, the estimate for the lead is statistically insignicant, providing some additional support


for the identication assumption.


    I note that although the average eects, reported in Table 2 are statistically insignicant, these eects


mask the lagged eects shown in Figure 3specically that HIV rates appear to dierentially fall in treated

 19 For   a gure of dierence-in-dierences estimates using a longer panel of pre-period data, comparing counties with SEP
openings from 20092016 to those without SEPs, see Figure A4. I note that since HIV data from the CDC and many state
agencies is not available prior to 2008, any estimates on HIV diagnoses should be taken with caution.




                                                             12
counties over time. Therefore, these estimates provide weak evidence that SEPs are successful in reducing


the spread of bloodborne illness due to syringe sharing. Below, I present estimates for various subgroups of


counties to show that these eects are not identical across geographies or types of counties.


   Importantly, in my above analysis, I provide estimates for HIV diagnoses based on CDC data and data


from state and local governments. One main limitation of these data is that while drug overdoses have been


increasing and HIV cases related to injection drug use has been decreasing (e.g. Figure 2), the county-level


data available for HIV diagnoses does not distinguish by cause of infection. Because of this, the causal eect


of the opening of an SEP on the rate of new HIV cases may be dicult to isolate in areas where sexual


transmission of HIV accounts for the majority of new cases. Moreover, the opening of a SEP may result in


more individuals getting tested for HIV. Nonetheless, the main estimates presented in Column 5 indicate


that SEPs may prevent approximately 6.1 percent of HIV cases reported by injection drug users. At the


upper bound, these estimates imply that SEPs could reduce all cases reported by injection drug users, or


over 10 percent of all HIV cases. Although this estimate seems large, the nature and spread of disease paired


with potential externalities of removing used needles from the street and limiting the number of HIV-positive


sexual partners could have compounding eects. At the very least, SEPs do not seem to results in additional


HIV diagnoses.




4.2 Drug-Related Mortality
The evidence presented above indicates that SEPs achieve their intended goal by preventing the spread


of bloodborne illness. If SEPs provide also drug counseling and resources for injection drug users to seek


treatment, such programs could discourage drug use and facilitate recovery.        However, three arguments


support the notion that SEPs simultaneously create adverse eects, leading to higher death rates from


overdose. First, programs distribute free supplies, including needles, sharps containers, and personal hygiene


items, which lowers the expected cost of using injection drugs. Second, SEPs provide a safe space to interact


with other users, increasing networking opportunities and reducing stigma. Third, communities that build


a SEP may attract nearby drug users and/or signal that they also support more police leniency for drug


users, lowering the legal risk of using opioids. Below, I test to what extent opening a SEP aects drug- and


opioid-related mortality and present evidence consistent with the presence of moral hazard.


   I rst present a graphical analysis of the eects of SEPs on drug- and opioid-related mortality over


time. Figure 4 plots the dierence-in-dierences coecient estimates from Equation 1, comparing changes


in mortality in counties with a SEP opening to changes in mortality in counties without a SEP. Prior to


the introduction of a SEP, estimates are all statistically similar to zero, indicating that mortality trends in




                                                      13
each group were not diverging prior to the program opening. In the rst three years of the SEP, estimates


indicate a 9.118.8 percent increase in drug-related mortality and a 23.042.1 percent increase in opioid-


related mortality, with eects increasing over time.


    In Table 3, I display point estimates from Equation 1 for drug-related mortality, opioid-related mortality,


and illicit opioid-related mortality, which specically includes heroin- and synthetic opioid-related deaths.


Importantly, drug-related mortality includes all opioid-related mortality as well as other types of drug-related


deaths, although opioid-related deaths account for over 60 percent of this category. Opioid-related mortality


is further dened using T-codes," or cause-of-death codes T40.0-40.4 and T40.6, which are commonly used


to dene opioid-related deaths.         These codes include heroin and fentanyl deaths as well as misdoses from


prescription opioids.     However, since SEPs are targeted towards injection drug users, and nearly all SEP


clients report using heroin and/or fentanyl, I also present estimates for illicit opioid-related mortality, which


includes heroin-related mortality (T40.1) and synthetic opioid-related mortality (T40.4), which I consider as


a measure of fentanyl-related deaths.


    Across Columns 15, estimates are consistent and indicate that SEPs increase drug-related mortality


by 12.814.6 percent, corresponding to approximately 3 more drug-related deaths per county per year,


on average, or 5,500 additional cases across the US. These eects are largely a result of increases in opioid-


related, and, specically, illicit opioid-related mortality. In particular, I nd that SEPs increase opioid-related


mortality by 25.4 percent, or about 3 more cases per county per year. Estimates for illicit opioid-related

                                                                                                                             20 , 21
mortality are even larger, and indicate an increase of 46.2 percent, driven by fentanyl-related deaths.


For all outcomes, mortality rates in comparison counties appear to be tracking those in counties with SEP


openings in the year prior to the opening (Column 6).


    These eects correspond to nearly 2.5 additional fentanyl-related deaths per county over the 07 years


following a SEP opening, providing support for two stark conclusions: (i) SEPs lead to greater risk of opioid


misuse and overdose and/or (ii) the increase in mortality rate among injection drug users simultaneously


reduces the probability that these users will spread HIV through needle sharing in the future. In Section 5


I present some evidence that eects on opioid-related mortality are concentrated in dierent areas than the


eects on HIV rates, suggesting that the former is more likely to be driving the results than the latter.

  20 Heroin-related deaths are responsible for approximately 20 percent of the eect shown    for illicit opioid-related mortality.
  21 In Figure A5 I further explore eects of SEPs on other drug-related mortality rates.     Deaths due to methadone, a pain
reliever and drug commonly used to treat opioid dependence, are relatively unresponsive to SEP openings, and may even fall
slightly. However, I nd that SEPs lead to large and increasing mortality rates for both fentanyl and cocaine. While eects on
synthetic opioids are expected, given the ndings reported above for illicit opioid-related mortality, eects on cocaine-related
mortality may be more surprising. However, an increasing public health issue is the recent mixing of cocaine and fentanyl, and
increases in injections of both drugs (Lopez, 2018). Over half of cocaine deaths attributable to drugs also have opioids in their
system (53.9 percent).




                                                               14
4.3 Emergency Room Visits and In-Patient Stays
Despite the fact that data on drug-related mortality is able to capture one measure of how much SEPs


can aect opioid overdose, the above eects may not be picking up drug                 usage   if users are injecting more


frequently but not at fatal doses. To explore the more comprehensive eects of SEPs on drug use, I use data


on drug-related emergency room visits and in-patient stays from the HCUP dataset. One limitation of these


publicly available data are that they are only available at the state level, which does not allow for a more

                                      22
granular, county-level analysis.


   Using the dierence-in-dierences approach described above, in this state-level analysis I assign the year


of treatment to the rst SEP clinic opening year between 20092016 in a given state. In Figure 5 and Table


4, I provide estimates showing the eects of the opening of a SEP in a state on the rate of opioid-related


emergency department (ED) admissions and in-patient stays. ED visits are likely to serve as a proxy for drug


use, as these data pick up drug-related overdoses that are easily reversed and result in less than a 24-hour


stay. In-patient data, on the other hand, reect more high-risk cases requiring the care of a doctor, and may


more clearly track patients with a longer history of drug abuse.


   Across Table 4 Columns 13 estimates mirror those of Figure 5 and indicate that the introduction of a


SEP increases drug-related emergency room admission and in-patient stays by approximately 8.9 percent


and 3.4 percent, respectively, although estimates in Column 3 are statistically insignicant at conventional


levels. However, when separately estimating lagged eects, like those shown in Figure 5, I estimate that SEPs


increase emergency room admissions by 18.8 percent, on average, with eects driven by the second through


fourth years, corresponding to about 1,600 additional ED visits per state annually, or approximately 30 visits

              23
per county.        Similar to the measured eects for mortality, eects for ED visits grow over time. Similarly,


estimates in Columns 13 indicate an increase in opioid-related hospital stays ranging from 4.613.3 percent,


although estimates in Columns 3 and 4 are positive and statistically insignicant. Given that 12.1 percent


of ED admits die before or while receiving treatment, these estimates imply an additional 3.6 drug-related


deaths per county, which is similar to the magnitudes reported above.


   In other words, these ndings suggest that SEPs increase emergency visits at ten times the rate that


they increase opioid-related mortality. To the extent that SEPs connect users to life-saving technology, such


as naloxone, or introduce ways to recognize overdose and encourage calling for help, then any increase in


emergency room visits may represent a reduction in opioid-related deaths that would have occurred otherwise.


Therefore, my results provide some evidence that SEPs help the marginal client from fatal overdose, but

 22 HCUP     does not contain data on every state. In particular, I drop Colorado, Louisiana, Michigan, New Mexico, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, Texas, Washington, and West Virginia for this analysis.
 23 This   is based on the fact that, on average, a given state has 52 counties.




                                                                15
are unable to reverse addiction. Indeed, estimates by hospital condition, shown in Figure A6 are consistent


with this notion. At-home drug-related mortality rates and mortality rates for those reaching the ER did


not experience a large increase after a SEP opening.


    Nonetheless, eects are driven by sharp increases in rates of individuals in in-patient care and those


reaching the hospital dead on arrival. Taken together, these ndings suggest that while SEPs are successful


in reducing disease, lowering the cost of obtaining clean needles and other supplies unintentionally encourages


more drug use, leading to more opioid-related overdoses.               While many of these overdoses can be reversed


in the ER, SEPs do little to prevent mortality rates from rising in subsequent years. These eects become


more pronounced over time, indicating that any future cost-benet analyses of SEPs should consider eects


at least 24 years after the introduction of the program.




5 Subgroup Analysis
Given the abundance of anecdotal and empirical evidence that the opioid crisis has largely aected younger


white males in rural and low-income areas, one would reasonably expect the eects of SEPs to be largest


in counties with small, mostly white populations and those with a relatively large share of low-income


individuals. In the following section, I explore how SEP openings dierentially aected groups across counties


to provide clarity on the heterogenous eects of SEPs.




5.1 Eects Across Counties
In Table 5, I consider to what extent SEPs aect various county subgroups. In Column 1, I replicate estimates


from my preferred specication for a baseline comparison. In Columns 25 I split the sample by urbanicity


and poverty levels.


    When analyzing eects by urban and rural counties with SEPs in Table 5 Columns 23, I nd a striking


resulteects for HIV rates and opioid-related mortality rates are concentrated in rural counties. One reason


for this may be that rural areas, which are well-known to be dierentially aected by the recent opioid crisis,

                                                                                                24
have relatively little access to HIV testing as well as substance abuse treatment.                   In particular, distance


to a hospital and/or other facilities that can revive individuals when overdosing may be a major barrier in


preventing fatal overdoses. To get a better sense of which counties may be driving this eect, I revisit and


expand on this nding in the next section.


    In Columns 4 and 5 I separately estimate eects on low- and high-poverty counties. I dene high-poverty

  24 The   average number of substance abuse treatment facilities in large urban, medium/small urban and rural counties is 122
and 20, respectively. By comparison, rural areas have only 2 facilities, on average.




                                                               16
counties as those having more than the county-level median poverty rate and dene low-poverty counties

                                                   25
as those having rates below this median.                Estimates for opioid-related mortality rates are statistically


signicant only for high-poverty areas, and indicate that SEPs increase opioid-related mortality rates by 39.5

                                                                                                                        26
percent, implying that SEPs are more likely to aect those that have nancial barriers to treatment.                           While


statistically insignicant, reductions in HIV appear to be concentrated in low-poverty counties, indicating


that eects for these two health outcomes may be driven by dierent areas adopting SEPs.




5.2 Eects Across US Region
Due to the fact that the opioid crisis has not aected all states and US regions uniformly, I now turn to a

                                                                     27
discussion on how SEPs aect health outcomes by region.                    In Table 6 I separately analyze eects of SEPs

                                                                                      28
on HIV rates and opioid-related mortality rates by US Census regions.                      Additionally, I show estimates from


a separate, non-mutually exclusive region, which includes the top ten states most aected by the crisis, as

                          29
dened by the CDC.


    Due to sample size, some estimates are less precise than the main ndings in Tables 2 and 3. Although


statistically insignicant, reductions in HIV rates are most concentrated in Midwest and Western counties.


Increases in opioid-related mortality rates are largest in Southern counties as well as those counties in top

                                                                                                30
10" states in Appalachia and the eastern seaboard most aected by the crisis.


    Taken with the results in Table 5, these ndings imply that SEPs have dierential eects that largely


depend on the size of the population and area of the country in which they are located. Next, I discuss this


implication in greater detail and present eects across county population. Importantly, these results have


signicant policy implications given that state and local policies may play a role in shaping the eectiveness


of SEPs, and one size ts all" federal policies could have diering eects across geographies.




5.3 Eects Across Age, Race, and Gender
Thus far I have shown that the introduction of a SEP has the potential to reduce the spread of bloodborne


illness while generating unintended consequences.              However, I note that average eects may be masking

  25 Specically, the median poverty rate across counties with SEPs is 16.1.
  26 Figure A7 presents the visual results of this analysis, displaying estimates   for rural counties, urban counties, low-poverty
counties and high-poverty counties separately.
  27 See Ruhm (2017) for a more thorough discussion on geographical variation in drug- and opioid-related mortality.
  28 Notably, for this analysis, I have 17 treated counties in the Midwest, 25 in the South, 13 in the Northeast, and 24     in the
West. See    https://www.census.gov/geo/reference/webatlas/regions.html        for a list of states in each region.
  29 In   order of severity, these states are West Virginia, Ohio, Pennsylvania, District of Columbia, New Hampshire, Kentucky,
Maine, Connecticut, Delaware, and Massachusetts.
  30 I   note that the eects here may be driven by the Census denition of which states are included in the South" census
denition.     Generally, eects are large in states in the Midwest/Appalachian region most aected by the crisis, including
Kentucky, Indiana, Ohio and West Virginia.       However, no one state is solely responsible for the ndings.     Estimates do not
meaningfully change when omitting states one-by-one from the analysis.




                                                               17
eects that dier by demographics, as motivated by Figure 2.          Below, I explore eects by age, race, and


gender in an attempt to understand who is most likely to be aected by SEPs.


   In Table 7, I rst present estimates on the eects of SEPs on opioid-related mortality for individuals in


their 20s, 30s, 40s, and 50s, respectively. Estimates are driven by older individuals aged 5059 and indicate


a 17.3 percent increase in opioid-related mortality. I nd no evidence that SEPs aect mortality rates for


those in their 20s, potentially due to the fact that the average SEP client is 38 years old, and/or that younger


individuals are less likely to die from a drug overdose. Estimates for those in their 30s are relatively large


but statistically insignicant at conventional levels.


   Table 7 additionally shows eects separate by race and gender. Eects are largest for white individuals,


which is well-known to be a group most aected by the opioid crisis (Hollingsworth, Ruhm, and Simon,


2017; Case and Deaton, 2017). Similar to my main results, estimates indicate an increase in opioid-related


mortality rates for white individuals by 12.7 percent, which corresponds to nearly 3,500 additional deaths


per year across the US. Eects for black individuals are similarly large, but do not increase until 23 years


after the SEP opening.


   The last two columns of Table 7 display eects by gender. Perhaps unsurprisingly, estimates are driven


by male opioid-related mortality, which has increased at faster rates during the opioid crisis than female


opioid-related mortality.


   Moreover, in Table 8 I also display state-level estimates for hospital visits by gender and age subgroups.


Individual-age data is not provided by HCUP; therefore, I use available pre-determined age categories to


analyze ED and in-patient stay rates. When observing dierences across age, eects are 23 times larger for


individuals aged 2544, with no changes in ED visit rates for those aged 4564. Interestingly, estimates for


males are statistically similar to the average eect, and indicate that the hospitalization results are   not solely
driven by male risky behavior. This could suggest that while men and women visit SEPs at similar frequency,


females are less likely to die of a fatal overdose, but more likely to visit the hospital for an opioid-related


complication.




6 Eects on Drug-Related Crime
If SEPs unintentionally encourage drug usage, as suggested by the aforementioned ndings, then one would


expect drug-related crime to also increase. Moreover, SEPs may result in areas of a community that draw


injection drug users together, creating a hot spot" for police to patrol, leading to more arrests.         On the


other hand, if the introduction of a SEP also signies increasing attitudes of legal leniency towards opioid


use, one would expect arrests for drug-related crimes to decrease after a SEP opening. Indeed, in a survey




                                                        18
of active SEPs, 82 percent reported very good" or somewhat good" relationships with law enforcement in


2013, suggesting that local police do not generally attempt to locate near and/or harass SEP clients. In this


section, I analyze eects on drug arrests including possession and sales to get a sense of how drug use and/or


local attitudes towards drug use respond to the opening of a SEP.


   In Figure 6 and Table 9, I show estimates for various drug-related crimes. Total Drug Crime Rate" refers


to a more comprehensive measure of drug crime including possession, sale, and/or manufacturing of drugs of


any kind. Across Columns 16, I present evidence that the introduction of a SEP has no eect on total drug


crime arrests, on average. However, I present some evidence that opioid-related possession arrests increase


by 12.728.0 percent after the opening of a SEP. When controlling for the year prior to adoption, as in Figure


6, estimates are signicant one year after the initial year of the program and increase over time, following


trends in drug-related health outcomes reported in the previous section. Notably, I nd weak evidence of a


reduction in arrests for drug sales, which could indicate that as drug use increases, police target users rather


than sellers due to time and/or resource constraints.


   These ndings suggest that SEPs do not result in greater leniency for drug users. While it is possible


that SEPs subsequently increase police monitoring due to heightened saliency of local public health issues,


my ndings on drug-related mortality and hospital admissions indicate that opioid use increases after a SEP


opening, and the proportion of arrests for drug possession also rises. Below, I show additional evidence that


this increase in drug-related crime is not mirrored by an increase in other criminal or risk-taking behavior,


implying that these eects are not simply a byproduct of compositional changes in population.




7 Robustness
The main threat to the validity of the empirical strategy is the possibility that concurrent policy changes


and/or shocks to opioid demand or availability is instead responsible for increases in opioid-related mortality.


Although changing demographics, economic conditions, and state restrictions should be captured by controls


included in the main specication, the degree to which other unobservable changes in county-level opioid use


happen at the same time as SEP openings (but not beforehand) is untestable. To better address the validity


of the identication strategy, I examine to what extent the main results depend on functional form, the


inclusion of various state-level health-related policies, or the denition and inclusion of comparison counties.


I additionally provide placebo estimates as a way to check whether the increase in opioid-related mortality


is due to changes in risky behavior or population composition.


   First, I test how robust my analyses are to functional form. To do so, I provide weighted least squares


and Poisson estimates in Table 10. Notably, these alternative estimates are generally less precise and smaller




                                                        19
                                                                                                                              31
in magnitude than the OLS estimates. Moreover, for HIV rates, WLS and Poisson estimates are positive.


As described in Solon, Haider, and Wooldridge (2015), this pattern can reect circumstances in which there


are relatively large eects for counties which maintain small populations. Given that I show large eects for


HIV and opioid-related mortality rates in rural counties in Table 5, these estimates remain consistent with


my previous ndings.


    I further explore this heterogeneity in population size directly Table 11, which displays estimates for a


more binary measure of population sizecounties with less/more than 200,000 people, and in Figure A8,

                                                                                                    32
which presents estimates by a more continuous measure of county-level population.                        Mirroring ndings in


Table 5 Columns 2 and 3, I note that these estimates do provide some suggestive evidence that estimates


for mortality are comparatively large for less-populated counties, which may demonstrate why the OLS


estimates are relatively large in magnitude as compared to the WLS estimates.                       Specically, Figure A8,


which provides the main estimates by county population, shows that estimates for opioid-related mortality


rates are positive and statistically signicant across counties with populations ranging from 01,000,000,


while eects for HIV rates are similar across county size, but are larger and more precise when estimating


eects for counties with 100,000-200,000 individuals. Figure A9, which replicates these estimates, weighting


them by county population, indicates similar patterns, providing additional support for the idea that eects

                                                           33
are concentrated in less densely populated areas.


    Furthermore, in Figure A10, I show estimates of the eect of SEP openings on rates of HIV diagnoses


and drug- and opioid-related mortality, omitting the inclusion of county-specic linear time trends. Without


these controls, eects are even more immediate and dramatic, and indicate a large decrease in HIV rates


over time as well as an increase in drug-related mortality rates in the years following an opening. Therefore,


this gives some indication that the main results present a more conservative estimate of the eects of SEP


openings in a given county. For reasons described in Section 3.2, I also provide lagged estimates for all main


health and crime outcomes and their averages in Table A3 to fully account for the time-varying treatment


eects, suggested by (Wolfers, 2006). Estimates are similar in magnitude to the main results and increase


over time, as shown in Figures 36.


    Second, since the opening of a SEP is not random, in my preferred specications I account for a number


of demographic, economic, and policy variables that are likely correlated with a county's decision to initiate

  31 For   the Poisson specication when estimating HIV rates, it's worth noting that the number of counties included in the
sample falls due to the fact that many counties experience no HIV diagnoses in a given year.         This does not occur when
estimating drug-related overdoses, as I drop counties that have zero drug-related mortality cases for the main analysis.
  32 I   choose this cuto for two reasons. First, the median population is 191,972 and second, in Table 5 I nd larger eects for
mortality in rural areas.
  33 I   also show estimates from an OLS model which estimates eects on the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of HIV
diagnoses and opioid-related deaths in Table A2.      Estimates for HIV rates are similar to those in Table 2.     Estimates for
opioid-related mortality rates are positive and range from 2.410.4 percent, but are statistically insignicant across all columns,
further supporting the idea that rural counties with large increases in mortality may be driving the main results.




                                                                20
a needle exchange program.           However, if the addition of these time-varying determinants of HIV rates


and mortality rates meaningfully change the main ndings, this would suggest that health outcomes in


the treatment and comparison groups might have diverged even in the absence of a SEP. To show that


these factors are orthogonal to the within-county variation in SEP openings, in Table A4 I estimate the


eects of SEP openings on HIV rates and opioid-related mortality rates, adding in controls for relevant state


legal restrictions and drug-related laws in separate specications. Importantly, estimates are similar across

                                                                                                        34
Columns 210, suggesting that no particular policy changes are driving the main results.


   Additionally, I investigate how much the eects of SEPs vary with state-level policies that aect access


to opioid prescriptions and drug treatment facilities. In Table A5, I separately estimate the eects for states


that did and did not expand Medicaid eligibility by 2015, according to Simon, Soni, and Cawley (2017). It


is unclear whether Medicaid would help to reduce opioid misuse or exacerbate it. For example, expansions


Medicaid eligibility increase access to drug treatment facilities for low-income individuals by eliminating


nancial barriers, which we would expect to reduce opioid-related overdoses. However, Medicaid could also


increase opioid-related mortality via increased access to low-cost prescription opioids. In Table A5, I nd


support for the latter argument. Notably, eects are larger in Medicaid expansion states for both drug- and


opioid-related mortality, although I also note that nearly all treated counties (81%) are located in Medicaid


expansion states.


   Third, I consider estimates based on alternative dierence-in-dierences identication strategies to explore


the extent to which comparing eects across counties with SEPs yields larger (or smaller) estimates. Table 12


presents estimates based on models using various comparison groups. In Column 1, I provide my main results


shown in Table 2 Column 6 for comparison. Importantly, I include estimates for both the average eect and


a one-year leading indicator variable, to provide some support for the notion that using other comparison

                                                                          35
groups doesn't yield a model that is likely to be misspecied.                  In Columns 25 I compare counties with


SEP openings between 20092016 to other US counties with an existing SEP (i.e. a SEP built before 2009),


all other US counties, all counties in states that permit SEPs, and counties bordering the dened treated


counties, respectively. Indeed, the coecient estimates for both outcome variables are similar to the baseline


results. Moreover, estimates for opioid-related mortality rates are similarly positive and range from 15.4-28.4


percent across specications. Estimates for the one-year lead is statistically insignicant across all columns.


   Fourth, because dierent types of counties may have adopted SEPs at dierent times, I similarly test the

 34 Data    on state policy variables, including laws governing patients, prescribers, or dispensing pharmacists that involve
quantitative prescription limits, patient identication requirements, requirements with respect to physician examination or
pharmacist verication, doctor-shopping restrictions, PDMPs, requirements related to tamper-resistant prescription forms, and
pain-clinic regulations is from Meara, Horwitz, Powell, McClelland, Zhou, O'Malley, and Morden (2016). Data on Naloxone
access laws is from Doleac and Mukherjee (2018).
 35 I   additionally present gures with lagged estimates for the two most relevant comparison groups in Figure A11.




                                                              21
extent to which earlier adopters dier from later adopters and present these estimates in Table A6. Column


1 displays the baseline results, while Columns 2 and 3 separately show eects for counties with SEP openings


between 20092012 and 20132016 separately. Splitting the sample yields less precise estimates; however,


for both HIV rates and opioid-related mortality rates, eects are driven by the later adopters. This suggests


that counties that opened SEPs at the height of the opioid crisis during the availability of fentanyl may have


had either more clients and/or clients using injection drugs at higher frequencies or more fatal doses.


    Fifth, because one may be concerned that the eects I report for opioid-related mortality may be a result


of population composition changes due to a SEP opening, in Figure 7 I investigate whether the treatment


counties simultaneously experience increases in mortality rates from other causes. In particular, I analyze


whether the introduction of a SEP in a county aects vehicle-related and/or alcohol-related mortality, or

                       36
total mortality.            I nd no statistically signicant eects of SEP openings on any of these other mortality


rates, implying that SEPs more directly aect outcomes related to drug use.


    In this same vein, I have also considered that my ndings may simply be driven by overall improvements


in healthy living which coincide with the opening of a SEP. To test this hypothesis, in Table A7 I additionally


analyze whether SEPs aect another sexually transmitted infections (STIs) that is not contracted through

                                                                                                                             37
needle sharing: chlamydia.           I nd no that rates of chlamydia decrease after the introduction of a SEP.


These ndings provide weak evidence that SEPs do not result in individuals engaging in more risky sexual

             38 , 39
behavior.


    Finally, in Table A8 I show estimates from a model analogous to Equation 1 that partials out pre-


treatment trends, as suggested by Goodman-Bacon (2018). To do so, I calculate residuals from a regression


of demeaned variables for all counties and all years and then estimate Equation 1 using these residualized


variables to avoid any bias resulting from estimating group specic trends o the full set of data. Estimates


for HIV rates are similar across all columns and indicate statistically signicant reductions ranging from 17.3


19.3 percent. These ndings are larger in magnitude than the main results presented in Table 2, suggesting


that trends in counties with SEPs followed a dierent trajectory in after the introduction of a new program.


Alternatively, mortality estimates are similar to the main results, and indicate an 20.5 percent increase in


opioid-related mortality.

  36 I   acknowledge that both could be aected by increases in injection drug use. However, since these outcomes rank in the
top 10 reasons for death in the United States, and are more likely to pick up compositional changes for adults aged 1860, or
changes in risky behavior.
  37 Similarly, SEP openings have no aect on gonorrhea rates.
  38 Ideally, this analysis would also be able to speak to how SEPs   aect rates of hepatitis C, another bloodborne illness that
can be contracted through needle sharing. However, county-level data for hepatitis C are unavailable. When I estimate how
SEPs aect state-level diagnoses of hepatitis C, estimates on the eects of SEPs on hepatitis C rates are small and close to zero,
and I can rule out reductions greater than 0.03 percent. This is consistent with previous work suggesting that SEPs mostly
address the spread of disease through the channel of reducing HIV and are ineective at reducing hepatitis C (Pollack, 2001).
  39 I   additionally nd no eects of SEP openings on county-level HIV prevalence, indicating that any reduction in bloodborne
illness by SEPs yields small aggregate eects.




                                                              22
8 Conclusion
In this paper, I document the eects of expanding access to clean needles and opioid-related counseling


through syringe exchange programs. Using county-level data on HIV cases, drug-related mortality, hospital-


izations, and drug-related crimes, I compare health outcomes in counties that experienced a SEP opening


from 20092016 to counties without a SEP. Consistent with the previous literature, I nd that syringe ex-


change programs reduce HIV diagnoses by up to 18.2 percent, or nearly 2 fewer cases of HIV per county per


year. However, I present new evidence that SEPs generate unintended consequences. In particular, I nd


that a SEP opening corresponds to an average increase in drug-related mortality by 11.6 percent and opioid-


related mortality by 25.4 percent, and that these eects grow over time. Moreover, I provide some evidence


that opioid-related emergency room visits and arrests for opioid possession increase after the opening of a


SEP.


   Overall, these estimates correspond to almost 4 more drug-related deaths per county each year, or over


6,000 drug-related deaths across the US. Eects are concentrated in rural and high-poverty areas, suggesting


that low-income individuals living in areas with fewer health care resources may face larger hurdles in


obtaining drug counseling and/or substance abuse treatment.


   I note that my ndings imply that SEPs do little to reduce drug overdoses, and may even exacerbate


opioid abuse and misuse. However, the results do not suggest that SEPs are ineective at curbing addiction


for all clients. Furthermore, the stated goal of SEPs is to provide counseling and other resources for injection


drug users while ensuring the safe disposal of used needles in an eort to reduce bloodborne illness. That


being said, SEPs are successful in preventing additional HIV diagnoses, which increases total social welfare.


On the other hand, if SEPs perpetuate crime and drug use, the introduction of such programs generate large


negative externalities that reduce total social welfare.   Since HIV has increasingly become a manageable


disease with available treatment, these eects imply the increases in opioid misuse and mortality may largely


outweigh the reduction in bloodborne illness in terms of societal costs.


   Importantly, the primary goal of SEPs is to provide clean supplies to injection drug users in a safe


environment with the intent of reducing needle sharing, while drug counseling and treatment referral are


secondary services.   Given the aims of harm reduction services, it is perhaps unsurprising that SEPs are


more eective at preventing the spread of bloodborne illness than reducing opioid dependence. Given the


well-documented benets of substance abuse treatment facilities, my ndings suggest that providing funding


for these clinics and increasing access may be a more fruitful avenue for reducing drug-related mortality and


nancially motivated crimes (Swensen, 2015; Bondurant, Lindo, and Swensen, 2018). Moreover, prescription


drugs, such as Buprenorphine that reduce symptoms of opiate addiction and withdrawal, or other opiate




                                                      23
antagonists, which work in the brain to prevent opiate eects and decreases the desire to take opiate, could


be one way for SEPs to mitigate clients' opioid dependence in the future. Policymakers and the public health


community more broadly should be careful to consider all costs and benets of SEPs, including long-run


eects generated by lowering the costs of consuming injection drugs. In the wake of increased drug-related


deaths and state policies to curb this epidemic, my estimates shed new light on how local policies can aect


syringe sharing, drug overdose, and drug-related crime.   Thus, it will become increasingly important for


future research to determine the extent and scope of how expanding (or reducing) access to SEPs aects


bloodborne illness and drug use more broadly.




                                                    24
References
Bao, Y., Y. Pan, A. Taylor, S. Radakrishnan, F. Luo, H. Pincus,                    and   B. Schackman (2016): Prescription
  Drug Monitoring Programs are Associated with Sustained Reductions in Opioid Prescribing by Physi-
  cians,    Health Aairs, 35(6), 10451051.
Bondurant, S. R., J. M. Lindo,           and   I. D. Swensen (2018): Substance Abuse Treatment Centers and Local
  Crime,     Journal of Urban Economics, 104, 124133.
Borusyak, K.,     and X. Jaravel (2017):       Revisiting Event Study Designs, with an Application to the Estimation
  of the Marginal Propensity to Consume, Working paper.


Bradford, A., W. D. Bradford, A. Abraham,                  and   G. B. Adams (2018):         Association Between US State
  Medical Cannabis Laws and Opioid Prescribing in the Medicare Part D Population,                             JAMA Internal
  Medicine, 178(5), 667672.
Buchmueller, T. C.,       and C. Carey (2018):         The Eect of Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs on Opioid
  Utilization in Medicare,        American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(1), 77112.
Case, A.,   and   A. Deaton (2017): Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century, Working paper, Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity.


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2015):                     NCHHSTP Atlas, Accessed 19-November-2016 at
  http://www.cdc.gov/nchhstp/atlas/.
             (2016):        Use    of    syringe   services     programs       increases,   but   access   must   improve   for
  greater    HIV    prevention,         Accessed   31-July-2018        at    https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2016/
  p1129-HIV-syringe-services.html.
Dave, D. M., A. M. Grecu,         and H. Saer (2017):       Mandatory Access Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs
  and Prescription Drug Abuse, Working Paper 23537, National Bureau of Economic Research.


DeSimone, J. (2005): Needle Exchange Programs and Drug Injection Behavior,                         Journal of Policy Analysis
  and Management, 24(3), 559577.
Doleac, J. L.,     and   A. Mukherjee (2018):           The Moral Hazard of Lifesaving Innovations:               Naloxone Ac-
  cess, Opioid Abuse, and Crime, "Working Paper. Available at                       https://justicetechlab.github.io/
  jdoleac-website/research/Doleac_Mukherjee_Naloxone.pdf".
General Accounting Oce (1993):  Needle Exchange Programs: Research Suggests Promise as an AIDS
  Prevention Strategy, Washington DC: US Government Printing Oce.


Goodman-Bacon, A. (2018): Dierence-in-Dierences with Variation in Treatment Timing, Working Paper
  25018, National Bureau of Economic Research.


Haegerich, T., L. Paulozzi, B. Manns,            and   C. Jones (2014): What We Know, and Don't Know, About the
  Impact of State Policy and Systems-Level Interventions on Prescription Drug Overdose,                      Drug and Alcohol
  Dependence, 145, 3447.
Hollingsworth, A., C. J. Ruhm,            and   K. Simon (2017):            Macroeconomic Conditions and Opioid Abuse,
  Journal of Health Economics, 56, 222223.
Jarlais, D. C. D., V. Guardino, A. Nugent,                and   A. Solberg (2014):       The Dave Purchase Memorial 2014
  National Survey of Syringe Exchange Programs:                    Summary of Results, Discussion paper, Beth Israel
  Presentation Slides from 2014 Harm Reduction Conference.


LawAtlas (2017):          Syringe Distribution Laws, Policy Surveillance Portal, Accessed 31-August-2017 at
  lawatlas.org/datasets/syringe-policies-laws-regulating-non-retail-distribution-of-drug-parapherna.




                                                                  25
Lopez,     G.   (2018):      Why    America's   Cocaine   Problem   is   now   a   Fentanyl   Problem   Too,   Ac-
  cessed        05-July-2019    https://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2018/5/4/17307296/
                                     at
  cocaine-opioid-crisis-fentanyl-overdose.
Mallatt, J. (2017):       The Eect of Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs on Opioid Prescriptions and
  Heroin Crime Rates, Working Paper.


Meara, E., J. R. Horwitz, W. Powell, L. McClelland, W. Zhou, A. J. O'Malley,            and   N. E. Morden (2016):
  State Legal Restrictions and Prescription Opioid Use among Disabled Adults,           The New England Journal
  of Medicine, 375, 4453.
Pollack, H. A. (2001): Cost-Eectiveness of Harm Reduction in Preventing Hepatitis C among Injection
  Drug Users,     Medical Decision Making, 21, 357367.
Rees, D. I., J. J. Sabia, L. M. Argys, J. Latshaw,     and D. Dave (2017):   With a Little Help from My Friends:
  The Eects of Naloxone Access and Good Samaritan Laws on Opioid-Related Deaths, Working Paper.


Ruhm, C. J. (2017): Geographic Variation in Opioid and Heroin Involved Drug Poisoning Mortality Rates,
  American Journal of Preventative Medicine, 53, 745753.
Schnell, M.,    and   J. Currie (2017): Addressing the Opioid Epidemic: Is There a Role for Physician Educa-
  tion?, Working Paper 23645, National Bureau of Economic Research.


Sean Cahill and Nathan Schaefer (2009):          Syringe Exchange Programs Around the World:            The Global
  Context, Accessed 31-July-2018 at        http://www.gmhc.org/files/editor/file/gmhc_intl_seps.pdf.
Simon, K., A. Soni,       and   J. Cawley (2017):   The Impact of Health Insurance on Preventative Care and
  Health Behavior: Evidence from the First Two Years of the ACA Medicaid Expansions,              Journal of Policy
  Analysis and Management, 36, 390417.
Solon, G., S. Haider,     and J. Wooldridge (2015):   What Are We Weighting For,     Jounral of Human Resources,
  50(2), 301316.


Swensen, I. D. (2015):       Substance-Abuse Treatment and Mortality,          Journal of Public Economics,    122,
  1330.


United States Census Bureau (2016):  ACS Demographic and Housing Estimates, Accessed 09-August-2018
  at   https://factfinder.census.gov/.
U.S. Department of Justice (2015):  2015 National Drug Threat Assessment Summary, Accessed 31-July-
  2018 at   https://www.dea.gov/docs/2015%20NDTA%20Report.pdf.
Waitemata District Health Borad (2014):  Palliative Care: Opioid Conversion Guide, .


Wolfers, J. (2006): Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce? A Reconciliation and New Results,            Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 96, 18021820.
World Health Organization (2004):  Eectiveness of Sterile Needle and Syringe Programming in Reducing
  HIV/AIDS Among Injecting Drug Users, Evidence for Action Technical Papers.




                                                          26
                                                 Table 1: Summary Statistics




                                                                   Treated Counties            Comparison Counties
                                                                           (N=79)                       (N=1,491)
         County-Level Variables

         HIV and Mortality Rates
         HIV Diagnoses                                                      10.78                           5.82
         Drug-Related Mortality                                             18.85                          16.57
         Opioid-Related Mortality                                           12.34                           9.85
         Illicit Opioid-Related Mortality                                   5.35                            3.53

         Crime Rates
         Drug Arrests                                                      387.92                         377.52
         Opioid-Related Sale Arrests                                        29.94                          17.23
         Opioid-Related Possession Arrests                                  0.67                            0.38

         County Characteristics
         Population                                                        552762                         137196
         Rural                                                              0.35                            0.60
         Percent Poverty Rate                                               17.21                          15.96
         Unemployment Rate                                                  7.59                            8.10
         Percent Hispanic                                                   0.12                            0.07
         Percent Black                                                      0.12                            0.09


         State-Level Variables

         Opioid-Related Hospitalization Rates
         Emergency Department Admissions                                   172.61                         146.59
         In-Patient Hospital Visits                                        250.40                         219.14

         Policy Indicators
         Prescription Limits                                                0.97                            0.98
         Tamper-Resistant Prescription                                      0.67                            0.50
         ID Requirement                                                     0.37                            0.45
         Doctor Shopping Restrictions                                       0.29                            0.31
         Physician Exam Requirements                                        0.70                            0.77
         Pain Clinic Regulations                                            0.56                            0.15
         Pharmacist Verication                                              0.30                            0.45
         Paraphernalia Laws                                                 0.25                            0.39
         Good Samaritan Laws                                                0.40                            0.27
         Prescription Drug Monitoring Program                               0.83                            0.79
         Naloxone Laws                                                      0.30                            0.25



Notes: Data on HIV diagnoses is from the CDC NCHHSTP Atlas and 34 state agencies. Drug-related deaths are based on the National

Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), Division of Vital Statistics Mortality Files. Unemployment rates are from the BLS. State-by-year

opioid-related hopsitalizations data are from the Healthcare Cost Utilization Project (HCUP). Information on state-level policy changes

is from Meara, Horwitz, Powell, McClelland, Zhou, O'Malley, and Morden (2016), Doleac and Mukherjee (2018), and the LawAtlas

Policy Surveillance Program.   Column 1 shows the means for treated counties in the sample, i.e., counties with a syringe exchange

program opening from 20092016. Column 2 displays the means for the comparison counties, i.e., other US counties without a syringe

exchange program. Rates are calculated as cases per 100,000 individuals.




                                                                  27
                  Table 2: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on HIV Diagnoses Rates,
                Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates Using Counties Without SEPs for Comparison




                                                             (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)

          Average Eect of SEP                             -0.790*       -0.697     -0.563      -0.530     -0.038       0.277
                                                           (0.431)      (0.426)   (0.443)     (0.450)     (0.423)     (0.462)
          One-Year Lead                                                                                                0.470
                                                                                                                      (0.375)
          Mean                                              6.20         6.20       6.20        6.20        6.20       6.20
          Observations                                     14094        14094      14094       14094       14094      14094


          County and Year Fixed Eects                        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
          Demographic and Economic Controls                  No          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
          State-Level Policy Controls                        No           No        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
          State-by-Year Fixed Eects                          No           No         No         Yes         Yes         Yes
          County-Specic Linear Time Trends                   No           No         No          No         Yes         Yes


Notes: Estimates are based CDC and state agency data on HIV diagnoses counts by county for the entire United States from 20082016.

Rates are calculated as cases per 100,000 individuals. Economic control variables include the county-level poverty rate and unemploy-

ment rate, demographic controls include percent Hispanic and percent black, and state-level policy controls include whether a state

imposes quantitative prescription limit, tamper-resistant prescription forms, pain clinic regulations, patient identication requirements,

doctor shopping restrictions, requirements with respect to physician examination or pharmacist verication, prescription drug moni-

toring programs, paraphernalia laws, and good Samaritan laws. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   28
             Table 3: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on Drug-Related Mortality Rates,
               Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates Using Counties Without a SEP for Comparison




                                                         (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
     Drug-Related Mortality (X4044)
     Average Eect of SEP                              2.373**       2.442**       2.128*       2.296**       1.927*      2.953**
                                                      (1.133)       (1.123)       (1.111)       (1.101)      (0.989)      (1.468)
     One-Year Lead                                                                                                         1.529
                                                                                                                          (1.237)
     Mean                                              16.68         16.68         16.68         16.68        16.68        16.68
     Observations                                      14121         14121         14121        14121        14121        14121


     Opioid-Related Mortality (T40.040.4 and T40.6)
     Average Eect of SEP                              2.623**       2.739**      2.335**       2.472**      2.489***     2.912**
                                                      (1.084)       (1.083)       (1.062)       (1.060)      (0.917)      (1.307)
     One-Year Lead                                                                                                         0.630
                                                                                                                          (1.034)
     Mean                                               9.78            9.78        9.78         9.78         9.78         9.78
     Observations                                      14121         14121         14121        14121        14121        14121


     Illicit Opioid-Related Mortality (T40.1 and T40.4)
     Average Eect of SEP                             3.458***      3.495***      2.957***      3.046***     1.720**      2.234**
                                                      (1.033)       (1.030)       (0.999)       (0.993)      (0.747)      (0.942)
     One-Year Lead                                                                                                         0.766
                                                                                                                          (0.630)
     Mean                                               3.72            3.72        3.72         3.72         3.72         3.72
     Observations                                      14121         14121         14121        14121        14121        14121


     County and Year Fixed Eects                        Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
     Demographic and Economic Controls                   No             Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
     State-Level Policy Controls                         No             No          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
     State-by-Year Fixed Eects                           No             No          No            Yes          Yes          Yes
     County-Specic Linear Time Trends                    No             No          No            No           Yes          Yes


Notes: Estimates are based on NCHS restricted mortality les by county for the entire United States from 20082016.             Rates are

calculated as cases per 100,000 individuals. Economic control variables include the county-level poverty rate and unemployment rate,

demographic controls include percent Hispanic and percent black, and state-level policy controls include whether a state imposes

quantitative prescription limit, tamper-resistant prescription forms, pain clinic regulations, patient identication requirements, doctor

shopping restrictions, requirements with respect to physician examination or pharmacist verication, prescription drug monitoring

programs, paraphernalia laws, and good Samaritan laws. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   29
             Table 4: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on Opioid-Related Hospital Visits,
                  Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates using States Without SEPs for Comparison




                                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)

               Emergency Room Admission Rate
               Average Eect of SEP                                23.822**      20.775**      13.484      10.462
                                                                  (10.214)       (9.250)     (9.316)     (12.341)
               One-Year Lead                                                                              -5.743
                                                                                                          (7.636)
               Mean                                                150.75        150.75       150.75      150.75
               Observations                                          258           258         258          258


               In-Patient Stay Rate

               Average Eect of SEP                                15.053**      12.502*       7.022       10.670
                                                                   (7.331)       (6.757)     (7.195)      (9.404)
               One-Year Lead                                                                               6.994
                                                                                                          (5.724)
               Mean                                                209.26        209.26       209.26      209.26
               Observations                                          375           375         375          375


               County and Year Fixed Eects                           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
               Demographic and Economic Controls                     No            Yes         Yes          Yes
               State-Level Policy Controls                           No            No          Yes          Yes


Notes: Estimates are based on state-level opioid-related emergency room visits from the Healthcare Cost Utilization Project for 2008

2016.   Rates are calculated as cases per 100,000 individuals.    Economic control variables include the state-level poverty rate and

unemployment rate, demographic controls include percent Hispanic and percent black, and policy controls include whether a state

imposes quantitative prescription limit, tamper-resistant prescription forms, pain clinic regulations, patient identication requirements,

doctor shopping restrictions, requirements with respect to physician examination or pharmacist verication, prescription drug moni-

toring programs, paraphernalia laws, and good Samaritan laws. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   30
Table 5: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on HIV Diagnoses Rates and Opioid-Related Mortality
                                                        Rates by Subgroup



                                                  Counties W/Out          Urban        Rural       Low Pov.      High Pov.
                                                       SEPs              Counties     Counties     Counties      Counties

                                                          (1)               (2)          (3)             (4)        (5)

         HIV Rate

         Average Eect of SEP                             -0.038            0.379       -0.781*         -0.600      0.668
                                                        (0.423)           (0.642)      (0.432)         (0.418)    (0.783)
         Mean                                             6.20              9.06         4.30           5.01        7.87
         Observations                                    14094             5643         8451            8190       5904

         Opioid-Related Mortality Rate

         Average Eect of SEP                           2.489***            1.851       2.794**         1.122      4.311***
                                                        (0.917)           (1.248)      (1.288)         (1.026)    (1.582)
         Mean                                             9.78              9.46         9.99           9.00       10.86
         Observations                                    14121             5643         8478            8217       5904


         County and Year Fixed Eects                      Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
         Demographic and Economic Controls                Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
         State-Level Policy Controls                      Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
         State-by-Year Fixed Eects                        Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
         County-Specic Linear Time Trends                 Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes


Notes: See Table 2 and Table 3.     Data on urbanicity is from the USDA. Counties W/Out SEPs" represents the baseline sample,

comparing counties with SEP openings to those without SEPs. Urban" counties include metropolitan areas, while Rural" counties

include micropolitan areas, small towns, and rural areas. High Pov." counties are dened as counties with poverty rates above the

2016 median poverty rate. Low Pov." counties are those with poverty rates at or below this median. All specications limit the sample

to include counties with new SEPs or counties without SEPs.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   31
Table 6: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on HIV Diagnoses Rates and Opioid-Related Mortality
                                                              by Region




                                                         Midwest         South        Northeast        West      Top 10"

                                                             (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)         (5)

        HIV Rate

        Average Eect of SEP                                -0.256         0.554           0.649        -0.732      -0.054
                                                          (0.712)        (0.988)        (0.832)        (0.585)     (0.774)
        Mean                                                3.03           8.56           5.70          3.43        3.09
        Observations                                      3582.00        7209.00        1557.00        1746.00     2628.00



        Opioid-Related Mortality Rate

        Average Eect of SEP                                -0.042        7.679***         1.213        -0.370     8.512***
                                                          (1.570)        (2.012)        (0.845)        (1.028)     (2.381)
        Mean                                                8.30          10.80           9.09          9.23        15.55
        Observations                                      3609.00        7209.00        1557.00        1746.00     2628.00


        County and Year Fixed Eects                          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
        Demographic and Economic Controls                    Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
        State-Level Policy Controls                          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
        State-by-Year Fixed Eects                            Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes
        County-Specic Linear Time Trends                     Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes


Notes: See Table 2 and Table 3.    For US Census Bureau denitions of region, see       https://www.census.gov/geo/reference/webatlas/
regions.html.   Top 10" states include those most aected by the opioid epidemic, according to the CDC. Top 10" states are West

Virginia, Ohio, Pennsylvania, District of Columbia, New Hampshire, Kentucky, Maine, Connecticut, Delaware, Massachusetts.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                    32
   Table 7: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on Opioid-Related Mortality Rates by Age, Race,
                                                  Ethnicity, and Gender Subgroups



                                          All       2029      3039       4049        5059      Black     Hispanic   White      Male      Female

                                          (1)         (2)       (3)           (4)      (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)       (9)       (10)

 Average Eect of SEP                   2.489***      0.119    0.456          0.312   0.594*    0.283**    0.072     1.842**   2.011***    0.478
                                        (0.917)     (0.095)   (0.335)    (0.346)     (0.336)   (0.140)    (0.149)   (0.900)   (0.714)    (0.426)
 Mean                                    9.78        0.36      2.56          3.17     3.44      0.32       0.29      14.50      6.04      3.74
 Observations                            14121      14121     14121      14121       14121     14121      14121     14121      14121     14121


 County and Year Fixed Eects              Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
 Demographic and Economic Controls        Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
 State-Level Policy Controls              Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
 State-by-Year Fixed Eects                Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
 County-Specic Linear Time Trends         Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes



Notes: See Table 3. Column 1 presents the baseline estimates. Columns 24 show estimates by age subgroup for individuals aged 2029,

3039, 4049, and 5059, respectively. Black" indicates estimates for Black individuals, Hispanic" indicates estimates for non-White

Hispanic individuals, and White" indicates estimates for White individuals. Male" indicates estimates for males, Female" indicates

estimates for females.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                        33
Table 8: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on Opioid-Related Hospital Visits by Age and Gender
                                                             Subgroups



                                                                  All      2544       4564       Male      Female

                                                                  (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)

                    Emergency Room Admission Rate
                    Average Eect of SEP                         16.250*   62.818**     2.021     18.095    14.472**
                                                                (9.211)   (26.715)    (8.722)   (12.089)   (6.910)
                    Mean                                        150.75     288.19     149.10     166.04     136.21
                    Observations                                  258        258       258        258        258

                    In-Patient Stay Rate
                    Average Eect of SEP                         10.408     23.802*    15.363     10.818     9.780
                                                                (7.104)   (14.118)    (9.494)   (7.260)    (7.335)
                    Mean                                        209.26     299.00     285.53     204.17     214.52
                    Observations                                  375        375       375        375        375


                    County and Year Fixed Eects                   Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
                    Demographic and Economic Controls             Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
                    State-Level Policy Controls                   Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes


Notes: See Table 4. Column 1 presents the baseline estimates for all hospital visits. Columns 23 show estimates by age subgroup for

individuals aged 2544 and 4564, respectively. Male" indicates estimates for males; Female" indicates estimates for females.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   34
               Table 9: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on Drug-Related Arrest Rates,
                Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates using Counties Without SEPs for Comparison



                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)       (6)

       Total Drug Crime Rate
       Average Eect of SEP                         -14.775      -13.647     -10.940      -9.455        -25.222   -36.025
                                                   (15.953)    (15.944)    (15.766)     (15.642)   (18.437)      (23.622)
       One-Year Lead                                                                                             -16.098
                                                                                                                 (16.770)
       Mean                                         403.34      403.34      403.34      403.34         403.34    403.34
       Observations                                 14115       14115        14115       14115         14115      14115



       Opioid-Related Drug Sale Rate

       Average Eect of SEP                          2.511        2.807       2.544       2.477         -4.930     -6.971
                                                   (2.608)      (2.598)     (2.570)     (2.575)        (3.681)   (5.189)
       One-Year Lead                                                                                              -3.041
                                                                                                                 (3.615)
       Mean                                         23.06        23.06       23.06       23.06         23.06      23.06
       Observations                                 14115       14115        14115       14115         14115      14115



       Opioid-Related Possession Rate

       Average Eect of SEP                         14.829**    15.058**    12.783**     12.607*        5.699      7.170
                                                   (6.315)      (6.296)     (6.406)     (6.447)        (4.708)   (5.270)
       One-Year Lead                                                                                              2.192
                                                                                                                 (3.060)
       Mean                                         44.83        44.83       44.83       44.83         44.83      44.83
       Observations                                 14115       14115        14115       14115         14115      14115


       County and Year Fixed Eects                   Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes
       Demographic and Economic Controls              No          Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes
       State-Level Policy Controls                    No          No          Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes
       State-by-Year Fixed Eects                      No          No          No          Yes           Yes        Yes
       County-Specic Linear Time Trends               No          No          No          No            Yes        Yes


Notes: Estimates are based on FBI Uniform Crime Reports by county for the entire United States from 20082016. Rates are calculated

as cases per 100,000 individuals. Economic control variables include the county-level poverty rate and unemployment rate, demographic

controls include percent Hispanic and percent black, and state-level policy controls include whether a state imposes quantitative

prescription limit, tamper-resistant prescription forms, pain clinic regulations, patient identication requirements, doctor shopping

restrictions, requirements with respect to physician examination or pharmacist verication, prescription drug monitoring programs,

paraphernalia laws, and good Samaritan laws. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   35
                                   Table 10: OLS, WLS, and Poisson Estimates from a
                  Dierence-in-Dierences Model using Counties Without SEPs for Comparison



                                                        OLS                             WLS                          Poisson

                                              (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)

   HIV Diagnoses

   Average Eect of SEP                       -0.530     -0.038     0.277     -0.817    0.859*   1.019**    0.010     0.039*    0.043*
                                            (0.450)    (0.423)    (0.461)   (1.075)   (0.492)    (0.483)   (0.046)   (0.022)   (0.025)
   One-Year Lead                                                   0.470                         0.230                         0.006
                                                                  (0.375)                        (0.455)                       (0.030)
   Mean                                       6.20       6.20       6.20      6.20      6.20      6.20     19.30      19.30    19.30
   Observations                              14094      14094      14094     14094     14094     14094     11790     11790     11790



   Opioid-Related Deaths
   Average Eect of SEP                      2.461**   2.493***    2.916**    0.940     0.334     0.255     0.022     -0.012    -0.039
                                            (1.056)    (0.917)    (1.308)   (0.792)   (0.566)    (0.742)   (0.059)   (0.047)   (0.064)
   One-Year Lead                                                   0.630                         -0.113                        -0.038
                                                                  (1.034)                        (0.455)                       (0.038)
   Mean                                       9.79       9.79       9.79      9.79      9.79      9.79     12.86      12.86    12.86
   Observations                              14085      14085      14085     14085     14085     14085     14085     14085     14085


   County and Year Fixed Eects                Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
   Demographic and Economic Controls          Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
   State-Level Policy Controls                Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
   State-by-Year Fixed Eects                  Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
   County-Specic Linear Time Trends           No         Yes        Yes        No       Yes       Yes        No       Yes       Yes




Notes: See Table 2 and Table 3. Columns 16 display the eects of SEPs on HIV and opioid-related mortality rates, while Columns

79 show estimates for HIV cases and opioid-related deaths. Estimates in Columns 46 are weighted by county population.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   36
     Table 11: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on HIV Diagnoses Rates and Opioid-Related
                                                  Mortality Rates by Population Size



                                                     All                              Counties with Population                  Counties with Population
                                                   Counties                                  > Median                                  < Median
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)            (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)        (10)      (11)      (12)
 HIV Rate

 Average Eect of SEP                 -0.207    -0.184     -0.046     -0.038        0.638     0.698     0.719     0.744     -1.033**   -1.052**   -0.927*   -0.946*
                                     (0.413)   (0.422)   (0.422)    (0.423)        (0.652)   (0.635)   (0.633)   (0.632)   (0.503)    (0.509)    (0.514)   (0.511)
 Mean                                 6.20      6.20       6.20       6.20         13.20     13.20     13.20     13.20       4.69       4.69      4.69      4.69
 Observations                        14094     14094      14094      14094          2501      2501      2501      2501      11589      11589     11589     11589



 Opioid-Related Mortality Rate
 Average Eect of SEP                 2.199**   2.264**   2.419***   2.489***       0.581     0.547     0.488     0.481     3.585**    3.747**    3.824**   3.943**
                                     (0.908)   (0.903)   (0.911)    (0.917)        (0.863)   (0.866)   (0.865)   (0.855)   (1.548)    (1.538)    (1.554)   (1.568)
 Mean                                 9.78      9.78       9.78       9.78          8.77      8.77      8.77      8.77      10.00      10.00      10.00     10.00
 Observations                        14121     14121      14121      14121          2501      2501      2501      2501      11616      11616     11616     11616


 County and Year Fixed Eects          Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
 Demographic and Economic Controls     No       Yes        Yes        Yes            No       Yes       Yes       Yes        No         Yes       Yes       Yes
 State-Level Policy Controls           No        No        Yes        Yes            No        No       Yes       Yes        No         No        Yes       Yes
 State-by-Year Fixed Eects             No        No        No         Yes            No        No        No       Yes        No         No         No       Yes
 County-Specic Linear Time Trends      No        No        No         Yes            No        No        No       Yes        No         No         No       Yes



Notes: See Table 2 and Table 3. The median population is 191,972.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                              37
     Table 12: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on HIV Diagnoses Rates and Opioid-Related
                                   Mortality Rates Using Various Comparison Groups



                                                     Counties             All       Counties      Counties in     Border
                                                    W/Out SEPs          Counties    W/ SEPs       SEP States     Counties

                                                           (1)             (2)          (3)              (4)        (5)

            HIV Rate

            Average Eect of SEP                           0.277           0.321        0.467            0.232      0.257
                                                         (0.462)         (0.460)      (0.522)          (0.451)    (0.455)
            One-Year Lead                                 0.470           0.495        0.438            0.387      0.410
                                                         (0.375)         (0.375)      (0.464)          (0.357)    (0.370)
            Mean                                          6.20            6.31         9.00             5.46       6.44
            Observations                                 14094           14922         1539            10917       4248



            Opioid-Related Mortality Rate

            Average Eect of SEP                         2.912**          2.870**      1.815*           2.761**    2.546**
                                                         (1.307)         (1.306)      (1.054)          (1.302)    (1.268)
            One-Year Lead                                 0.630           0.606        0.827            0.625      0.231
                                                         (1.034)         (1.033)      (0.758)          (1.052)    (0.994)
            Mean                                          9.78            9.85         11.77            10.68      8.96
            Observations                                 14121           14949         1539            10917       4248


            County and Year Fixed Eects                    Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes
            Demographic and Economic Controls              Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes
            State-Level Policy Controls                    Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes
            State-by-Year Fixed Eects                      Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes
            County-Specic Linear Time Trends               Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes


Notes: See Table 2 and Table 3. Counties W/Out SEPs" represent the baseline results comparing counties with SEP openings to those

without SEPs, Counties W/ SEPs" compares counties with recent SEPs openings to counties in the US with an existing SEP, All

Counties" represents a full sample of US counties comparing counties with recent SEP openings to all other US counties, Counties in

SEP States" represents a subsample of all counties in US states with legal access to SEPs, and Border Counties" shows estimates from

a model comparing counties with SEP openings to their respective bordering counties.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   38
                        Figure 1: Number of SEPs and Syringes Exchanged Over Time




Notes: Data is from the NASEN 2014 National Survey of Syringe Exchange Programs and from the NASEN directory of syringe

exchange programs.


                                                          39
                           Figure 2: Opioid-Related Deaths and HIV Cases Over Time




Notes: County-level data on drug-related mortality from 20082016 is from the National Center for Health Statistics Mortality

Files. Data on HIV cases contracted via drug injection is from the CDC Atlas.




                                                            40
                       Figure 3: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates of the Eect of Opening a
                                      Syringe Exchange Program on HIV Rates


                                                        HIV Rate




Notes: The above gure displays the coecients and their respective 95% condence intervals for the leading indicators and

lagged treatment eects from OLS regressions, as specied in Equation 1.      The vertical line represents the rst year during

the sample period that a county experienced a syringe exchange program opening.       Estimates are based on HIV diagnoses

counts by county for the entire United States from 20082016. HIV diagnoses rates are from the Center for Disease Control

and Prevention's NCHHSTP Atlas and 34 state agencies. Economic control variables include the county-level poverty rate and

unemployment rate, demographic controls include percent Hispanic and percent black, and state-level policy controls include

whether a state imposes quantitative prescription limit, tamper-resistant prescription forms, pain clinic regulations, patient

identication requirements, doctor shopping restrictions, requirements with respect to physician examination or pharmacist

verication, prescription drug monitoring programs, paraphernalia laws, and good Samaritan laws. Standard errors are clustered

at the county level.




                                                             41
                       Figure 4: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates of the Eect of Opening a
                           Syringe Exchange Program on Drug-Related Mortality Rates


                                           Drug-Related Mortality Rate




                                          Opioid-Related Mortality Rate




                                     Illicit Opioid-Related Mortality Rate




Notes: Each gure displays the coecients and their respective 95% condence intervals for the leading indicators and lagged

treatment eects from OLS regressions, as specied in Equation 1. The vertical line represents the rst year during the sample

period that a county experienced a syringe exchange program opening.     Estimates are based on restricted mortality les by

county for the entire United States from 20082016.     Economic control variables include the county-level poverty rate and

unemployment rate, demographic controls include percent Hispanic and percent black, and state-level policy controls include

whether a state imposes quantitative prescription limit, tamper-resistant prescription forms, pain clinic regulations, patient

identication requirements, doctor shopping restrictions, requirements with respect to physician examination or pharmacist

verication, prescription drug monitoring programs, paraphernalia laws, and good Samaritan laws. Standard errors are clustered

at the county level.
                                                             42
                     Figure 5: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates of the Eect of Opening a
                  Syringe Exchange Program on Opioid-Related Hospital Visits (State-Level)


                                Opioid-Related Emergency Department Rate




                                      Opioid-Related In-Patient Stay Rate




Notes: Each gure displays the coecients and their respective 95% condence intervals for the leading indicators and lagged

treatment eects from OLS regressions, as specied in Equation 1. The vertical line represents the rst year during the sample

period that a state experienced a syringe exchange program opening. Estimates are based on state-level data on emergency

department (ED) visits and in-patient (IP) hospital stays from 20082016 from the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project

(HCUP). Economic control variables include poverty rate, unemployment rate, demographic controls include percent Hispanic

and percent black, and state-level policy controls include whether a state imposes quantitative prescription limit, tamper-

resistant prescription forms, pain clinic regulations, patient identication requirements, doctor shopping restrictions, require-

ments with respect to physician examination or pharmacist verication, prescription drug monitoring programs, paraphernalia

laws, and good Samaritan laws. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                              43
                     Figure 6: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates of the Eect of Opening a
                             Syringe Exchange Program on Drug-Related Crime Rates


                                                Total Drug Crime Rate




                                          Opioid-Related Drug Sale Rate




                                          Opioid-Related Possession Rate




Notes: Each gure displays the coecients and their respective 95% condence intervals for the leading indicators and lagged

treatment eects from OLS regressions, as specied in Equation 1. The vertical line represents the rst year during the sample

period that a county experienced a syringe exchange program opening.         County-level arrest data from 20082016 is from

the FBI Uniform Crime Reports.     Economic control variables include the county-level poverty rate and unemployment rate,

demographic controls include percent Hispanic and percent black, and state-level policy controls include whether a state imposes

quantitative prescription limit, tamper-resistant prescription forms, pain clinic regulations, patient identication requirements,

doctor shopping restrictions, requirements with respect to physician examination or pharmacist verication, prescription drug

monitoring programs, paraphernalia laws, and good Samaritan laws. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                               44
                       Figure 7: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates of the Eect of Opening a
 Syringe Exchange Program on Alcohol-Related Mortality, Trac-Related Mortality, and Total Mortality
                                                     Rates


                                       Alcohol-Related Mortality Rate




                                        Trac-Related Morality Rate




                                             Total Morality Rate




Notes: See Figure 4.




                                                      45
Appendix




           46
                Table A1: Summary Statistics for a Rural Midwest Syringe Exchange Program




                           Client Characteristics                        Mean     St.Dev.

                           Age                                           37.84     10.13
                           Percent White                                  0.97     0.18
                           Percent Male                                   0.59     0.49
                           First Injection Age                           27.14     10.25
                           Previously Sought Addiction Treatment          0.22     0.41
                           Percent Ever Overdosed                         0.32     0.47
                           Number of Times Overdosed                      3.42     4.83
                           Percent Injected Heroin at First Use           0.49     0.50
                           Percent Injected Opioid Pills at First Use     0.29     0.46
                           Percent Prescribed Opioid Pain Pills           0.26     0.44
                           Percent Carry Naloxone                         0.67     0.47


                           Visit Characteristics

                           First Exchange                                 0.22     0.42
                           Number of Syringes Exchanged                  30.15     11.49
                           Percent Inject Heroin                          0.80     0.40
                           Percent Inject Fentanyl                        0.16     0.37
                           Percent Inject Opioid Pills                    0.02     0.15
                           Percent Diagnosed with HIV                     0.01     0.07
                           Percent Diagnosed with Hepatitis C             0.21     0.41
                           Percent Given a Referral                       0.01     0.07
                           Percent Given Naloxone                         0.14     0.34
                           Percent Received HIV Education                 0.14     0.35
                           Number of Clients                             144.59    30.27
                           Distance Traveled, in Miles                   14.52     40.37



Notes: Data is from the Portsmouth syringe exchange program from 2018.




                                                             47
Table A2: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Transformations of HIV
                                          Diagnoses and Opioid-Related Mortality




                                                             (1)           (2)       (3)          (4)      (5)         (6)

       HIV Diagnoses
       Average Eect of SEP                                 -0.008        -0.011    -0.010       -0.015   -0.123      -0.053
                                                          (0.076)        (0.073)   (0.072)     (0.071)   (0.075)     (0.094)
       One-Year Lead                                                                                                  0.105
                                                                                                                     (0.087)
       Observations                                        14103         14094      14094       14094    14094       14094



       Opioid-Related Deaths
       Average Eect of SEP                                 0.093         0.104      0.065       0.076     0.024       0.045
                                                          (0.067)        (0.067)   (0.068)     (0.068)   (0.055)     (0.081)
       One-Year Lead                                                                                                  0.030
                                                                                                                     (0.067)
       Observations                                        14130         14121      14121       14121    14121       14121


       County and Year Fixed Eects                          Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes
       Demographic and Economic Controls                     No           Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes
       State-Level Policy Controls                           No            No        Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes
       State-by-Year Fixed Eects                             No            No        No           Yes      Yes         Yes
       County-Specic Linear Time Trends                      No            No        No           No       Yes         Yes


Notes: See Table 2 and Table 3. Estimates are from Equation 1, using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of the listed outcome

variables.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                    48
        Table A3: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on Drug-Related Health and Crime Rates,
           Lagged Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates Using Counties Without a SEP for Comparison



                                       HIV       Drug-Related    Opioid-Related    Opioid-Related      Opioid-Related   Drug Sale   Drug Poss.
                                     Diagnoses    Mortality        Mortality         ED Visits            IP Stays       Arrests     Arrests

                                        (1)            (2)                (3)             (4)                (5)           (6)          (7)
 Eect of SEP in First Year             -0.021        2.132**         2.647***            9.841             8.082          -6.009      0.052
                                      (0.443)        (1.038)            (0.930)         (7.908)            (5.672)       (3.836)      (0.045)
 Eect of SEP in Second Year            -0.407        2.065*             2.770**        27.262***           11.746         -5.335      0.081
                                      (0.649)        (1.207)            (1.217)         (9.860)            (8.520)       (4.505)      (0.063)
 Eect of SEP in Third Year             -0.653        3.768**         4.523***          34.725**            15.181        -10.841*     0.131
                                      (0.887)        (1.741)            (1.672)         (14.293)           (9.857)       (6.113)      (0.105)
 Eect of SEP in Fourth+ Year           -1.170        4.515**         5.280***          58.201***          21.251*        -15.320*     0.133
                                      (1.369)        (1.869)            (1.743)         (20.140)          (11.716)       (7.888)      (0.111)
 Average Lagged Eect                   -0.56          3.12               3.81            32.51             14.07          -9.38        0.10
 P-value (test average eect = 0)        0.45          0.02               0.00             0.01              0.09           0.07        0.18
 Mean                                   6.20          16.68              9.78           150.75             209.26         23.06        0.45
 Observations                          14094          14121             14121             258               375           14115       14115


 County and Year Fixed Eects            Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes         Yes
 Demographic and Economic Controls      Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes         Yes
 State-Level Policy Controls            Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes         Yes
 State-by-Year Fixed Eects              Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes                No            No          Yes
 County-Specic Linear Time Trends       Yes            Yes               Yes              No                 No            Yes         Yes



Notes: See Tables 2, 3, 4 and 9.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   49
     Table A4: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on HIV Diagnoses Rates and Opioid-Related
                                 Mortality Rates, Controlling for State Legal Restrictions



                                                (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)        (10)

 HIV Rate
 Average Eect of SEP                          -0.697     -0.665    -0.169    -0.156    -0.127    -0.127    -0.127    -0.121     -0.038     -0.035
                                              (0.426)   (0.433)    (0.423)   (0.424)   (0.422)   (0.422)   (0.422)   (0.420)   (0.423)    (0.422)
 Mean                                          6.20       6.20      6.20      6.20      6.20      6.20      6.20      6.20       6.20       6.20
 Observations                                 14094      14094     14094     14094     14094     14094     14094     14094      14094      14094


 Opioid-Related Mortality Rate
 Average Eect of SEP                          2.739**   2.895***   2.319**   2.288**   2.280**   2.276**   2.281**   2.287**   2.489***   2.487***
                                              (1.083)   (1.077)    (0.908)   (0.911)   (0.908)   (0.908)   (0.907)   (0.907)   (0.917)    (0.917)
 Mean                                          9.78       9.78      9.78      9.78      9.78      9.78      9.78      9.78       9.78       9.78
 Observations                                 14121      14121     14121     14121     14121     14121     14121     14121      14121      14121


 County and Year Fixed Eects                   Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
 Demographic and Economic Controls              No        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
 County-Specic Linear Time Trends               No        No        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
 Rx Limits, Tamper Resistant Forms, ID Laws     No        No         No       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
 Doctor Shopping Restrictions                   No        No         No        No       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
 Physician Exam, Pharmacist Verication          No        No         No        No        No       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
 Pain Clinic Regulations                        No        No         No        No        No        No       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
 Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs          No        No         No        No        No        No        No       Yes        Yes        Yes
 Paraphernalia and Good Samaritan Laws          No        No         No        No        No        No        No        No        Yes        Yes
 Naloxone Laws                                  No        No         No        No        No        No        No        No        No         Yes



Notes: See Table 2 and Table 3. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                      50
  Table A5: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on Drug-Related Health and Crime Outcomes by
                                                 2015 Medicaid Expansion Status



                                       HIV        Drug-Related   Opioid-Related    Opioid-Related      Opioid-Related   Drug Sale   Drug Poss.
                                     Diagnoses     Mortality       Mortality         ED Visits            IP Stays       Arrests     Arrests

                                        (1)            (2)                (3)             (4)                (5)           (6)          (7)

 Medicaid Expansion
 Average Eect of SEP                   -0.327        2.296**         3.274***           15.848             7.418          -5.518      0.078
                                      (0.407)        (1.092)            (1.011)         (11.373)           (8.908)       (4.035)      (0.057)
 Mean                                   3.78          17.72             10.90           168.68             239.17         25.87        0.51
 Observations                           7002          7002               7002             159               220           7002         7002


 No Medicaid Expansion
 Average Eect of SEP                   1.128         -0.063             -1.207          19.753             -0.303         -1.133      0.007
                                      (1.426)        (1.766)            (1.545)         (13.950)          (13.199)       (8.235)      (0.059)
 Mean                                   8.60          15.66              8.68           121.95             166.81         20.76        0.44
 Observations                           7092          7119               7119             99                155           7113         7113


 County and Year Fixed Eects            Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes         Yes
 Demographic and Economic Controls      Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes         Yes
 State-Level Policy Controls            Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes         Yes
 State-by-Year Fixed Eects              Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes                No            No          Yes
 County-Specic Linear Time Trends       Yes            Yes               Yes              No                 No            Yes         Yes



Notes: See Tables 2, 3, 4 and 9. Data on Medicaid expansion status is from Simon, Soni, and Cawley (2017). Expansion states include

AK, AZ, AR, CA, CO, CT, DE, HI, IL, IA, IN, KY, MD, MA, MI, MN, NV, NH, NJ, NM, NY, ND, OH, OR, PA, RI, VT, WA, WV,

and WI. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   51
     Table A6: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on HIV Diagnoses Rates and Opioid-Related
                                             Mortality Rates, by Treatment Year




                Treated Year                                       20092016           20092012         20132016
                (# Treated Counties)                                    (n   = 79)      (n   = 24)      (n   = 55)
                                                                             (1)             (2)             (3)
                HIV Rate

                Average Eect of SEP                                      -0.046           0.057          -0.074
                                                                        (0.422)          (0.785)        (0.503)
                Mean                                                     6.20              6.35           5.80
                Observations                                             14094            13599          13878



                Opioid-Related Mortality Rate
                Average Eect of SEP                                  2.419***             0.137         3.349***
                                                                        (0.911)          (1.012)        (1.191)
                Mean                                                     9.78              8.40          11.37
                Observations                                             14121            13626          13905


                County and Year Fixed Eects                                  Yes             Yes             Yes
                Demographic and Economic Controls                            Yes             Yes             Yes
                State-Level Policy Controls                                  Yes             Yes             Yes


Notes: See Table 2 and Table 3.    Treated Year" represents the rst year a county experiences a SEP opening.       Column 1 displays

the main estimates for counties with an opening between 20092016, while Column 2 displays estimates comparing counties with an

opening between 20092012 to counties without a SEP and Column 3 displays estimates comparing counties with an opening between

20132016 to counties without a SEP.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   52
                    Table A7: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on Chlamydia Rates,
                Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates using Counties Without SEPs for Comparison




                                                         (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)


   Average Eect of SEP                                 -9.821         -7.589       -6.811        -6.517        -6.902       -10.091
                                                      (11.028)       (11.039)    (10.989)      (10.952)      (10.110)      (15.755)
   One-Year Lead                                                                                                            -4.756
                                                                                                                           (11.163)
   Mean                                                351.17        351.17        351.17       351.17        351.17        351.17
   Observations                                        14948          14948        14948         14948         14948         14948


   County and Year Fixed Eects                           Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
   Demographic and Economic Controls                     No             Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
   State-Level Policy Controls                           No             No          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
   State-by-Year Fixed Eects                             No             No           No           Yes           Yes           Yes
   County-Specic Linear Time Trends                      No             No           No            No           Yes           Yes


Notes: Estimates are based on CDC NCHHSTP Atlas data on county-level rates of chlamydia for the entire United States from 2008

2016. Economic control variables include the county-level poverty rate and unemployment rate, demographic controls include percent

Hispanic and percent black, and state-level policy controls include whether a state imposes quantitative prescription limit, tamper-

resistant prescription forms, pain clinic regulations, patient identication requirements, doctor shopping restrictions, requirements with

respect to physician examination or pharmacist verication, prescription drug monitoring programs, paraphernalia laws, and good

Samaritan laws. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                   53
Table A8: The Eect of a Syringe Exchange Program on HIV Rates and Opioid-Related Mortality Rates,
                                                   Accounting for Pre-Trends




                                                             (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)

      HIV Rate
      Average Eect of SEP                                -1.188***       -1.127***      -1.074***      -1.071***   -1.060**
                                                           (0.405)        (0.390)         (0.392)       (0.392)    (0.429)
      One-Year Lead                                                                                                 0.041
                                                                                                                   (0.392)
      Mean                                                   6.14           6.14            6.14         6.14        6.14
      Observations                                          14085          14085           14085        14085       14085


      Opioid-Related Mortality Rate
      Average Eect of SEP                                 1.873**         1.920**        1.981**       2.010**     2.145**
                                                           (0.914)        (0.911)         (0.911)       (0.913)    (1.023)
      One-Year Lead                                                                                                 0.513
                                                                                                                   (0.804)
      Mean                                                   9.79           9.79            9.79         9.79        9.79
      Observations                                          14085          14085           14085        14085       14085


      County and Year Fixed Eects                            Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes
      Demographic and Economic Controls                      No              Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes
      State-Level Policy Controls                            No              No             Yes          Yes         Yes
      State-by-Year Fixed Eects                              No              No             No           Yes         Yes


Notes: See Table 2 and Table 3. Estimates are from a model analogous to Equation 1 that partials out pre-treatment trends.

*, **, and *** indicate statistical signicance at the ten, ve, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                    54
                              Figure A1: Map of Portsmouth SEP Visitor Zip Codes




Notes: Geocoded clinic-level data on patient residence zip code is from the Portsmouth, Ohio SEP.




                                                            55
                                   Figure A2: County-Level Locations of SEPs




Notes: Geocoded data on SEP location by county is from NASEN. Shaded counties represent those with SEPs as of 2016.




                                                          56
                       Figure A3: Locations of Existing SEPs and Recent SEP Openings




Notes: Geocoded data on SEP location is from the NASEN directory. Darker shaded circles represent SEPs opened between

20092016. Lighter shaded circles represent SEPs opened prior to 2009.




                                                           57
                   Figure A4: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates of the Eect of Opening a
                             Syringe Exchange Program, Using Data from 20032016


                                                       HIV Rate




                                          Drug-Related Mortality Rate




                                         Opioid-Related Mortality Rate




Notes: See Figure 4. Estimates are based on restricted mortality les for the entire United States from 20032016.




                                                            58
                   Figure A5: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates of the Eect of Opening a
                       Syringe Exchange Program on Other Drug-Related Mortality Rates


                                   Methadone-Related Morality Rate




                                     Fentanyl-Related Morality Rate




                                     Cocaine-Related Mortality Rate




Notes: See Figure 4.




                                                    59
 Figure A6: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates of the Eect of Opening a Syringe Exchange Program on
                            Drug-Related Mortality Rates, by Hospital Condition


           Inpatient Drug-Related Mortality Rate         Outpatient/ER Drug-Related Mortality Rate




        Hospital DOA Drug-Related Mortality Rate            At-Home Drug-Related Mortality Rate




Notes: See Figure 4.




                                                    60
                   Figure A7: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates of the Eect of Opening a
            Syringe Exchange Program on Opioid-Related Mortality Rates, by County Subgroup


                       Urban Counties                                             Rural Counties




                    Low-Poverty Counties                                      High-Poverty Counties




Notes: See Figure 4. Data on urbanicity is from the USDA. Urban" counties include metropolitan areas, while Rural" counties

include micropolitan areas, small towns, and rural areas. High-Poverty" counties are dened as counties with poverty rates

above the sample 2016 median poverty rate. Low-Poverty" counties are those with poverty rates at or below this median.




                                                            61
                           Figure A8: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates for HIV Rates and
                               Opioid-Related Mortality Rates by County Population Size


                                                          HIV Rate




                                            Opioid-Related Mortality Rate




Notes: Each gure displays the coecients and their respective 95% condence intervals for the eects from OLS regressions,

as specied in Equation 1, by population size. A x-axis value of  i" where    i = 25, 000, 75, 000, 125, 000, ...1, 000, 000   indicates

an estimate from a dierence-in-dierences analysis comparing health outcomes in treated and comparison counties with less

than   i   individuals. Estimates are based on restricted mortality les and CDC HIV diagnoses counts by county for the entire

United States from 20082016. HIV diagnoses rates are from the Center for Disease Control and Prevention's NCHHSTP Atlas

and 34 state agencies. Economic control variables include the county-level poverty rate and unemployment rate, demographic

controls include percent Hispanic and percent black, and state-level policy controls include whether a state imposes quantitative

prescription limit, tamper-resistant prescription forms, pain clinic regulations, patient identication requirements, doctor shop-

ping restrictions, requirements with respect to physician examination or pharmacist verication, prescription drug monitoring

programs, paraphernalia laws, and good Samaritan laws. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.



                                                               62
                             Figure A9: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates for HIV Rates and
                            Opioid-Related Mortality Rates by County Population Size (WLS)


                                                            HIV Rate




                                              Opioid-Related Mortality Rate




Notes: Each gure displays the coecients and their respective 95% condence intervals for the eects from WLS regressions, as

specied in Equation 1, weighted by county population size. A x-axis value of  i" where   i = 25, 000, 75, 000, 125, 000, ...1, 000, 000
indicates an estimate from a dierence-in-dierences analysis comparing health outcomes in treated and comparison counties

with less than   i   individuals. Estimates are based on restricted mortality les and CDC HIV diagnoses counts by county for the

entire United States from 20082016. HIV diagnoses rates are from the Center for Disease Control and Prevention's NCHHSTP

Atlas and 34 state agencies. Economic control variables include the county-level poverty rate and unemployment rate, demo-

graphic controls include percent Hispanic and percent black, and state-level policy controls include whether a state imposes

quantitative prescription limit, tamper-resistant prescription forms, pain clinic regulations, patient identication requirements,

doctor shopping restrictions, requirements with respect to physician examination or pharmacist verication, prescription drug

monitoring programs, paraphernalia laws, and good Samaritan laws. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                                 63
                      Figure A10: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates of the Eect of Opening a
                           Syringe Exchange Program on Drug-Related Mortality Rates,
                                      Without County-Specic Linear Trends


                                                      HIV Rate




                                         Drug-Related Mortality Rate




                                        Opioid-Related Mortality Rate




Notes: See Figures 3 and 4. Each gure displays the coecients and their respective 95% condence intervals for the leading

indicators and lagged treatment eects from OLS regressions, as specied in Equation 1, omitting controls for county-specic

linear time trends.




                                                           64
                  Figure A11: Dierence-in-Dierences Estimates of the Eect of Opening a
                        Syringe Exchange Program on Opioid-Related Mortality Rates,
                                            by Various Comparison Groups


                                              Counties Without SEPs




                                                    All Counties




                                            Counties with Existing SEPs




Notes: See Figure 4. The top panel displays coecients and their 95% condence intervals from a model specied by Equation 1,

comparing counties with SEP openings to those without SEPs. The middle panel displays coecients and their 95% condence

intervals from a model specied by Equation 1 comparing counties with SEP openings to all other US counties. The bottom

panel displays coecients and their 95% condence intervals from a model specied by Equation 1 comparing counties with

SEP openings to those with existing SEPs.




                                                           65
