                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       FIRMS AND COLLECTIVE REPUTATION:
                 A STUDY OF THE VOLKSWAGEN EMISSIONS SCANDAL

                                        Ruediger Bachmann
                                          Gabriel Ehrlich
                                            Ying Fan
                                          Dimitrije Ruzic

                                        Working Paper 26117
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26117


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2019




I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described
in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ruediger Bachmann, Gabriel Ehrlich, Ying Fan, and Dimitrije Ruzic. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Firms and Collective Reputation: a Study of the Volkswagen Emissions Scandal
Ruediger Bachmann, Gabriel Ehrlich, Ying Fan, and Dimitrije Ruzic
NBER Working Paper No. 26117
July 2019
JEL No. D12,D22,D90,L14,L15,L62

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper uses the 2015 Volkswagen emissions scandal as a natural experiment to provide
evidence that collective reputation externalities matter for firms. We find that the Volkswagen
scandal reduced the U.S. sales of the other German auto manufacturers--BMW, Mercedes-Benz,
and Smart--by about 105,000 vehicles worth $5.2 billion. The decline was principally driven by
an adverse reputation spillover, which was reinforced by consumer substitution away from diesel
vehicles and was partially offset by substitution away from Volkswagen. These estimates come
from a model of vehicle demand, the conclusions of which are also consistent with difference-in-
differences estimates. We provide direct evidence on internet search behavior and consumer
sentiment displayed on social media to support our interpretation that the estimates reflect a
reputation spillover.

Ruediger Bachmann                              Ying Fan
3026 Jenkins Nanovic Hall                      Department of Economics
Department of Economics                        University of Michigan
University of Notre Dame                       611 Tappan Street
Notre Dame, IN 46556                           Ann Arbor, MI 48109
rbachman@nd.edu                                and NBER
                                               yingfan@umich.edu
Gabriel Ehrlich
Department of Economics                        Dimitrije Ruzic
University of Michigan                         1 Boulevard de Constance
611 Tappan St                                  INSEAD
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                       77305 Fontainebleau
gehrlich@umich.edu                             France
                                               dimitrije.ruzic@insead.edu
1         Introduction
    Do firms have economically important collective reputations? If so, collective reputa-
tions could influence outcomes for a group's members and, as a result, one firm's actions
may have spillovers both on the reputations and on the outcomes of other firms in the
group. In a seminal paper, Tirole (1996) develops a theoretical framework for modeling
collective reputation showing that an original sin by elder group members can have long-
lasting effects on a group. However, there is limited empirical evidence that group reputa-
tion and reputational externalities exist and that they matter economically, especially for
firms. We fill this gap by identifying and quantifying group reputation externalities in an
important setting.
    We use the 2015 Volkswagen (VW) emissions scandal as a natural experiment and
argue that it provides an ideal setting to study reputation externalities. On September 18,
2015, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) served a Notice of Violation to the
VW Group alleging that approximately 500,000 VW and Audi diesel-engine vehicles sold
between 2009 and 2015 in the United States contained a defeat device that allowed these
vehicles to appear to comply with emissions regulations in the test box, while having higher
on-road emissions.1 This date marks the public eruption of one of the major industrial
scandals in recent history, with a prolonged legal fallout in the United States, leading to
approximately $15 billion in fines and other costs for VW (see Zycher (2017)).
    Several features of the scandal make it an appealing natural experiment to study repu-
tation spillovers: (1) For the general public, the scandal was a clear surprise in September
2015, and it immediately generated extensive media coverage. (2) The German auto man-
ufacturers featured the notion of "German engineering" prominently in their U.S. advertis-
ing, creating a natural reputational group. (3) Individual automotive makes are salient to
consumers, enabling us to use novel company-specific data on U.S. social-media sentiment
and internet searches to directly establish the existence of reputational externalities.
    Adding to its appeal as a natural experiment, the scandal occurred within an impor-
tant setting: (4) The auto manufacturing industry is large and important in Germany. In
2014, the year prior to the scandal, vehicles amounted to 18 percent of Germany's total ex-
ports according to the German Federal Statistical Office (Destatis (2015)), and were thus
Germany's largest export category. Also as of 2014, Germany captured by far the largest
share of world vehicle exports in UN trade statistics (United Nations (2017)), with 22.7
percent in dollar and 18.5 percent in unit terms, followed by Japan with, respectively, 12.5
percent and 10.7 percent. (5) German vehicles are a large share of the U.S. market: in
2014 German auto manufacturers accounted for 8.1 percent of all U.S. light vehicle sales,
    1
        The Volkswagen Group consists of Volkswagen proper plus Audi and Porsche.

                                                      1
making Germany the second-largest source for foreign-branded vehicles. (6) The scandal
had serious public health consequences. Oldenkamp et al. (2016) estimate that the excess
emissions caused by VW diesel vehicles cost 45,000 disability-adjusted life years, with a
value of life lost of approximately $39 billion.2 We add to this a calculation of the economic
damage for the other German auto manufacturers. Finally, (7) the scandal also sparked
a public discussion regarding the mechanism at the center of our paper: country-related
reputational spillovers (see, for example, Bruckner (2015), Chambers (2015), Nienaber
(2015), Werz (2016), and Remsky (2017)). Our paper provides numbers to this debate.
    We conduct our study in three steps. In the first step, we use a difference-in-differences
approach to provide evidence that there was a country-specific spillover from the VW scan-
dal to the other German auto manufacturers. In the second step, we estimate a demand
model to confirm and quantify this spillover effect. In the third step, we provide evidence
that this spillover effect is best interpreted as a reputational spillover effect.
    As the first step, we show that the VW scandal reduced the vehicle sales of the non-VW
German auto manufacturers--BMW, Mercedes-Benz, and Smart--relative to their non-
German counterparts.3 We document this pattern by comparing how vehicle sales changed
over time for non-VW German auto manufacturers relative to the non-German auto manu-
facturers. The scandal's differential impact on the non-VW German automakers is a robust
feature of the data: it holds individually for each non-VW German auto manufacturer, and
it exists for diesel and non-diesel sales alike.
    This estimated differential impact of the VW scandal on the vehicle sales of the other
German auto manufacturers is a result of three forces. First, the VW scandal led some con-
sumers to substitute away from VW, increasing the vehicle sales of all other auto manufac-
turers; the extent of that substitution may have differed for German versus non-German
auto manufacturers. Second, because the VW scandal centered on diesel vehicles, changes
in consumers' preference for diesel may have differentially affected auto manufacturers
based on their varying levels of exposure to the diesel market. Third, the scandal could
have led to a substitution away from German auto manufacturers in the form of a system-
atic, country-specific spillover.
    While the difference-in-differences approach does not quantify one channel separately
from the others, our results suggest that the spillover effect is a key outcome of the scandal.
For one, if other German makes are closer substitutes for VW than are non-German makes,
substitution away from VW should have increased demand more for the other German
makes than for the non-Germans. This substitution pattern would bias against our finding
   2
     Barrett et al. (2015) estimate 59 premature deaths and a social cost of $450 million; Holland et al.
(2016) estimate similar numbers.
   3
     Opel, a German auto manufacturer and formerly a subsidiary of General Motors, does not sell in the
United States.
                                                   2
of a negative difference-in-differences coefficient.4 Moreover, our difference-in-differences
results show a decline in the sales of the non-VW German auto manufacturers even when
we exclude all diesel sales from the analysis, suggesting that the diesel channel alone
cannot explain our finding. Taken together, these two arguments imply the existence of
the third channel, that is, the spillover channel.
    In the second step, we estimate a model of vehicle demand and use it to decompose the
scandal's overall effect into its three constituent forces. The model allows consumers to
value certain vehicle characteristics, such as a diesel engine or a German origin, differently
before and after the VW scandal. In counterfactual simulations, we calculate vehicle sales
for counterfactual worlds in which consumers did not change their valuations of some of
these vehicle characteristics after the VW scandal. These counterfactual simulations allow
us to quantify the scandal's overall effect and decompose it into the three forces.
    We find that the VW scandal reduced the sales of the other German auto manufacturers
and that this decline was principally driven by a country-specific spillover. Specifically, the
overall effect on those manufacturers amounted to a decline in sales of 104,661 vehicles
valued at $5.2 billion in 2016, based on the list prices in the data. Behind this overall
effect was a larger country-specific spillover effect, which decreased the non-VW German
auto manufacturers' 2016 sales by 472,084 units worth $26.5 billion. This decline from
the spillover effect was partially offset by an increase in sales as consumers substituted
away from VW, and it was reinforced by substitution away from diesel vehicles.
    The finding that the spillover effect coexists with a countervailing substitution effect
away from VW--and that, therefore, the spillover effect is larger in absolute value than
the scandal's combined effects--is unlikely to be a coincidence. Firms that are associated
closely enough to have a collective reputation (so that the spillover effect exists) are also
likely to produce closer substitutes (which determines the substitution effect). Therefore,
despite our focus on a specific scandal in a specific industry, the pattern we uncover is
likely to hold more broadly.
    In the third step of our study, we present several pieces of evidence to support our
argument that the German-specific spillover is best interpreted as arising from a collective
reputation. As background, we show that German automakers leveraged a notion of "Ger-
man engineering" in their marketing. Moreover, media mentions of the phrase "German
engineering" spiked after the scandal. We also use social media data from Twitter to doc-
ument changes in sentiment toward the non-VW German automakers that are indicative
of harm to their collective reputation. In addition, to rule out an alternative explanation
that works through information instead of reputation, we use internet search data to show
  4
      Subsequent demand estimates show that vehicle sales data indeed reflect this pattern of substitution.


                                                      3
that consumers did not exhibit any heightened interest toward the non-VW German auto
manufacturers. By contrast, consumer search interest in Volkswagen displayed a large
spike following the scandal. We provide further independent evidence that a U.S. cus-
tomer would have had no technical or economic reason to believe that the other German
auto manufacturers were implicated in the VW emissions scandal.
    Our results thus substantiate the opening claim in Tirole (1996) that: "Collective rep-
utations play an important role in economics and the social sciences. Countries [...] are
known to be hard-working, honest, corrupt, hospitable or belligerent." We show that the
actions of one member of a group of firms can materially damage the group's reputation,
producing reputational externalities from the standpoint of individual firms. We thereby
provide evidence for reputational spillover effects of major corporate scandals and their
economic consequences.
    Our results also relate to the theoretical work of Bordalo et al. (2013) on the impor-
tance of salient product features in consumer choice. The discovery of VW's malfeasance
precipitated a major industrial scandal in which a German origin was a salient product
attribute. The scandal arguably heightened the salience of a German origin in the market
for light vehicles at the same time that it led consumers to reassess their valuations of this
attribute, generating the reputational externalities we find.
    We contribute to the literature by studying group reputation and reputation spillovers
on the economic outcomes of firms. The focus on group reputation distinguishes our paper
from an existing literature on individual reputation, including Cabral and Hortac ¸su (2010),
Li (2010), Mayzlin et al. (2014), Fan et al. (2016), Luca (2016), Luca and Zervas (2016),
and Li et al. (2018).5 In addition to this literature on individual reputation, Nosko and
Tadelis (2015) study how the quality of a transaction between a seller and a buyer on
eBay affects the buyer's probability to use the eBay platform again. Our paper also relates
to other work studying the reputational effects of industrial scandals, such as Jonsson et al.
(2009) for the Swedish finance industry, Freedman et al. (2012) for the U.S. toy industry,
and Bai et al. (2018) for the Chinese dairy industry.6
    Additionally, there is a small but growing literature that studies the economic conse-
   5
     There is also a finance literature that studies how a variety of corporate events adversely affect firm
enterprise values and interprets such effects as reputational losses; see, for example, Fiordelisi et al. (2014)
for a summary of this literature. We supplement our main analyses, which document spillovers to economic
activity in terms of vehicle sales and direct measures of consumer sentiment, with a similar event study using
stock prices in appendix D.
   6
     The aforementioned event study literature using financial data has also recently studied spillovers from
corporate events; see, for example, Gleason et al. (2008) and Kang (2008). There is also an agricultural
economics literature studying the group reputation of regional appellations such as Bordeaux Wines: Castri-
ota and Delmastra (2014) on the determinants of collective reputation, and Landon and Smith (1998) on
the correlation of prices and collective reputation. Finally, Yu et al. (2002) and Yu and Lester (2008) study
reputation spillover theoretically from a management perspective.

                                                       4
quences of the Volkswagen emissions scandal. Strittmatter and Lechner (2017), Ater and
Yoseph (2018), and Che et al. (2018) focus on the scandal's effect on Volkswagen vehicles
as opposed to spillovers to other auto manufacturers, and they examine the used vehi-
cle market rather than the new vehicle market. Griffin and Lont (2018) and Barth et al.
(2019) study the scandal's effects on equity, bond, and credit default swap markets for VW
and other large automakers. Finally, Alexander and Schwandt (2019) use the geographic
distribution of diesel vehicles involved in the emissions scandal as exogenous variation for
local pollution to study the health effects of vehicle exhaust.
    Our study also speaks to three additional strands of literature: First, a recent literature
in international macroeconomics, for instance di Giovanni and Levchenko (2012), di Gio-
vanni et al. (2014) and di Giovanni et al. (2018)), emphasizes the importance of large
international firms for aggregate fluctuations and international comovement; our results
suggest that misbehavior at such firms can damage the collective reputation of particular
national powerhouse industries and thus may contribute to these fluctuations. Second, the
international economics literature has examined the extent to which taste shocks for do-
mestic versus foreign goods can explain the comovement of international business cycles
(Stockman and Tesar (1995)). Our results suggest that the misbehavior of large multina-
tional firms might generate such taste shocks through reputational spillovers. Third, our
results provide a case study for the recent macroeconomic literature on customer capital;
our evidence shows how customer capital can decline through reputational spillovers and
quantifies the economic consequences of such a loss (Drozd and Nosal (2012) and Gourio
and Rudanko (2014)).
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 provides a more detailed
explanation and timeline of the VW emissions scandal and describes the scandal's effect
on VW. Section 3 provides difference-in-differences estimates that suggest the existence
of a German-specific spillover effect. Section 4 presents a model of vehicle demand and
quantifies the spillover effect. Section 5 provides support for our interpretation of the
spillover effect as a reputational spillover, and discusses alternative interpretations. A final
section 6 concludes.


2    The VW Emissions Scandal as a Natural Experiment
   In this section, we describe the timeline of the VW emissions scandal in more detail
and argue that it provides a good setting to study the spillovers arising from collective
reputation. Using data from print publications, the stock market, and social media, we
show that the scandal was largely unanticipated. We then provide evidence substantiating
the claim that German auto manufacturers share a group identity.
                                               5
2.1      Timeline of the Scandal
    In May 2014, West Virginia University's Center for Alternative Fuels Engines and Emis-
sions found discrepancies between high on-road emissions by VW diesel vehicles and ear-
lier test results. The EPA and the California Air Resources Board (CARB) permitted a
voluntary recall of VW diesel vehicles in December 2014. In May 2015, CARB conducted
new tests, and again the on-road emissions failed to match the test-box results for VW
diesel vehicles. In July 2015, the agencies informed VW about these tests and threatened
not to certify the 2016 diesel vehicles. On September 3, 2015, VW admitted to the EPA
and CARB that it had used a defeat device in its software, which regulated emissions and
produced fake test results in the test box (see Breitinger (2018) for a more complete time-
line). The scandal entered its public phase on September 18, 2015, when the EPA served
a Notice of Violation to the Volkswagen Group.
    Volkswagen's culpability quickly became a matter of public knowledge: on September
20, two days after the start of the scandal, Volkswagen admitted publicly to the decep-
tion and issued an apology. VW Chief Executive Officer Martin Winterkorn resigned three
days later, on September 23.7 On September 28, German authorities opened a fraud in-
vestigation of the former CEO, and in October they authorized a police raid on the VW
headquarters. The U.S. Congress called the VW U.S. CEO Michael Horn to testify on Octo-
ber 8, 2015, and he formally resigned his post in early March 2016. In anticipation of the
fines and settlements associated with the scandal, VW set aside more than $18 billion in
fiscal year 2015. The scandal's legal resolution in the United States began in April 2016.
On July 26, 2016, VW and a U.S. court agreed on a civil settlement totaling $15 billion.
    Major news outlets across many countries covered the scandal and its aftermath. On
September 19, the morning after the scandal, the front page of the New York Times read:
"U.S. Orders Major VW Recall Over Emissions Test Trickery." The Wall Street Journal used
a more accusatory tone: "Volkswagen Faked EPA Exhaust Test, U.S. Alleges." Spiegel On-
line and Zeit Online, the online platforms of two major German newspapers, frequently
reported about the scandal, which also quickly spilled over into popular culture. For ex-
ample, on October 13, 2015, Paramount Pictures and Leonardo DiCaprio's production
company announced that they had secured the rights to shoot a film about the scandal,
and on September 22, 2016, VW was awarded the satirical Ig Noble Prize in chemistry
(Improbable Research (2016)).
  7
      He was charged with fraud in the United States in May 2018.




                                                     6
2.2         The Scandal Surprised the General Public
    Monthly print media mentions of "Volkswagen" more than tripled in September 2015,
suggesting that the scandal came as a complete surprise to the general public. We quantify
the media prominence of the scandal using data from the Newsbank news aggregator on
print media mentions of "Volkswagen" in the United States. The database covers roughly
5,000 U.S. newspapers, newswires, journals, and magazines. Figure 1 shows that men-
tions of "Volkswagen" spiked from a pre-scandal monthly average of 1,500 to 5,500 in
September 2015. This sudden increase suggests that the scandal caught the media and
public by surprise.

           Figure 1: Monthly Print Media Mentions of "Volkswagen" in the United States
           6000
           5000
           4000
   Count
           3000
           2000
           1000
           0




           Jan. 2011   Jan. 2012     Jan. 2013        Jan. 2014    Jan. 2015      Jan. 2016
                                                 Month
Note: Dashed line shows the month of the Volkswagen emissions scandal, September 2015. Data come
from the Newsbank news aggregator, which covers roughly 5,000 U.S. newspapers, newswires, journals, and
magazines. Time period covered is January 2011 to August 2016.

    Along with the adverse attention in the media, VW's stock price declined precipitously
following the EPA's announcement; the visually evident discontinuity on September 18 in


                                                  7
figure 2 suggests that the scandal came as a surprise to market participants. Volkswagen's
end-of-day stock price fell by 33 percent in the two trading days following the scandal.8
The stock price subsequently recovered some of its losses over the rest of the year, but at
the end of August 2016 it remained 24 percent lower than its pre-scandal closing price.

                                        Figure 2: End-of-Day Stock Price for Volkswagen Group
                                  60
                                  50
           Stock Price, Dollars
                                  40
                                  30
                                  20




                                   Jan. 2011   Jan. 2012   Jan. 2013       Jan. 2014   Jan. 2015   Jan. 2016
                                                                           Day
Note: Dashed line shows the date of the Volkswagen emissions scandal, dated September 18, 2015. End-
of-day price shown for Volkswagen ADR listed on U.S. stock exchanges. Data come from the Bloomberg
database. Time period covered is January 2011 to August 2016.


   Furthermore, the tone of social media discussion regarding Volkswagen suddenly shifted,
with positive sentiment declining and negative sentiment spiking in the aftermath of the
scandal. We document this point with novel sentiment measures from Networked In-
sights.9 We focus on sentiment data from Twitter, an online social media networking
service where some 300 million active monthly users share short messages. The sentiment
   8
      To focus on the effects within the United States and to avoid currency effects from the euro-based VW
listing on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, we use the price of the VW American Depository Receipt (ADR)
traded on U.S. markets. ADRs are issued by a U.S. depository bank and entitle the owner to shares in an
international security; they are priced and pay dividends in U.S. dollars, and are traded through broker-
dealers.
    9
      Networked Insights is a data analytics company, founded in 2006, that provides a platform for real-time
semantic analyses of social media posts; its primary clients are consumer-facing companies that use the
platform to manage their brands.


                                                                       8
                                  Figure 3: Daily Twitter Sentiment Towards Volkswagen

                                            A: Positive Sentiment in Excess of August 2015 Average



                            .2
                            .1
             Excess Share
                            0
                            -.1
                            -.2




                            Sep. 4, 2015    Sep. 11, 2015        Sep. 18, 2015       Sep. 25, 2015    Oct. 2, 2015
                                                                      Day



                                           B: Negative Sentiment in Excess of August 2015 Average
                            .4
                            .3
             Excess Share
                            .2
                            .1
                            0
                            -.1




                            Sep. 4, 2015    Sep. 11, 2015        Sep. 18, 2015       Sep. 25, 2015    Oct. 2, 2015
                                                                      Day

                                                  Volkswagen                       Volkswagen Group
Note: Dashed vertical lines show the date of the Volkswagen emissions scandal, dated September 18, 2015.
The figure shows the normalized shares of tweets expressing positive/negative Twitter sentiment towards
a particular make. The denominator of these shares includes positive, negative and neutral sentiments.
Sentiment shares are normalized by subtracting the average sentiment share from August 10 to August
31, 2015. We show a window of ±14 days around September 18, 2015. Volkswagen Group is defined as
Volkswagen, Audi, and Porsche. Data come from Networked Insights.


                                                                   9
measures in our data set are calculated from a 10 percent random sample from Twitter.
Networked Insights categorizes tweets as displaying positive, neutral, or negative senti-
ment toward the mentioned company. Posts are excluded from the analysis if they are not
written in English or if the user accounts are associated with locations outside the United
States. Networked Insights also constructs brand identifiers. An identifier for Volkswagen,
for instance, is meant to collate mentions of "Volkswagen," "VW," "#Volkswagen," and the
like. Given the size of the underlying data set, Networked Insights only retains the past
13 months of data. We requested the data in September 2016, so our time series begins
on August 10, 2015, a little over a month before the scandal became public. We first cre-
ate average daily sentiment shares (positive/negative/neutral) for August 2015 for each
vehicle make in our data to serve as a pre-scandal baseline. We then construct sentiment
shares in excess of this August baseline for each day.
    Figure 3 displays these sentiment metrics for VW and the VW Group two weeks before
and after the scandal. Panel A shows a decrease in positive sentiment toward VW, from
an average of 3 percentage points higher than its August baseline in the two weeks prior
to the scandal to an average of 8 percentage points below in the two weeks following
the scandal. Panel B displays a sharp increase in negative sentiment toward VW: from an
average of 3 percentage points below to an average of 26 percentage points above.10 The
results for the entire Volkswagen group (which includes Audi and Porsche) are similar.
Together, these two panels suggest that Volkswagen's reputation suffered in the aftermath
of the September 18 EPA announcement.


2.3     "German Engineering" as a Group Identity
    Having established that the VW scandal was a shock and that it affected VW's reputa-
tion, we now provide evidence that there is a collective German reputation through which
the scandal may have had a spillover effect on the other German automakers.
    We first note that German auto manufacturing companies have historically leveraged
the broader reputation of "German engineering" in their marketing. For instance, a VW
commercial from 2014 states, "... Everyone knows that the best cars in the world come
from Germany." The ad fades out to the question: "Isn't it time for German engineering?",
and then pivots to the German phrase "Das Auto" ("The Car"), presumably in order to
associate VW and "German engineering" with the idea of the archetypical car.
  10
    The pre-scandal and post-scandal means are statistically different at the 1 percent significance level for
both positive and negative sentiment.




                                                     10
It is, therefore, not surprising that following the scandal, media attention to "German
engineering" spiked, with 130 print articles mentioning the term in September 2015, a
five-fold increase over the preceding months. We illustrate this increase in figure 4 using
data from the Newsbank aggregator. A recurring theme in this news coverage was the
notion that the scandal might tarnish the broader reputation of German manufacturing
firms. As part of this coverage of the scandal, Reuters published an article on September
22, 2015, titled "VW scandal threatens `Made in Germany' image" (Chambers (2015)). A
day later, Reuters doubled down with an article titled "Volkswagen could pose bigger threat
to German economy than Greek crisis" (Nienaber (2015)), which included the claim: "The
broader concern for the German government is that other car makers such as Mercedes-
Benz and BMW could suffer fallout from the Volkswagen disaster."11




 11
      See also Bruckner (2015), Werz (2016), and Remsky (2017).


                                                  11
 Figure 4: Monthly Print Media Mentions of "German Engineering" in the United States

           150
           100
   Count
           50
           0




           Jan. 2011   Jan. 2012     Jan. 2013      Jan. 2014      Jan. 2015      Jan. 2016
                                                 Month
Note: Dashed line shows the month of the Volkswagen emissions scandal, September 2015. Data come
from the Newsbank news aggregator, which covers roughly 5,000 U.S. newspapers, newswires, journals, and
magazines. Time period covered is January 2011 to August 2016.



3 Difference-in-Differences Evidence on the Spillover Effect

    In this section, we present difference-in-differences evidence that the VW emissions
scandal had a spillover effect on the other German auto manufacturers (BMW, Mercedes-
Benz, and Smart). We show that the scandal substantially reduced the U.S. sales growth
of the other German automakers relative to their non-German counterparts. Note that be-
cause VW vehicles and other vehicles are potential substitutes, there may not be a cleanly
untreated control group for a difference-in-differences analysis. Therefore, we interpret
these results as uncovering the relative effects of the scandal for the non-VW German and
non-German automakers. Nonetheless, we argue that the difference-in-differences results


                                                  12
do provide evidence for the existence of a German-specific spillover, despite the presence
of two other mechanisms. In the ensuing section 4, we estimate a model of vehicle demand
to quantify the sales decline of the non-VW German automakers caused by the scandal and
to isolate the spillover effect.


3.1       Regression Results
    To study the effects of the VW emissions scandal, we obtain data on light vehicle sales
from WardsAuto, one of the premier automotive industry publications. WardsAuto receives
sales data from all auto manufacturers in the United States. It is thus in principle a com-
plete count of light vehicle sales in the United States.12 An individual observation in the
data contains identifiers for the vehicle make (e.g., Honda or Volkswagen), the vehicle
model (e.g., Civic or Jetta), and the vehicle powertype (e.g., gas or diesel). The data set
contains 37 makes, listed in appendix table A.1, and 357 distinct models. The sample
period is January 2010 to August 2016. We identify six makes as of German origin: Audi,
BMW, Mercedes-Benz, Porsche, Smart, and Volkswagen.13
    We use a difference-in-differences regression specification to show how the scandal af-
fected German auto manufacturers relative to the non-German auto manufacturers. We
begin the analysis by constructing a total sales measure for each make, so that an obser-
vation is a make-month (e.g., Honda in January 2016). We focus on 12-month log sales
growth, which parsimoniously accounts for make-specific trends and make-month-specific
seasonality in the level of vehicle sales; they start in January 2011. Following a standard
difference-in-differences regression specification (e.g., Angrist and Krueger (1999)), we
estimate the following regression:

                                          yit = i + t + Tit + it ,                                         (1)

where yit = ln Salesit - ln Salesit-12 is the 12-month log sales growth rate of vehicle make
i at time t. i is a make-specific fixed effect, capturing make-level heterogeneity in growth
rates. t is a fixed effect for each month in the sample, capturing seasonality in vehicle
sales and the potential impacts of time-varying fuel prices. Tit is an indicator taking value
one for the German auto manufacturers on and after the scandal date, and zero otherwise.
  12
       The official U.S. vehicle sales statistics in the national accounting data are based on the same data we
use.
  13
    Mini, the present-day incarnation of a line manufactured by the British Motor Corporation and its suc-
cessors between 1959 and 2000, is currently owned by BMW. Given its historical association with Britain,
we classify Mini as not of German origin. We consider alternative classifications in appendix B.1 and show
that the results are not sensitive to this choice.


                                                       13
    We exclude the Volkswagen Group from the sample to focus the analysis on the eco-
nomic consequences of reputation for German automakers not directly implicated by the
scandal. We weight this regression by the square root of sales volumes to dampen the
impact of highly volatile sales growth rates of small sales levels. Figure 5 shows that the
pre-scandal trends in sales growth for the non-VW German and non-German auto manu-
facturers are comparable, suggesting the non-Germans as a reasonable comparison group
for studying the scandal's effects.14 The coefficient of interest,  , captures the scandal's
differential impact on non-VW German auto manufacturers relative to non-German auto
manufacturers.

                                                 Figure 5: Differences in U.S. Light Vehicle Sales Growth
                                 .3
   Year-over-Year Log Sales Growth
                                 .2
                                 .1
                                 0
                                 -.1




                                     Jan. 2011      Jan. 2012     Jan. 2013     Jan. 2014   Jan. 2015       Jan. 2016
                                                                               Month

                                                                German excl. VW Group             Non-German



Note: Dashed vertical line shows the month of the Volkswagen emissions scandal, September 2015. Data
come from Ward's Automotive. Volkswagen Group is defined as Volkswagen, Audi, and Porsche.

  14
              Appendix B.2 adds some additional evidence for this assessment.


                                                                              14
    The estimation results in table 1 show that the scandal reduced the sales growth rates
of the non-VW German automakers by 9.2 percentage points relative to their non-German
counterparts (column (1)). Furthermore, columns (2)­(4) document that the scandal re-
duced sales growth for each of the three non-VW German auto manufacturers individually:
BMW's sales growth rate by 13.1 percentage points, Mercedes-Benz's by 5.5 percentage
points, and Smart's by 30.3 percentage points. Appendix B.3 shows that our finding of
a relative decline in the non-VW German automakers' sales is robust to estimating an
unweighted regression, to using a different growth rate measure, and to estimating an al-
ternative regression in which we use log sales levels as the dependent variable and include
make-specific time trends and seasonal patterns.

      Table 1: Difference-in-Differences Estimates--U.S. Light Vehicle Sales Growth
             German vs. Non-German Auto Manufacturers, Excl. VW Group


 Dependent Variable                                  12-month Log Sales Growth
                                                                   Mercedes-
                                       Baseline         BMW                          Smart
                                                                      Benz
                                          (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
 German × Post-Scandal                  -0.092          -0.131        -0.055         -0.303
                                       (0.030)         (0.011)       (0.011)        (0.012)

 Time Fixed Effects                      Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
 Make Fixed Effects                      Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
 R2                                     0.303           0.307         0.306          0.307
 N                                      2150            2014          2014           2014

 Note: Unit of observation is a make-month (e.g., the log growth of all BMW sales from January
 2014 to January 2015). Time period covered is January 2011 to August 2016. Standard errors
 clustered at the make level in parentheses. VW Group (VW, Audi, and Porsche) excluded from
 all regressions. The comparison group in all four columns is the non-German automakers. VW
 emissions scandal dated September 18, 2015. Sales are measured in units sold. All regressions
 are weighted by the square root of sales volumes. Data come from Ward's Automotive.


3.2   Discussion of the Spillover Effect
    In this section, we review three forces through which the VW emissions scandal could
have driven the relative decline in vehicle sales documented in the previous section, and
we provide suggestive evidence that a country-specific spillover exists even when taking
into account the two other forces.
    The first force is substitution away from VW: the scandal led consumers to substitute
away from VW to other makes. This substitution effect should have increased sales for both

                                                15
the other German and the non-German auto manufacturers. However, figure 5 shows that
sales for the non-VW German auto manufacturers declined following the scandal. More-
over, the strength of this effect may have differed for the two groups. If VW vehicles are
more closely substituted by German rather than non-German vehicles--as our estimates
in section 4 will show--then the substitution away from VW should have increased Ger-
man sales by more than non-German sales. Therefore, if this substitution effect had been
the only operative force, the difference-in-differences coefficient estimate in the previous
section should have been positive. Our estimated coefficient of ­9.2 percent thus suggests
that substitution away from VW alone cannot explain the effect of the scandal documented
in the previous section.
    The second force is substitution away from diesel vehicles arising from the scandal's
origins in the diesel market. The strength of this effect may have differed across automak-
ers based on their different exposures to that market. To assess whether the non-VW
German automakers' relative decline in sales was fully driven by this force, we repeat the
difference-in-differences regression for diesel sales and non-diesel sales separately. The
estimation results in table 2 show that the scandal reduced German automakers' sales
growth of non-diesel vehicles by 8.4 percentage points and that of the diesel vehicles by
a larger--albeit less precisely estimated--21.5 percentage points relative to that of non-
German auto manufacturers. While the latter result on diesel sales confirms that this

      Table 2: Difference-in-Differences Estimates Separating Diesel and non-Diesel
             German vs. Non-German Auto Manufacturers, Excl. VW Group


 Dependent Variable                                  12-month Log Sales Growth
 Power Type                               Baseline          non-Diesel            Diesel
                                            (1)                 (2)                 (3)
 German × Post-Scandal                     -0.092              -0.084              -0.215
                                          (0.030)             (0.033)             (0.126)

 Time Fixed Effects                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 Make Fixed Effects                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 R2                                        0.303               0.300               0.295
 N                                         2150                2150                 428

 Note: Unit of observation is a make-month (e.g., the log growth of all BMW sales from January
 2014 to January 2015). Time period covered is January 2011 to August 2016. Standard errors
 clustered at the make level in parentheses. VW Group (VW, Audi, and Porsche) excluded from
 all regressions. VW emissions scandal dated September 18, 2015. Sales are measured in units
 sold. All regressions are weighted by the square root of sales volumes. Data come from Ward's
 Automotive.

                                              16
force may contribute to our estimate, the negative and statistically significant decline in
non-diesel sales growth indicates that substitution away from diesel cannot, on its own,
explain the scandal's relative effects on the other German automakers; a third channel
must have been at play.15
    The third force could be a reputational spillover, consistent with the aforementioned
notion of "German engineering" and the surge in the media mentions of "German engi-
neering" following the scandal. In sum, even though the substitution forces away from
diesel and away from VW to non-VW German vehicles relative to non-German vehicles
were likely at play, they cannot on their own explain the difference-in-differences results.
We consider this evidence as strongly suggestive of the existence of a German-specific rep-
utational spillover from the scandal.
    Nonetheless, the analyses in this section do not allow us to quantify the spillover inde-
pendently of the two substitution forces nor to interpret it unambiguously as arising from
collective reputation. We therefore estimate a model of vehicle demand in the next section
and conduct counterfactual simulations to quantify separately the sales loss to the non-VW
German auto manufacturers from each of the three forces. We finalize our argument in
the subsequent section 5 by providing evidence suggesting that the spillover effect indeed
arose from collective reputation.

4     Demand Estimation and Decomposition: Quantifying
      the Spillover Effect
   In this section, we estimate a model of vehicle demand and use it to decompose the
scandal's impact on the sales of non-VW German automakers into three forces: substitution
away from VW , substitution away from diesel, and the spillover effect.

4.1     Demand Model
   Demand for vehicles is captured by a nested-Logit model where the indirect utility uijt
that consumer i derives from purchasing a vehicle j in year t is given by:

                                    uijt = pjt + xjt  + jt + ijt ,                                     (2)

where pjt is the price of vehicle j in year t, and the vector xjt captures key observable
attributes of the vehicle, for example, miles per gallon and vehicle weight. xjt also in-
  15
     Also note that Smart never sold diesel vehicles in the United States, yet, as table 1 shows, was still
impacted by the scandal.


                                                   17
cludes fixed effects at the make, power type, and year levels, as well as make-specific time
trends. Finally, xjt contains interaction terms such as VWj × Post-Scandalt : the interaction
of VWj , which takes the value 1 if the make of vehicle j is Volkswagen and 0 otherwise, and
Post-Scandalt , which takes the value 1 if year t is after the scandal and 0 before the scandal.
Other such interaction terms are Other Germanj × Post-Scandalt and Dieselj × Post-Scandalt .
The model thus allows the scandal to affect vehicle demand through these interactions with
an indicator for the post-scandal period. The term jt , captures vehicle characteristics that
are not observable to the econometrician but are known to consumers and auto manufac-
turers. Finally, ijt is an idiosyncratic taste shock. Consumers have an outside option of
not buying a vehicle, the utility of which we normalize to ui0t = i0t .
    Given our focus on collective reputation at the country level, we view a nested-Logit
model with country-level nests as a parsimonious way to allow vehicles with the same
country origin and those with different country origins to have different degrees of sub-
stitutability. Specifically, we assume that idiosyncratic tastes ijt follow a generalized ex-
treme value distribution that reflects this different substitutability. That is, ijt and ij t
are allowed to be correlated if and only if the makes of j and j have the same country of
origin. Following Berry (1994), the nested-Logit model gives us the following estimation
equation:
                           ln sjt - ln s0t = pjt + xjt  +  ln sj |gt + jt ,                 (3)

where (sjt , s0t , sj |gt , pjt , xjt ) are data, (,  ,  ) are parameters to be estimated, and jt is
the error term. We use sjt to denote the market share of vehicle j in year t, s0t to denote
the share for the outside option of not purchasing a vehicle, and sj |gt to denote the market
share of vehicle j within the total sales of all vehicles from country g .16 The nesting pa-
rameter   [0, 1] captures the correlation in preferences for products of the same country
of origin. Large values of  indicate stronger correlation and more substitution within the
same country of origin; as  approaches zero, the model becomes a standard Logit model.


4.2     Data and Estimation
    To estimate our model of vehicle demand, we supplement the WardsAuto sales volume
data described in section 3.1 with another dataset from WardsAuto that contains informa-
tion on vehicle characteristics and list prices (i.e., manufacturers' suggested retail prices)
for all vehicles between 2010 and 2016. Unlike the sales volume data, which is at the
  16
     Specifically, in our estimation, the countries of origin are Germany, Japan, Korea, the United States, and
all others. We combine Italy, UK and Sweden into an "others" group because each of them provides only a
few vehicles to the U.S. market. When we unpack this group, we obtain similar results but some estimates
are less precise.


                                                     18
monthly frequency, the vehicle characteristics and price data is at the annual frequency.
Consequently, much like the broader literature on estimating vehicle demand (for exam-
ple, Berry et al. (1995), and Berry et al. (1999)), we estimate the model at an annual level.
Since the scandal became public in September 2015, we define all years prior to 2015 as
pre-scandal, 2016 as post-scandal, and exclude 2015 from our estimation sample.
    To simplify notation, we designate a vehicle--indexed by j in section 4.1--as a make-
model-power type (e.g., a Honda Civic with a gasoline engine). The annual vehicle char-
acteristics and price data are reported at the vehicle-trim level, as opposed to the monthly
sales volume data, which are reported at the vehicle level. We thus aggregate the price
and characteristics data for each vehicle, as a baseline, through the median across trim
options.17 We also investigate and report the robustness of our results with respect to two
different aggregation methods by using the mean or the minimum across trims.
    Following the aforementioned literature, we define market size by the number of house-
holds in the United States. We use the all-items Consumer Price Index for all urban con-
sumers published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics to express prices in constant 2015
dollars. Appendix C.1 provides summary statistics of prices and characteristics.
    Because the price pjt and the within-group market share sj |gt of a vehicle might be
correlated with the unobservable demand shock jt , ordinary least squares estimation of
equation (3) could lead to biased estimates of the model coefficients. Consequently, we
use an instrumental-variables approach. Specifically, we construct instrumental variables
based on the characteristics of competing products, as in the work of Berry et al. (1995).
In the oligopolistic market for automobiles, the price and market share of vehicle j de-
pend not only on the vehicle's own characteristics, but also on the characteristics of all
the other vehicles available in the market. This correlation between the characteristics
of other vehicles and the potentially endogenous variables (pjt , sj |gt ) makes these charac-
teristics relevant instruments. Under the timing assumption that automakers decide the
characteristics of their vehicles before the realization of the demand shocks, the character-
istics of other vehicles are uncorrelated with vehicle j 's demand shock, and hence they are
also exogenous instruments. Appendix C.2 presents the first-stage regressions for prices
and within-group market shares, and details the instrumental variables we use.
    Table 3 reports our estimation results for the nested-Logit model in equation (3). In the
baseline specification in column (1), we include separate interactions of the Post-Scandal
  17
    For instance, Hyundai supplied three trims of the Genesis four-door sedan in 2016: the Genesis 3.8, the
Genesis 3.8 AWD (all-wheel drive), and the Genesis 5.0 Ultimate. Their highway miles per gallon were 18,
16, and 15, respectively, so in our baseline specification we would assign a value of 16 miles per gallon to
the 2016 Hyundai Genesis. Our dataset does not break out model sales by trim type, so we cannot calculate
sales-weighted average characteristics for each model.



                                                    19
indicator with indicators for VW, Audi, Porsche, and with a single indicator for the group
of non-VW German auto manufacturers to capture how the scandal affected the consumer
valuations of these makes. Subsequently, in column (2), we unpack the set of non-VW Ger-
man auto manufacturers and include separate interactions for BMW, Mercedes-Benz, and
Smart. In columns (3) and (4), we re-examine the baseline specification with, respectively,
mean and minimum aggregation of characteristics across trims. All specifications include
make fixed effects,18 power-type fixed effects, and year fixed effects to capture hetero-
geneity at these levels that may not be captured by other covariates in the specification.
All specifications also include a make-specific time trend.
    The estimated coefficients in table 3 show that consumer utility decreases with a ve-
hicle's price and increases with a vehicle's size, fuel efficiency, and horsepower/weight.
Comparing results across the four columns, the coefficient estimates are stable. Therefore,
in what follows, we take column (1) as our baseline.
    The estimated parameters show that the scandal reduced consumer valuations for
makes in the VW Group, with the strongest decline for Volkswagen proper. Specifically,
the estimated coefficient on VWj × Post-Scandalt is negative (­0.275) and statistically sig-
nificant, implying a decrease in consumer valuation of VW after the scandal. To interpret
the magnitude of this coefficient, we compute the marginal effect of the VWj ×Post-Scandalt
term as follows: we set this term to be zero while holding all other variables and coeffi-
cients constant, and recompute VW sales in 2016, the post-scandal year. The simulated
VW sales are 989,446, while the sales in the data are 322,902. The marginal effect is
therefore a 67% decline i.e., (989,446-322,902)/989,446 in VW sales.
    Reinforcing the evidence from section 3, the estimates from the vehicle-demand model
show that the scandal generated negative spillovers to the other German auto manufactur-
ers. The estimated coefficient for Other Germanj × Post-Scandalt in column (1) is negative
and statistically significant, with a marginal treatment effect corresponding to a 41% de-
cline in sales for the non-VW German auto manufacturers. In column (2) we look at the
changes in valuation for these German auto manufacturers--BMW, Mercedes-Benz, and
Smart--separately. We again find a negative effect of the VW scandal on the consumer
valuation of each of these three automakers.
    We also find a decline in consumers' tastes for diesel vehicles following the VW scandal.
The marginal effect of Dieselj × Post-Scandalt was a 61% sales decline for diesel vehicles.
Given the scandal's origin in the diesel segment, this decline is expected.
    The estimated nest parameter  is 0.85, indicating that consumers viewed vehicles
within the same country grouping as closer substitutes than vehicles across country group-
 18
      We group makes with fewer than ten observations in our sample into an "other make" indicator.


                                                    20
                Table 3: Demand Estimation Results--U.S. Light Vehicle Sales


Trim Aggregation                        Median          Median          Mean             Min
                                          (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
Price ($1000)                            -0.008          -0.008         -0.010          -0.006
                                        (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.003)         (0.002)
Horsepower/Weight                        2.636           2.688          4.839            0.698
                                        (1.284)         (1.304)        (1.738)         (0.993)
Weight (1000 lb)                         0.049           0.049          0.078            0.007
                                        (0.025)         (0.025)        (0.032)         (0.020)
Length                                   0.004           0.005          0.004           0.005
                                        (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)
Miles Per Gallon                         0.009           0.009          0.010           0.008
                                        (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.003)         (0.002)
VW × Post-Scandal                        -0.275          -0.276         -0.274          -0.252
                                        (0.123)         (0.124)        (0.129)         (0.105)
Audi × Post-Scandal                      -0.084          -0.083         -0.094          -0.091
                                        (0.088)         (0.090)        (0.094)         (0.075)
Porsche × Post-Scandal                   -0.111          -0.110         -0.107          -0.125
                                        (0.107)         (0.109)        (0.141)         (0.089)
Other German × Post-Scandal              -0.185                         -0.194          -0.172
                                        (0.079)                        (0.091)         (0.066)
BMW × Post-Scandal                                       -0.111
                                                        (0.107)
Mercedes-Benz × Post-Scandal                             -0.239
                                                        (0.112)
Smart × Post-Scandal                                     -0.259
                                                        (0.174)
Diesel × Post-Scandal                    -0.151          -0.153         -0.158          -0.150
                                        (0.082)         (0.083)        (0.086)         (0.079)
Nest Parameter ( )                       0.851           0.849          0.843           0.864
                                        (0.040)         (0.041)        (0.042)         (0.039)
Make Fixed Effects                         yes             yes            yes             yes
Power-Type Fixed Effects                   yes             yes            yes             yes
Year Fixed Effects                         yes             yes            yes             yes
Make-Specific Time Trends                  yes             yes            yes             yes

Note: Unit of observation is vehicle-year. A vehicle is defined as a make-model-power type (e.g.,
a Honda Civic with a gasoline engine). Time period covered is 2010 to 2016, with 2015 omitted
as the scandal year. Data come from Ward's Automotive. The number of observations in all four
specifications is 2,090.




                                                21
ings. In other words, a consumer switching away from Volkswagen was much more likely
to prefer another German vehicle to a non-German one, ceteris paribus.
    Overall, the estimation results suggest three channels through which the VW scandal
affected the sales of the non-VW German auto manufacturers. First, we find a significant
decline in the consumer valuation of VW. In a market where differentiated vehicles are
(imperfect) substitutes, this decline in consumer valuation of VW drove sales away from
VW toward vehicles from other makes. Further, this force drove sales disproportionately
toward other German auto manufacturers, because their vehicles are closer substitutes to
VW than are non-German vehicles. We refer to this increase in sales as the "substitution
away from Volkswagen Group" effect. Second, we find a decrease in consumers' taste for
diesel vehicles. Since BMW and Mercedes-Benz continued to sell diesel vehicles after the
scandal, their sales declined due to this substitution away from diesel.19 Third, according
to our estimates, consumer valuations of the other German auto manufacturers declined
above and beyond the reduced valuation for diesel vehicles, leading to a further decline
in their sales. In what follows, we quantify the overall effect of the scandal as well as the
importance of each of these three channels.

4.3      Quantifying Each Effect
    To quantify the effect of the scandal and decompose the overall effect into the sub-
stitution, diesel, and country-specific spillover channels, we conduct three counterfactual
simulations for the year 2016. Table 4 summarizes the design of these three simulations.
In the first simulation (CF1), we turn off all three channels and simulate what would have
happened had the scandal never transpired. To do so, we set the post-scandal interaction
dummies to zero and recompute vehicle sales. Therefore, the comparison of the simulated
sales and revenues of CF1 and those in the data gives us the overall effect of the scandal.
In the second simulation (CF2), we turn on the channel of substitution away from the VW
Group. Specifically, we keep the estimated post-scandal change in the consumer valua-
tions of the three VW Group automakers (Volkswagen, Audi, and Porsche) by setting their
post-scandal interaction dummies to one, while leaving the other interaction dummies at
zero. The difference between CF2 and CF1, therefore, quantifies the effect of substitution
away from the VW Group. The third simulation (CF3) extends the second by also allowing
for the estimated change in consumers' tastes for diesel vehicles. As a result, the difference
between CF3 and CF2 isolates the diesel effect. Finally, because CF3 includes two of the
three channels but not the country-specific spillover channel, the difference between the
(post-scandal) data and CF3 quantifies the spillover effect.
 19
      As has been mentioned, Smart has never sold diesel vehicles in the United States.


                                                     22
                                 Table 4: Counterfactual Designs


                                                CF1            CF2              CF3         Data


 Substitution Away from VW Group                 no            yes              yes          yes

 Substitution Away from Diesel                   no             no              yes          yes

 Spillover to Other German Automakers            no             no              no           yes


            Table 5: VW Scandal's Impact on Other German Auto Manufacturers


                                              Comparison          Vehicle Sales        Revenue
                                                                                      ($ billion)


 Overall Scandal                               Data ­ CF1            ­104,661            ­$5.2


 Substitution Away from VW Group               CF2 ­ CF1             +398,032           +$22.0

 Substitution Away from Diesel                 CF3 ­ CF2             ­30,609             ­$0.7

 Spillover to Other German Automakers          Data ­ CF3            ­472,084           ­$26.5

 Note: Counterfactual designs are defined in table 4. The simulated effects are for 2016, the first
 calendar year after the scandal. Revenue effects are expressed in 2015 dollars.


    Table 5 reports the overall effects of the scandal on non-VW German auto manufactur-
ers and a decomposition of the overall effects into the three channels. Together, the scan-
dal's three channels reduced the sales of non-VW German auto manufacturers by 104,661
units worth $5.2 billion.20 That decline amounts to 13 percent of their counterfactual sales
in the absence of the scandal.21 From table 5, we can also see that this decline was mainly
driven by the spillover effect, which lowered sales for the non-VW German automakers by
472,084 vehicles and reduced their revenues by $26.5 billion. This effect was partially
offset by the increase in sales for the non-VW German auto manufacturers, as consumers
switched away from Volkswagen (by 398,032 units worth $22 billion), and reinforced by
a decline in sales as tastes for diesel fell (by 30,609 units worth $0.7 billion). As a result,
the overall effect was substantially smaller than the spillover effect.
  20
    The change in revenue is computed based on the list prices in the data.
  21
    According to the simulation results from CF1, their sales would have been 798,580 units had the VW
scandal not taken place.
                                                 23
    The coexistence of a group reputation spillover and a substitution effect, which par-
tially offset each other, is unlikely to be a coincidence: automakers that are associated
closely enough to have a collective reputation are also likely to produce closer substitutes.
Indeed, our estimated nest parameter  = 0.85 suggests that vehicles with the same coun-
try of origin are closer substitutes. We believe that the pattern that the overall effect was
smaller than the spillover effect is likely to generalize to other settings in which collective
reputation plays an important role. Because a shock to a group member that generates
a decline in collective reputation is also likely to produce large within-group substitution,
the combined effect of such a shock that would be measured by difference-in-differences
methods even with an untreated control group is likely to understate the spillover effect.
    The three counterfactuals we discuss in this section are not the only way to decompose
the overall effect. For instance, in table 5, we quantify substitution away from the VW
Group by comparing two counterfactuals, CF1 and CF2, only one of which allows for this
channel to be in effect. We could alternatively quantify this channel by comparing the data,
in which all channels are active, to a counterfactual which turns off only the substitution
away from VW Group channel. In principle, the non-linearity of the demand model means
that the order in which each channel is turned on or off could affect the decomposition
results. For ease of exposition, we detail all possible such counterfactuals and comparisons
in appendix C.3. In table 6, we show the minimum and maximum effects of each chan-
nel over all possible comparisons. The ranges for the decomposition are rather narrow
quantitatively, demonstrating that our results are robust to different decompositions.


    Table 6: Bounding VW Scandal's Impact on non-VW German Auto Manufacturers


                                                 Vehicle Sales            Revenue ($ billion)

                                              Min           Max           Min           Max


 Substitution Away from VW Group           +378,045      +405,450       +$21.2        +$22.7

 Substitution Away from Diesel              ­38,137       ­22,628        ­$1.5         ­$0.7

 Spillover to Other German Automakers      ­472,084      ­444,569        ­$26.5        ­$24.9

 Note: The simulated effects are for 2016, the first calendar year after the scandal. Revenue
 effects are expressed in 2015 dollars. Appendix C.3 details all possible counterfactual designs
 and results that give rise to the bounds in the table.




                                               24
5      Interpretation of the Spillover Effect
    In this section, we argue that the most plausible interpretation of the spillover effect
documented and quantified in the previous two sections is that it arises from a collective
reputation shared by all German automakers selling vehicles in the United States. As men-
tioned in section 2, German auto manufacturers use the notion of "German engineering"
in their advertising, providing prima facie evidence that they share a collective reputation.
Here, we begin by presenting more direct evidence that the VW emissions scandal led to
a deterioration in public perceptions of the other German automakers sharing a collective
reputation. We then discuss an alternative information-based interpretation and argue
that it is less persuasive. Finally, we describe subsequent scandals involving the German
automakers, clarify that they are only tangentially related to the original VW emissions
scandal, and thus conclude that these subsequent scandals are unlikely to explain our
documented spillover effect.
    We use the Twitter sentiment data described in section 2.2 to show that perceptions of
the non-VW German automakers suffered in the aftermath of the VW emissions scandal.
Specifically, we estimate the difference-in-differences specification in equation (1) with
Twitter sentiment data for the non-VW German automakers. The unit of observation is a
make-day.22 Column (1) of table 7 shows a statistically significant decline of 3.5 percentage
points in positive sentiment toward non-VW German auto manufacturers as a result of
the scandal (we discuss the results for negative Twitter sentiment in column (2) later in
this section). To put this number in perspective, the share of tweets expressing positive
sentiment toward those companies averaged 12.3 percent in August 2015. We consider this
deterioration in positive social-media sentiment towards the other German automakers
as suggesting that the sales spillover effect we document arose from a country-specific
collective reputation.
    An alternative interpretation of the spillover effect to the non-VW German auto man-
ufacturers is that, following the scandal, consumers suspected these other German auto
manufacturers of having engaged in cheating behavior similar to VW's. For example, con-
sumers might have suspected that the German automakers cheated by implicitly collud-
ing through a common labor market for research and development personnel or through
shared upstream manufacturers in the supply chain. Such a suspicion could have arisen
  22
     Of the 37 auto makes with light vehicle sales in the Ward's U.S. data (our data source for vehicle sales),
Alfa Romeo, Saab, Suzuki and Tesla did not have identifiers in the Networked Insights database; see ta-
ble A.2 in appendix A. The estimation sample is a window of ±14 days around the scandal eruption date
of September 18, 2015, and the outcome variable is the share of tweets expressing positive/negative Twit-
ter sentiment towards a particular make. The denominator of these shares includes positive, negative and
neutral sentiments.


                                                     25
             Table 7: Difference-in-Differences Estimates--Twitter Sentiment
              German vs. Non-German Auto Manufacturers, Excl. VW Group


 Dependent Variable                       Positive Sentiment           Negative Sentiment
                                                   (1)                         (2)
 German × Post-Scandal                          -0.035                        0.002
                                               (0.006)                       (0.006)

 Time Fixed Effects                              Yes                           Yes
 Make Fixed Effects                              Yes                           Yes
 R2                                             0.348                         0.268
 N                                               840                           840

 Note: Unit of observation is a make-day. Sentiment shares are normalized by subtracting the
 average sentiment share from August 10 to August 31, 2015. The denominator of these shares
 includes positive, negative and neutral sentiments. The estimation period comprises 14 days
 before and after scandal date of September 18, 2015. Volkswagen Group is defined as Volkswa-
 gen, Audi, and Porsche. All regressions include make and time fixed effects, and are weighted
 by tweet volume. Data come from Networked Insights.


fundamentally from a shared German identity, in which case this alternative channel is ul-
timately connected to group reputation. If, however, such a suspicion arose from indepen-
dent information available to consumers around the time of the scandal, this alternative
interpretation would indeed be distinct from our notion of collective reputation.
    We now present four arguments against this alternative interpretation. Our first two
arguments provide evidence suggesting that any such "shared suspicion" was not substanti-
ated by information available to consumers around the time of the VW scandal. Our third
argument is that patterns of social media sentiment are indeed inconsistent with con-
sumers possessing information that implicated the other German auto manufacturers in
malfeasance similar to VW's. Our fourth argument goes further and presents online search
patterns suggesting that consumers did not possess such suspicions in the first place.
    First, there was no concurrent notion of malfeasance by the non-VW German automak-
ers. The West Virginia University study that ultimately led to the discovery of the VW
scandal focused on three diesel vehicles: a VW Passat, a VW Jetta, and a BMW X5. The
VW vehicles failed the test, whereas the BMW vehicle passed. No Mercedes-Benz vehicles
were tested (see Thompson et al. (2014)). In addition, Mercedes-Benz and BMW had little
technical reason to resort to cheating devices, as their diesel vehicles tended to be larger
than VW's. As a result, they used exclusively the Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) sys-
tem as their N Ox -control system, which adds urea and water to the exhaust flows. This


                                              26
system is more effective and more reliable in reducing N Ox emissions but requires more
space for the urea and water containers. VW, with on average smaller vehicles in its fleet,
developed a different system, a nitrogen oxide trap, which the VW engineers could never
get to operate with the same efficiency as SCR systems.23 This difficulty was what led
to VW's deception in the first place: VW would not have been able to comply with U.S.
regulations without cheating (Zycher (2017)). Finally, media at the time wrote that non-
VW German automakers were not implicated in the scandal. On September 22, 2015, for
instance, CNN wrote (Petroff (2015)): "But before you start worrying about the complete
collapse of the German auto industry, it's worth repeating that--at least for now--the
scandal is limited to Volkswagen. Other German automakers such as Daimler, which owns
Mercedes-Benz, and BMW have said they're not affected." Even in the fall of 2017, Zycher
wrote (Zycher (2017)): "Note that VW is the only manufacturer accused of explicitly in-
stalling such systems to defeat N Ox emissions control systems. [...] In short, it is perverse
to fail to distinguish between the behavior of VW and that of the rest of the industry."
    Second, an expert on the German automotive industry we interviewed dismissed the
idea of implicit collusion through the labor market: research and development personnel
are too valuable to lose to a competitor in the hope of potential collusion gains. Consistent
with that notion, non-compete clauses for crucial engineers are widespread in the Ger-
man auto industry. This expert also rejected the possibility of implicit collusion through
parts manufacturers: key account managers at upstream part firms are strictly separated
by downstream auto manufacturers and are secluded from any development projects con-
ducted with competitor companies.
    Third, the reaction of Twitter sentiment toward the other German automakers dis-
played a very different pattern after the scandal than did the reaction of Twitter senti-
ment toward VW. As mentioned in section 2.2, negative sentiment toward VW increased
sharply following the scandal, while positive sentiment declined moderately. This evi-
dence suggests that suspicion of malfeasance manifests mainly as an increase in negative
sentiment towards the wrongdoer. Therefore, if consumers indeed had information that
other German automakers were cheating too, we should expect a similar pattern for their
social-media sentiment. However, as shown in column (2) of table 7, we find no mean-
ingful change in negative Twitter sentiment following the scandal for the other German
automakers. By contrast, positive sentiment toward them declined, as shown in column
(1). This decline in positive sentiment without a corresponding increase in negative senti-
ment suggests that perceptions of non-VW German automakers suffered after the scandal
for reasons other than consumers possessing information about malfeasance.
  23
    Only the tested VW Passat had a SCR system installed, but, according to Zycher (2017), the system was
operating with reduced efficiency to not inconvenience the driver with too frequent refills of the urea.

                                                   27
    Fourth, although online searches for Volkswagen spiked following the scandal, con-
sumers showed no heightened inquisitiveness toward the other German auto manufactur-
ers. Figure 6 contains four panels, each of which plots a time series of a single Google
search term ("Volkswagen", "VW", "BMW", and "Mercedes").24 Searches for "Volkswagen"
and "VW" in panels A and B increased dramatically in the aftermath of the scandal; the
week of September 18, the date of the EPA announcement, coincides with z-scores of 22
and 15. By contrast, searches for the two main non-VW German makes, "BMW" in panel
C and "Mercedes" in panel D, are indistinguishable from their regular fluctuations. The
Google search data implies that consumers did not become more inquisitive about the
other German auto manufacturers following the scandal. If consumers suspected those
automakers of cheating similar to VW's, they did not display it in a similar accompanying
search for information.
    Taken together, these four arguments suggest that the scandal's effects on non-VW
German automakers were unlikely to be driven by information. Rather, the scandal must
have tarnished the reputations of the other German auto manufacturers through their
association with Volkswagen, consistent with the notion of a collective reputation.
    We conclude this section with a brief discussion of some scandals involving the German
auto manufacturers, clarifying both that they are unrelated to the 2015 VW emissions
scandal and that they erupted well after the end of our study period. In the summer of
2017, it was suggested that Mercedes-Benz had also manipulated emissions (Zeit Online
(2017)), although Mercedes-Benz never admitted wrongdoing in the United States. Note
that these accusations arose almost two years after the VW scandal broke and one year
after the end of our study period. Later, in the spring of 2018, BMW had its own cheating
device scandal, which led to raids of its corporate offices in Germany (Ewing (2018)).
However, as Ewing (2018) also reports, this affair was much smaller (11 thousand vehicles
affected versus 11 million in the VW scandal). More importantly, it had no U.S. impact as
none of the affected vehicles were in the United States.25
    VW, BMW, and Mercedes-Benz are currently in unrelated legal trouble with the Euro-
pean competition authority (BBC (2018)). The case centers on collusion to standardize
parts in two areas: particle filters for gas engine vehicles and urea containers in SCR sys-
  24
     The underlying data on Google trends is weekly, and it is scaled by Google so that 100 corresponds to
the largest number of searches per week in the search period. For weekly data, Google trends only allows
users to download a few pre-defined search periods. We chose a five-year window from August 2011 to
August 2016. We normalize the series and express weekly values as z-scores, deviations from the mean that
are scaled by the standard deviation. A z-score of 1 indicates a 1-standard-deviation increase over the mean.
Both the means and the standard deviations are constructed using the period prior to September 2015.
  25
     Like Mercedes-Benz, BMW never admitted to any wrongdoing. BMW executives blamed a simple mistake
that led them to install the wrong software for the implicated vehicles. The subsequent fines imposed by
German authorities were $11.6 million, orders of magnitude smaller than the combined $25 billion of fines
for VW in the United States and Germany (see Dobush (2018)).
                                                    28
                                          Figure 6: Google Trends of Searches for German Auto Manufacturing Firms

                                               A. Volkswagen                                                                 B. VW




                  25
                                                                                             25




                  20
                                                                                             20




                  15
                                                                                             15




                  10
                                                                                             10




        Z-Score
                                                                                   Z-Score




                  5
                                                                                             5




                  0
                                                                                             0




                  -5
                                                                                             -5
                       Jan. 2012   Jan. 2013   Jan. 2014   Jan. 2015   Jan. 2016                  Jan. 2012   Jan. 2013   Jan. 2014     Jan. 2015   Jan. 2016
                                                    Week                                                                       Week

                                                 C. BMW                                                                   D. Mercedes




                  25
                                                                                             25




29
                  20
                                                                                             20




                  15
                                                                                             15




                  10
                                                                                             10




        Z-Score
                                                                                   Z-Score




                  5
                                                                                             5




                  0
                                                                                             0




                  -5
                                                                                             -5




                       Jan. 2012   Jan. 2013   Jan. 2014   Jan. 2015   Jan. 2016                  Jan. 2012   Jan. 2013   Jan. 2014     Jan. 2015   Jan. 2016
                                                    Week                                                                       Week



     Note: Dashed lines show the week of the Volkswagen emissions scandal, dated September 18, 2015. The underlying data on Google trends is weekly
     and it is scaled by Google so that 100 corresponds to the largest number of searches per week in the sample period (August 2011 to August 2016). We
     construct z-scores as the deviation from the mean of the series, normalized by its standard deviation. The z-scores on the vertical axis are constructed
     using the mean and standard deviation for each search term over the period prior to September 2015.
tems for diesel engine vehicles (which VW had only used in a few of its larger vehicles).
Notably, "The Commission said it had no indications that the automakers coordinated with
each other on the use of illegal emissions-cheating `defeat devices'." (BBC (2018)). Collu-
sion for the purposes of standardization of parts is very different from collusion on defeat
devices. Moreover, such collusion is actually legal under European competition law for
efficiency purposes, as long as the colluding parties seek permission from the competition
authorities (which they appear not to have done in this case).
    To sum up: at the time that the VW scandal broke, U.S. consumers had neither a tech-
nical nor an economic reason to believe that BMW and Mercedes-Benz were culpable of
malfeasance similar to VW. The documented Google search behavior and Twitter senti-
ment expression indeed do not appear to be consistent with the notions that BMW and
Mercedes-Benz were implicated in the same way as VW, nor that U.S. consumers believed
in collective malfeasance. By contrast, the evidence is consistent with our interpretation
of the spillover effect as arising from collective reputation.

6    Conclusion
    This paper documents that firms have economically important collective reputations in
the context of a key industry featuring national powerhouse companies. Using the 2015
VW emissions scandal as a natural experiment, we show that these collective reputations
can give rise to reputation spillovers with large economic consequences; in particular, a
scandal implicating one group member can have adverse impacts on the other group mem-
bers not implicated in the wrongdoing. We begin by using a difference-in-differences ap-
proach to provide evidence that there is a country-specific spillover from the VW emissions
scandal to the other German auto manufacturers. The impact of the VW emissions scandal
on the other German automakers is a combination of three forces: substitution away from
VW, substitution away from diesel, and the reputational spillover. We estimate a model
of vehicle demand to decompose the scandal's effect into these three constituent forces.
Our results suggest that the scandal had an economically important country-specific rep-
utational spillover. We thus provide empirical support for the existence both of collective
reputation for firms and of group reputation externalities.
    Our results also contextualize the economic harm of one of the largest industrial and
public health scandals in recent U.S. history. As a complement to the literature on the
scandal's health costs for the general public, we document its economic costs to companies
not directly tainted by the scandal but sharing a collective reputation with the wrongdoer.
Our findings suggest the need to study whether there are policy steps that could correct
the potentially adverse externalities arising from the collective reputations of firms.

                                            30
References
Alexander, Diane and Hannes Schwandt (2019), "The impact of car pollution on infant and
  child health: Evidence from emissions cheating." WP 2019-04, Federal Reserve Bank of
  Chicago.

Angrist, Joshua and Alan Krueger (1999), "Empirical strategies in labor economics." In
  Handbook of Labor Economcis (Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds.), volume 3, chap-
  ter 23, 1277­1366, Elsevier.

Ater, Itai and Nir Yoseph (2018), "The impact of product recalls on the secondary market:
  Evidence from dieselgate." Mimeo, Tel Aviv University.

Bai, Jie, Ludovica Gazze, and Yukun Wang (2018), "Collective reputation in trade: Evi-
  dence from the Chinese dairy industry." Mimeo, Harvard University.

Barrett, Steven, Raymond Speth, Sebastian Eastham, Irene Dedoussi, Akshay Ashok,
  Robert Malina, and David Keith (2015), "Impact of the Volkswagen emissions control
  defeat device on US public health." Environmental Research Letters, 10, 114005.

Barth, Florian, Christian Eckert, Nadine Gatzert, and Hendrik Scholz (2019), "Spillover
  effects from the volkswagen emissions scandal: An analysis of stock, corporate bond, and
  credit default swap markets." Mimeo, Friedrich-Alexander-Universit¨   at (FAU) Erlangen-
  N¨urnberg.

BBC (2018), "BMW, Daimler and Volkswagen face EU diesel emissions probe." BBC. https:
  //www.bbc.com/news/business-45558588.

Berry, Steven (1994), "Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation." The
  RAND Journal of Economics, 25, 242­262.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes (1995), "Automobile prices in market
  equilibrium." Econometrica, 63, 841­890.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes (1999), "Voluntary export restraints on
  automobiles: Evaluating a trade policy." American Economic Review, 89, 400­430.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer (2013), "Salience and consumer
  choice." Journal of Political Economy, 121, 803­843.

Breitinger, Matthias (2018), "Der Abgasskandal." Zeit Online. http://www.zeit.de/wirtsc
  haft/diesel-skandal-volkswagen-abgase.

                                           31
Bruckner, Johanna (2015), "Was die Skandale f¨  ur das deutsche Image bedeuten."
  Sueddeutsche.de. http://www.sueddeutsche.de/kultur/pegida-dfb-und-vw-was-die-ska
  ndale-fuer-das-deutsche-image-bedeuten-1.2732828.

Cabral, Lu´
          is and Ali Hortac
                          ¸su (2010), "The dynamics of seller reputation: Evidence from
  eBay." The Journal of Industrial Economics, 58, 54­78.

Castriota, Stefano and Marco Delmastra (2014), "The economics of collective reputation:
  Evidence from the wine industry." American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 97, 469­
  489.

Chambers, Madeline (2015), "VW scandal threatens `Made in Germany' im-
  age." Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/usa-volkswagen-germany-image-idUSL
  5N11S38X20150922.

Che, Xiaogang, Hajime Katayama, and Peter Lee (2018), "Willingness to pay for brand rep-
  utation: Lessons from the Volkswagen emissions scandal." Mimeo, Durham University.

Destatis (2015), "Automobilindustrie liefert wichtigstes Exportgut." Press release, Im Fokus
  vom 14.10.2015.

di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei Levchenko (2012), "Country size, international trade, and
  aggregate fluctuations in granular economies." Journal of Political Economy, 120, 1083­
  1132.

di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei Levchenko, and Isabelle Mejean (2014), "Firms, destinations,
  and aggregate fluctuations." Econometrica, 84, 1303­1340.

di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei Levchenko, and Isabelle Mejean (2018), "The micro origins of
  international business cycle comovement." American Ecoonomic Review, 108, 82­108.

Dobush, Grace (2018), "BMW will pay $11.6 million in dieselgate fines--a tiny penalty
  compared to other emission scandals." Fortune Magazine. http://fortune.com/2018/09/
  03/bmw-dieselgate-fine/.

Drozd, Lukasz and Jaromir Nosal (2012), "Understanding international prices: Customers
  as capital." American Economic Review, 102, 364­395.

Ewing, Jack (2018), "BMW offices raided by authorities in emissions-cheating investiga-
  tion." The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/20/business/energy-e
  nvironment/bmw-diesel-emissions.html.


                                            32
Fan, Ying, Jiandong Ju, and Mo Xiao (2016), "Reputation premium and reputation man-
  agement: Evidence from the largest e-commerce platform in China." International Jour-
  nal of Industrial Organization, 46, 63­76.

Fiordelisi, Franco, Maria-Gaia Soana, and Paola Schwizer (2014), "Reputational losses and
  operational risk in banking." The European Journal of Finance, 20, 105­124.

Freedman, Seth, Melissa Kearney, and Mara Lederman (2012), "Product recalls, imperfect
  information, and spillover effects: Lessons from the consumer response to the 2007 toy
  recalls." Review of Economics and Statistics, 94, 499­516.

Gleason, Cristi A, Nicole Thorne Jenkins, and W Bruce Johnson (2008), "The contagion
  effects of accounting restatements." The Accounting Review, 83, 83­110.

Gourio, Francois and Leena Rudanko (2014), "Customer capital." Review of Economic Stud-
  ies, 81, 1102­1136.

Griffin, Paul A and David H Lont (2018), "Game changer? The impact of the VW emission-
  cheating scandal on the interrelation between large automakers' equity and credit mar-
  kets." Journal of Contemporary Accounting & Economics, 14, 179­196.

Holland, Stephen, Erin Mansur, Nicholas Muller, and Andrew Yates (2016), "Damages and
 expected deaths due to excess N OX emissions from 2009 to 2015 Volkswagen diesel
 vehicles." Environmental Science & Technology, 50, 1111­1117.

Improbable Research (2016). Improbable Research. http://www.improbable.com/ig/winn
  ers/.

Jonsson, Stefan, Henrich R Greve, and Takako Fujiwara-Greve (2009), "Undeserved loss:
  The spread of legitimacy loss to innocent organizations in response to reported corporate
  deviance." Administrative Science Quarterly, 54, 195­228.

Kang, Eugene (2008), "Director interlocks and spillover effects of reputational penalties
  from financial reporting fraud." Academy of Management Journal, 51, 537­555.

Landon, Stuart and Constance Smith (1998), "Quality expectations, reputation, and price."
  Southern Economic Journal, 64, 628­647.

Li, Lingfan, Steven Tadelis, and Xiaolan Zhou (2018), "Buying reputation as a signal of
   quality: Evidence from an online marketplace." Mimeo, University of California at Berke-
   ley.


                                            33
Li, Lingfang (2010), "Reputation, trust, and rebates: How online auction markets can
   improve their feedback mechanisms." Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 19,
   303­331.

Luca, Michael (2016), "Reviews, reputation, and revenue: The case of yelp.com." HBS
  working paper series 12-016, Harvard University.

Luca, Michael and Georgios Zervas (2016), "Fake it till you make it: Reputation, competi-
  tion, and yelp review fraud." Management Science, 62, 3412­3427.

MacKinlay, A. Craig (1997), "Event studies in economics and finance." Journal of Economic
 Literature, 35, 13­39.

Mayzlin, Dina, Yaniv Dover, and Judith Chevalier (2014), "Promotional reviews: An em-
 pirical investigation of online review manipulation." American Economic Review, 104,
 2421­2455.

Nienaber, Michael (2015), "Volkswagen could pose bigger threat to German economy than
  Greek crisis." Reuters. http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-volkswagen-germany-eco
  nomy-idUSKCN0RN27S20150923.

Nosko, Chris and Steven Tadelis (2015), "The limits of reputation in platform markets: An
 empirical analysis and field experiment." Mimeo, University of California at Berkeley.

Oldenkamp, Rik, Rosalie van Zelm, and Mark Huijbregts (2016), "Valuing the human
  health damage caused by the fraud of Volkswagen." Environmental Pollution, 212, 121­
  127.

Petroff, Alanna (2015), "What Volkswagen means to the German economy." CNN
  Money. http://money.cnn.com/2015/09/22/news/economy/volkswagen-germany-car
  s-economy/.

Pitas, Costas (2017), "Mini boss says UK production not essential to brand." Reuters.
  https://www.reuters.com/article/us-autoshow-geneva-mini-britain/mini-boss-says-u
  k-production-not-essential-to-brand-idUSKBN16E1F0.

Remsky, Sarah (2017), "Eine Belastung f¨   ur das Label `Made in Germany'." Zeit On-
  line. http://www.zeit.de/wirtschaft/unternehmen/2017-07/abgasskandal-deutsche-wir
  tschaft-krise-volkswagen-daimler-porsche-automobilindustrie.




                                           34
Stockman, Alan C. and Linda L. Tesar (1995), "Tastes and technology in a two-country
  model of the business cycle: Explaining international comovements." American Economic
  Review, 85, 168­185.

Strittmatter, Anthony and Michael Lechner (2017), "Sorting on the used-car market after
  the Volkswagen emission scandal." WP 6480, CESifo.

Thompson, Gregory, Daniel Carder, Marc Besch, Arvind Thiruvengadam, and Hemanth
  Kappanna (2014), "In-use emissions testing of light-duty diesel vehicles in the united
  states." Report, Center for Alternative Fuels, Engines & Emissions, West Virginia Univer-
  sity.

Tirole, Jean (1996), "A theory of collective reputations (with applications to the persistence
  of corruption and to firm quality)." Review of Economic Studies, 63, 1­22.

United Nations (2017), "UN comtrade data base." United Nations. https://comtrade.un.or
  g/db/.

Werz, Michael (2016), "Smarter Lobbyieren." Zeit Online. http://www.zeit.de/wirtschaft
 /unternehmen/2016-01/automobilindustrie-usa-volkswagen-audi-porsche-verfahren.

Yu, Tieying and Richard H Lester (2008), "Moving beyond firm boundaries: A social net-
  work perspective on reputation spillover." Corporate Reputation Review, 11, 94­108.

Yu, Tieying, Richard H Lester, and Metin Sengul (2002), "Reputation spillover: How
  changes in corporate reputation affect competitive action." In Academy of Management
  Proceedings, volume 2002, H1­H6.

Zeit Online (2017), "Daimler soll mehr als eine Million Fahrzeuge manipuliert haben."
  Zeit Online. http://www.zeit.de/wirtschaft/unternehmen/2017-07/abgasskandal-daiml
  er-ag-schadstoffe?

Zycher, Benjamin (2017), "The Volkswagen emissions scandal and the urge for collec-
  tive punishment." American Enterprise Institute Spotlight. http://www.aei.org/spotlight/
  the-volkswagen-emissions-scandal/.




                                             35
A   List of Automotive Makes

                               Table A.1: Makes in WardsAuto Data

            Acura                            Honda                       Nissan
         Alfa Romeo                         Hyundai                     Porsche
             Audi                            Infiniti                     Ram
            BMW                              Jaguar                      Saab
            Buick                             Jeep                       Scion
           Cadillac                            Kia                       Smart
          Chevrolet                        Land Rover                   Subaru
           Chrysler                          Lexus                      Suzuki
            Dodge                           Lincoln                      Tesla
             Fiat                            Mazda                       Toyota
             Ford                        Mercedes-Benz                Volkswagen
             GMC                              Mini                       Volvo
                                           Mitsubishi
Note: We exclude Mercury from the dataset because it was discontinued in January 2011, the
first month of our analysis.


                                Table A.2: Makes in Twitter Data

            Acura                            Honda                        Mini
             Audi                           Hyundai                    Mitsubishi
            BMW                              Infiniti                    Nissan
            Buick                            Jaguar                     Porsche
           Cadillac                           Jeep                        Ram
          Chevrolet                            Kia                       Scion
           Chrysler                        Land Rover                    Smart
            Dodge                            Lexus                      Subaru
             Fiat                           Lincoln                      Toyota
             Ford                            Mazda                    Volkswagen
             GMC                         Mercedes-Benz                   Volvo
Note: Data come from Networked Insights.




                                               36
B     Robustness: Difference-in-Differences Estimation
   In this appendix, we first show that our treatment of Mini as a non-German make in
the baseline specification does not drive our results. We then provide additional visual
evidence to support the notion of parallel trends in sales growth rates between the non-
VW German and non-German auto manufacturers prior to the scandal. Finally, we explore
a number of alternative econometric specifications.

B.1    Classification of Mini

    Table B.1: Difference-in-Differences Estimates--Robustness to Classification of Mini


 Dependent Variable                                 12-month Log Sales Growth
                                          Baseline
                                                         Excluded from        Considered
 Treatment of Mini                      (considered
                                                           the Sample          German
                                       non-German)
                                            (1)                 (2)                 (3)
 German × Post-Scandal                     -0.092              -0.093              -0.099
                                          (0.030)             (0.030)             (0.029)

 Time Fixed Effects                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 Make Fixed Effects                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 R2                                        0.303               0.305               0.304
 N                                         2150                2082                2150

 Note: Unit of observation is a make-month (e.g., the log growth of all BMW sales from January
 2014 to January 2015). Time period covered is January 2011 to August 2016. Standard errors
 clustered at the make level in parentheses. Volkswagen Group (Volkswagen, Audi, and Porsche)
 excluded from all regressions. Volkswagen emissions scandal dated September 18, 2015. Sales
 are measured in units sold. All regressions are weighted by the square root of sales volumes.
 Data come from Ward's Automotive.

    In our baseline country classification of auto makes, we include Mini--a company with
historical roots in Britain that is now owned by BMW--as a non-German make. Our clas-
sification is supported by BMW board member Peter Schwarzenbauer, who told Reuters
in a 2017 interview that the "brand being perceived as British, that's important... Most
people don't know where the cars are produced" (Pitas (2017)). This focus on the coun-
try of brand association rather than the country of production or ownership drives our
baseline classification choice. Nonetheless, we show here that this choice does not impact
our results. Column (2) of table B.1 excludes Mini from the analysis altogether; the re-
sulting estimate of a 9.3 percentage point decline in non-VW German vehicle sales growth
hardly differs from the baseline estimate of 9.2 percentage points. Classifying Mini as Ger-
                                              37
man through its ownership by BMW in column (3) leads to an estimated decline of 9.9
percentage points, which is also similar to the baseline result.

B.2    Assessing Parallel Pre-Trends
   To examine whether the trends in sales growth displayed in Figure 5 are parallel prior to
the scandal, we estimate month-by-month differences in the sales growth rates of German
and non-German auto manufacturers. Specifically, we estimate a regression of the form:

                                            ln Salesit - ln Salesit-12 = t + t non-VW Germani + it ,                            (B.1)

where t , t = 1, ..., T is a set of month dummies for January 2011 to August 2016; non-VW
Germani is a dummy variable that equals one if the make i is BMW, Mercedes-Benz, or
Smart; and t is the difference in sales growth between German and non-German auto
manufacturers, which we allow to vary over time. Figure B.1 displays the estimated coef-
ficients t and the corresponding two-standard-error confidence bands based on standard
errors clustered at the make level. These estimates are centered at zero prior to the scan-
dal, suggesting that the sales growth of the non-German auto manufacturers constitutes a
reasonable comparison for the sales growth of the non-VW German auto manufacturers.

Figure B.1: Differences in Sales Growth for non-VW German vs. non-German Automakers
                                        .4
                                        .2
                 Average Treatment Effect
                                        0
                                        -.2
                                        -.4




                                            Jan. 2011   Jan. 2012      Jan. 2013        Jan. 2014    Jan. 2015      Jan. 2016
                                                                                       Month

                                                              Estimated Coefficient                 Two-Standard Error Bounds



Note: Dashed vertical line shows the month of the VW emissions scandal, September 2015. The solid line
displays the estimated coefficients t from equation (B.1). Confidence bands are calculated from standard
errors clustered at the make level. Regression excludes the VW Group. Data come from Ward's Automotive.

                                                                                      38
B.3    Alternative Econometric Specifications
    We show here that our difference-in-differences estimates are not sensitive to several
alternative econometric specifications. Throughout the paper, we have weighted observa-
tions by the square root of the make's monthly sales volume. Column (2) of table B.2 shows
that our choice to weight the observations is conservative: the unweighted estimate of the
difference-in-differences coefficient is 14 percentage points. Moreover, instead of natural
log-differences, in column (3) we consider mid-point growth rates, where the change in
sales volume between period t and period t - 12 is divided by the average level of sales in
the two periods. The estimated difference-in-differences coefficient under this alternative
measure is 9.4 percentage points, which is similar to the baseline result in column (1).
Finally, column (4) shows that using log sales levels as the dependent variable and adding
make-specific linear time trends and make-specific months dummies (in addition to make
and time fixed effects) again yields a similar result.

        Table B.2: Difference-in-Differences Estimates--Alternative Specifications


                                                                                       Log Sales
 Dependent Variable                           12-month Log Sales Growth
                                                                                         Level

 Specification                           Baseline     Unweighted       Mid-Point
                                           (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
 German × Post-Scandal                    -0.092          -0.140         -0.094          -0.096
                                         (0.030)         (0.058)        (0.030)         (0.028)

 Time Fixed Effects                        Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
 Make Fixed Effects                        Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
 Make-Specific Linear Time Trends          No              No             No              Yes
 Make-Specific 12 Month Dummies            No              No             No              Yes
 R2                                       0.303           0.131          0.322           0.994
 N                                        2150            2150           2150            2556

 Note: Unit of observation is a make-month. Time period covered in columns (1) through (3)
 is January 2011 to August 2016 and in column (4) is January 2010 to August 2016. Standard
 errors clustered at the make level in parentheses. Volkswagen Group (Volkswagen, Audi, and
 Porsche) excluded from all regressions. Volkswagen emissions scandal dated September 18,
 2015. Sales are measured in units sold. All regressions are weighted by the square root of sales
 volumes. Regressions in columns (1) through (3) include make and time fixed effects. The re-
 gression in column (4) uses log sales levels as the dependent variable and includes make-specific
 linear time trends and make-specific dummies for the twelve calendar months (in addition to
 make and time fixed effects). Data come from Ward's Automotive.



                                                 39
C     Additional Details on Demand Estimation & Counter-
      factuals
   In this appendix, we present additional details on the estimation of the model of vehicle
demand from section 4. First, we provide summary statistics for the list prices and vehicle
characteristics used in the estimation. Second, we present the first-stage regression results,
in which we regress the endogenous variables (vehicle prices and within-group market
shares) on the instrumental variables. Third, we present alternative decompositions of the
three channels by which the VW emissions scandal affected the vehicle sales of the other
German auto manufacturers.


C.1    Summary Statistics
    Our estimation sample consists of 2,090 vehicle-year combinations, where a vehicle is
defined as a make-model-power type. Table C.1 reports the summary statistics of list prices
and vehicle characteristics.

                                Table C.1: Summary Statistics


                                  Mean             Std. Dev.         Min              Max


 Prices (2015-$1000)               41.40            24.18           12.41           228.04
 Horsepower/Weight                  0.06            0.02             0.02            0.19
 Weight (1000 lb)                  4.01             0.94             1.81            7.15
 Length (inches)                  188.67            19.50          106.10           274.20
 Miles per Gallon                  29.14            12.76           10.00           119.00
 Diesel                             0.07            0.26              0               1
 Gas                                0.78             0.41             0                1
 Other Power Type                   0.15            0.36               0               1
 Germany                            0.23            0.42              0               1
 Japan                              0.33             0.47             0                1
 Korea                              0.06             0.24             0                1
 United States                      0.31            0.46               0               1
 Other Country                      0.07            0.25               0               1

 N                                                             2,090
 Note: Unit of observation is a vehicle-year. A vehicle is defined as a make-model-power type
 (e.g., a Honda Civic with a gasoline engine). Time period covered is 2010 to 2016, with 2015
 omitted as the scandal year, just as in table 3, which reports our demand estimates. Data come
 from Ward's Automotive.



                                              40
C.2    First-Stage Regressions
                  Table C.2: First-Stage Regressions for Demand Estimation


      Dependent Variable                                  Price          Within-Group Market Share
                                                           pjt                      sj |gt
      IV1                                             -0.261                        0.008
                                                     (0.055)                       (0.002)
      IV2                                              0.012                        0.001
                                                     (0.014)                       (0.001)
      IV3                                             -0.020                        0.004
                                                     (0.017)                       (0.001)
      IV4                                              1.576                        -0.053
                                                     (5.343)                       (0.228)
      IV5                                             -0.067                         0.130
                                                     (2.004)                       (0.085)
      IV6                                             -0.198                        -0.006
                                                     (0.439)                       (0.019)
      IV7                                             -0.027                        -0.012
                                                     (0.107)                       (0.005)
      Horsepower/Weight                             1070.145                       -33.626
                                                    (97.529)                       (4.156)
      Weight (1000 lb)                               10.805                         -0.095
                                                     (2.495)                       (0.106)
      Length                                          -0.168                        0.021
                                                     (0.132)                       (0.006)
      Miles per Gallon                                 0.150                        0.019
                                                     (0.127)                       (0.005)
      VW × Post-Scandal                               -0.873                        -1.826
                                                    (20.293)                       (0.865)
      Audi × Post-Scandal                             -6.606                        -0.903
                                                    (20.913)                       (0.891)
      Porsche × Post-Scandal                          -7.755                        -0.004
                                                    (24.958)                       (1.064)
      Other German × Post-Scandal                     -3.828                         0.708
                                                    (12.366)                       (0.527)
      Diesel × Post-Scandal                            1.997                        -1.318
                                                    (10.062)                       (0.429)

      Time Fixed Effects                                  Yes                        Yes
      Make Fixed Effects                                  Yes                        Yes
      Power-Type Fixed Effects                            Yes                        Yes
      Make-Specific Time Trends                           Yes                        Yes

      Note: Excluded instrumental variables: IVs 1­3 are the sum of vehicle characteristics over
                                       (k)
      closely competing vehicles. Let xjt denote the value of characteristic k for vehicle j at time
                                  (k)   (k)         (k)
      t, then IVk =      j =j 1 xj t - xjt < dk xj t , where for k = 1, 2, 3 represents the horse-
      power/weight, length, mpg of vehicle j , and dk is the standard deviation of attribute k in the
      data. IVs 4­6 are the sum of characteristics over competitors' vehicles. IV 7 is the number of
      vehicles of the same country origin and power type as vehicle j in year t.



                                                   41
C.3    Additional Counterfactuals
    In section 4.3, we conduct three counterfactual simulations in which we turn on the
three channels sequentially in order to quantify the effect of each channel. There, the
sequence of turning on the channels is "Substitution Away from VW Group," followed by
"Substitution Away from Diesel," and finally "Spillover to Other German Automakers."
That sequence is, however, not unique. Given the nonlinearity of the demand model,
there are four unique quantifications of each channel's effect. This is because we can
quantify the effect of each channel by comparing two scenarios: one in which this channel
is turned, and one in which it is turned off. For each comparison, the other two channels
are either both in play, they are both turned off, or one of them is turned off. We summarize
the counterfactual designs used in these four quantifications in table C.3, and we report
the results of the four quantifications in table C.4 (bold table entries correspond to the
baseline decomposition in table 5 in the main text). The range of the three channels'
effects reported in table 6 is based on comparing the results across the four columns in
table C.4. As noted, the results are stable across these different quantifications.




                                             42
                              Table C.3: Counterfactual Designs


                                      CF1    CF2    CF3       Data        CF4     CF5   CF6   CF7


# of Active Channels                   0      1        2       3              1    1     2     2

Substitution Away from VW Group        no     yes      yes    yes         no      no     no   yes

Substitution Away from Diesel          no     no       yes    yes         yes     no    yes    no

Spillover to Other German Au-
                                       no     no       no     yes         no      yes   yes   yes
tomakers


Table C.4: Quantifications of Each Channel's Effect on the non-VW German Automakers


                                                              Other Two Channels

                                             Off/Off                 On/Off              On/On


Substitution Away from VW Group             CF2 ­ CF1        CF3 ­ CF4   CF7 ­ CF5      Data ­ CF6
           Vehicle Sales                    +398,032         +405,560    +387,292       +378,045
           Revenue ($ billion)               +$22.0           +$22.7      +$21.4         +$21.2

Substitution Away from Diesel               CF4 ­ CF1        CF3 ­ CF2   CF6 ­ CF5      Data ­ CF7
           Vehicle Sales                     ­38,137          ­30,609     ­22,628        ­31,874
           Revenue ($ billion)                ­$1.5            ­$0.7       ­$1.0          ­$1.2

Spillover to Other German Automakers        CF5 ­ CF1        CF7 ­ CF2   CF6 ­ CF4      Data ­ CF3
            Vehicle Sales                   ­460,078         ­470,818    ­444,569        ­472,084
            Revenue ($ billion)              ­$25.4           ­$26.0      ­$24.9          ­$26.5

Note: Bold table entries correspond to the baseline decomposition in table 5. Positive numbers
indicate that the channel increased vehicle sales or revenue for the non-VW German automakers;
negative numbers mean the opposite. The entries in the column titled "Off/Off" report the
channel's effect in a counterfactual without the other two channels; e.g., the first row of that
column reports the effect of the substitution away from VW channel if the scandal had not
also led to substitution away from diesel and a spillover to the other German automakers. The
entries in the columns titled "On/Off" report the channel's effect in a counterfactual with one of
the other two channels, as indicated by the counterfactual definitions in table C.3. Finally, the
entries in the column titled "On/On" report the channel's effect in a counterfactual with both
of the other two channels. The simulated effects are for 2016, the first calendar year after the
scandal. Revenue effects are expressed in 2015 dollars.




                                               43
D      The Scandal's Impact on non-VW German Stock Returns

   In this appendix, we show that the VW emissions scandal's effect on vehicle sales was
mirrored in stock returns. To this end, we combine two complementary data sources. We
construct daily U.S. stock returns from the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP)
database, which covers primary listings on NYSE, NYSE MKT, NASDAQ, and NYSE Arca.26
We supplement this data with American Depository Receipts (ADRs) for publicly-listed
automotive firms from other countries.27 ADRs allow us to calculate the daily returns for
foreign automotive firms even on days when the underlying stocks were not traded in
their home markets. For instance, the Tokyo Stock Exchange was closed for holidays on
September 21­23, 2015; U.S. exchanges were open on those days. If we constructed daily
returns of Japanese securities, e.g., Mazda or Nissan, from the Japanese exchange, we
would have no observations on those U.S. trading days.

                            Table D.1: Automakers in Stock Price Data

           Automaker (Holding Company)                                       Ticker

                         BMW                                              BAMXY:US
           Daimler (Mercedes-Benz, Smart)                                 DDAIY:US
                          Ford                                               F:US
                     Fiat-Chrysler                                         FCAU:US
                      Fuji-Subaru                                         FUJHY:US
                    General Motors                                          GM:US
                        Honda                                              HMC:US
                        Mazda                                             MZDAY:US
                        Nissan                                            NSANY:US
                        Toyota                                              TM:US
                         Tesla                                             TSLA:US
        Tata Motors (Jaguar and Land Rover)                                TTM:US
                  Volkswagen Group                                        VLKAY:US
    Note: Stock prices for automakers come from Bloomberg. Ford, General Motors, and Tesla
    are listed on U.S. stock exchanges; all remaining stock prices come from American Depository
    Receipts. The sample is restricted to companies that sell light vehicles in the United States.
  26
     NYSE is the New York Stock exchange and the premier market place. NYSE MKT is the marketplace
within the NYSE for small market capitalization companies. NASDAQ is the second largest marketplace for
stocks in the world after NYSE, with a certain specialization in high-tech companies. Finally, NYSE Arca is
another specialized electronic-trading marketplace for U.S. stocks.
  27
     Appendix table D.1 lists the holding companies of auto makes used in our analysis (ADRs for the holding
companies of some auto makes in the Ward's sales data were insufficiently frequently traded to be used).
Ford, General Motors, and Tesla are listed on U.S. stock exchanges; all remaining prices come from ADRs.


                                                    44
   To compare expected and realized stock returns, we follow the market model and as-
sume that an individual stock's expected return depends only on the stock's covariance
with the market return, its so-called beta. The difference between the expected return on
stock i at time t and its actual return is referred to as the "abnormal return," ARit . We
measure each stock's abnormal return by estimating the following regression:

                                 Rit = i + i Rmarket,t + it                              (D.1)

where i indexes individual stocks and t represents market trading days. The regression
sample covers the trading year, approximately 250 trading days, ending thirty days before
the scandal. In equation (D.1), Rit is the daily stock return for stock i from day t - 1 to
day t, and Rmarket,t is the return on the CRSP value-weighted market portfolio (which does
not include the ADRs). The abnormal return is the difference between the stock's actual
return and its return predicted from the regression: ARit = Rit - R   ^ it . The cumulative ab-
normal return, CARit , is then defined as t  s=0 ARis . The starting point in our definition of
cumulative abnormal returns, s = 0, is September 16, 2015, two days before the scandal.
    Figure D.1 shows that the cumulative abnormal return averaged over the German au-
tomotive firms excluding Volkswagen was negative 10 percent within two trading days of
the scandal. That decline contrasts sharply with abnormal returns for the non-automotive
stocks in the CRSP database, which remained near zero after the scandal. Similarly, the
non-German auto stocks exhibited only slight abnormal return movements on and around
the scandal date.
    We complement the visual evidence in figure D.1 using two quantitative approaches.
First, we estimate two sets of difference-in-differences regressions, where the outcome
variable is either ARit or CARit . Owing to the high-frequency nature of the data, we use
data for September 16 and 17, 2015, as the pre-scandal period, and data for September
18, 21, and 22, 2015, as the post-scandal period. In one set of regressions, we find that
relative to non-German auto stocks, the non-VW German automakers experienced roughly
2 percent lower daily abnormal returns (see columns (1) and (2) of table D.2). In the other
set of regressions, the outcome variable is cumulative abnormal returns at the end of the
pre- and post- scandal periods for each stock. We find that relative to non-German auto
stocks, the non-VW German auto stocks experienced roughly 6 percent lower cumulative
abnormal returns. Both results are statistically significant.
    Second, we conduct an event study, a methodology commonly used in the finance lit-
erature (e.g., MacKinlay (1997)). The market model assumes that the return distributions
are the same during the estimation period prior to the scandal and during the event win-


                                              45
                                                        Figure D.1: Cumulative Abnormal Stock Returns


                                            .05
        Cumulative Daily Abnormal Returns
                                            0
                                            -.05
                                            -.1




                                                   -2             -1                           0                 1                           2
                                                                              Trading Days Since Scandal

                                                            German Car Stocks excl. VW Group                         Non-German Car Stocks

                                                            CRSP, Market-Cap Weighted excl. Car Stocks


Note: Dashed line shows the date of the VW emissions scandal, September 18, 2015. Automotive stock
data come from the Bloomberg database; CRSP index comes from the Center for Research in Security Prices.
Estimates based on the market model defined by equation (D.1); cumulative abnormal returns averaged
across individual stocks in each group.



dow surrounding it. Under that assumption, the abnormal return obtained by estimating
equation (D.1) should equal zero in expectation for any individual stock if the scandal had
no effect on stock returns. Consequently, the cumulative abnormal returns for stocks on
the three days of September 18, 21, and 22, 2015 should also have been approximately
zero. We can test this hypothesis by computing the following test statistic for each stock i:

                                                                                     CARiT
                                                                                                         1   ,                                   (D.2)
                                                                                                         2
                                                                              T  V ar[ARi ]

where CARiT is the cumulative abnormal return of stock i between September 16 and
September 22, 2015; T = 5 (trading) days in the event window; and V ar[ARi ] is an esti-
mate of the variance of the abnormal return of stock i. Following MacKinlay (1997), we


                                                                                         46
           Table D.2: Difference-in-Differences Estimates--Abnormal Stock Returns

                                                                                 Cumulative
 Dependent Variable                             Abnormal Returns              Abnormal Returns
                                                (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)
 German × Post-Scandal                        -0.019          -0.019         -0.064       -0.061
                                             (0.004)         (0.005)        (0.013)      (0.015)

                                                              Sales                       Sales
 Weighting                                    None                           None
                                                             Volume                      Volume
 Time Fixed Effects                            Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes
 Company Fixed Effects                         Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes
 R2                                           0.687           0.600         0.882         0.799
 N                                              60              60            24            24

 Note: Unit of observation in columns (1) and (2) is the daily abnormal stock return for the
 periods before and after the event date. In columns (3) and (4) it is the cumulative abnormal
 returns at the end of the pre- and post-scandal periods. Abnormal returns are calculated using
 a market model (equation (D.1)). Automotive stock prices come from Bloomberg and include
 U.S.-listed stocks (Ford, General Motors, and Tesla) and ADRs (all other auto make holding com-
 panies). The weighted regressions are sales-weighted using the Ward's Automotive sales data.
 Robust standard errors in parentheses. The pre-scandal period comprises September 16 and 17,
 2015, and the post-scandal period comprises September 18, 21, and 22, 2015 (September 18
 was a Friday in 2015).


use the abnormal return variance over the estimation window for equation (D.1). Assum-
ing that stock returns are normally distributed, this statistic is distributed approximately
standard normal. BMW's cumulative abnormal return of negative 7.2 percent and Daim-
ler's negative 11.4 percent have respective test statistics of 2.42 and 4.17.28 These test
statistics lead us to reject the null hypothesis that the VW scandal had no effect on the
companies' stock returns.
    The behavior of automotive companies' stock returns after the VW emissions scandal
thus reinforces the findings from our analysis of vehicle sales that the scandal materially
harmed the other German automakers.




 28
      Note that both Mercedes-Benz and Smart are subsidiaries of Daimler.


                                                      47
