                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

  CREDIT BUILDING OR CREDIT CRUMBLING? A CREDIT BUILDER LOAN'S
EFFECTS ON CONSUMER BEHAVIOR, CREDIT SCORES AND THEIR PREDICTIVE
                             POWER

                                         Jeremy Burke
                                        Julian Jamison
                                          Dean Karlan
                                          Kata Mihaly
                                       Jonathan Zinman

                                     Working Paper 26110
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26110


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   July 2019

The credit bureau that provided data to us had the right to: (a) review the paper to ensure
that the analysis using credit scores was depersonalized, aggregated, and that the scores
received the correct trademark attribution; (b) offer comments about the paper, which the
authors agreed ex-ante to consider in good faith. The authors retained intellectual freedom to
report the results of this study regardless of the outcomes. We thank: the St. Louis
Community Credit Union, and especially Paul Woodruff, for cooperation; the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), in particular Sarah Bainton Kahn and Daniel Dodd-
Ramirez for their assistance and preparation of a policy brief based this study; participants at
many conferences and seminars for comments; Innovations for Poverty Action; and, in
particular, Anna Cash, Lucia Goin, Nora Gregory, Peter Lugthart, and Kayla Wilding for
research support. We gratefully acknowledge research funding provided by the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (under competitive award CFP-12-Z-00020/0002). The views
expressed are those of the authors alone and are not necessarily shared by the CFPB or any
other arm of the U.S. government. Institutional Review Board approval for human subjects
protocols from Innovations for Poverty Action (no. 14January-001) and RAND Human
Subjects Protection Committee (no. 2013-0660). This study was registered with the AEA
RCT Registry with the ID number AEARCTR-0000441. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jeremy Burke, Julian Jamison, Dean Karlan, Kata Mihaly, and Jonathan Zinman.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Credit Building or Credit Crumbling? A Credit Builder Loan's Effects on Consumer Behavior,
Credit Scores and Their Predictive Power
Jeremy Burke, Julian Jamison, Dean Karlan, Kata Mihaly, and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 26110
July 2019, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. D12,G14,G21

                                         ABSTRACT

How does the large market for credit score improvement products affect consumers and market
efficiency? For consumers, we use a randomized encouragement design on a standard credit
builder loan (CBL) and find null average effects on scores. But a generalized random forest
algorithm finds important heterogeneity, most starkly with respect to baseline installment credit
activity. CBLs induce delinquency on pre-existing loan obligations, suggesting that even a
seemingly modest additional claim on monthly cash flows is too much for many consumers to
manage. For the market, CBL take-up reveals information: takers experience future score
improvements relative to non-takers, which, given null average treatment effects, implies positive
selection. However, we find suggestive evidence that the CBL weakens the score's power for
predicting default in some cases. We propose simple changes, to CBL provider strategy and
credit bureau reporting categories, that could produce more uniformly positive effects for both
individuals and the market.

Jeremy Burke                                             Kata Mihaly
University of Southern California                        RAND Corporation
Center for Economic and Social Research (CESR)           200 South Hayes St
1909 K St NW, Suite 530                                  Arlington, VA 22202
Washington, DC 20006-1101                                kmihaly@rand.org
jeremyburke1@gmail.com
                                                         Jonathan Zinman
Julian Jamison                                           Department of Economics
Office of Research                                       Dartmouth College
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau                     314 Rockefeller Hall
1700 G Street NW                                         Hanover, NH 03755
Washington, DC 20552                                     and NBER
j.jamison@exeter.ac.uk                                   jzinman@dartmouth.edu

Dean Karlan
Kellogg Global Hub
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and CEPR
and also NBER
dean.karlan@gmail.com


A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at AEARCTR-0000441
1. Introduction

    Consumer credit histories are important inputs to various markets. Lenders use them in
determining willingness to ration or lend, and at what terms. 1 Many landlords, insurers, and
employers now use them when evaluating potential customers or employees. 2 Yet about 20% of
the U.S. population lacks a traditional credit score due to thin or non-existent credit bureau files.
For these "credit invisibles", and many more, there is much information beyond standard credit
histories that credit risk modelers could and increasingly do use, including payment behavior on
non-traditional products like the credit builder loans (CBLs). 3

    Many programs and products, like CBLs, aim to help consumers signal or improve
creditworthiness. These also include financial education, financial coaching and credit counseling
programs, and credit repair and credit monitoring services. Whether they truly help consumers is
an open question. 4 So too is whether they enhance market efficiency by revealing unobservable
information or worsen market efficiency by providing misleading signals. CBLs have become an
increasingly common approach. They are widely available, and prominent financial self-help
resources like NerdWallet and Credit Karma provide advice on how to access and manage them.
The main CBL suppliers are credit unions and community banks, with financial technology
companies like Self Inc. entering the market recently.

    CBLs are short-term installment contracts on small amounts (typically $500 to $1,000, repaid
monthly over 6-24 months) in which the "lender" eliminates its credit risk by inverting the
sequence of origination and repayment: "loan" proceeds are held in an escrow account and only
released after the contracted payments, which include principal and an administrative fee, are



1
  A majority of credit users in the USA have below-prime credit scores (Brooks et al. 2015), and below-
prime credit usage typically increases borrowing costs by several percentage points and hundreds or
thousands of dollars per year (Pulliam Weston 2010; Zinman 2015).
2
  See, e.g., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2012), Bartik and Nelson (2020), Bos et al. (2018),
Clifford and Shoag (2020), Dobbie et al. (2020).
3
  Other examples of relatively novel information sources include alternative credit bureaus focusing on
small-dollar products that are largely missing from the "Big Three" traditional bureaus, utility and rent
payments, and social media. See, e.g., Brevoort et al. (2015) and Brevoort and Kambara (2017).
4
  We are not aware of any prior randomized evaluations of credit building products. Several RCTs have
estimated effects of programmatic interventions like financial education and counseling on credit behaviors
and scores, and Kaiser et al.'s (2020) meta-analysis infers a mean effect size of 0.04 standard deviations.
One issue with programmatic interventions for adults is low take-up, as discussed below.

                                                                                                         1
made. 5 The CBL thus operates less like a loan and more like either a costly commitment savings
device (if individuals do not withdraw the funds from the restricted account) or a costly sequence
of deposits and withdrawals (if individuals choose to withdraw the funds immediately after making
each payment). Nevertheless, and critically, credit reporting treats CBLs as standard installment
loans, per industry agreements between CBL providers and the three major credit bureaus. And as
with standard loans, CBL providers report all CBL payment performance to the bureaus, both
positive (<30 days late) and negative (>=30 days late).

    Like any credit building intervention, CBLs could have impacts on consumers, lenders, and
markets alike. For consumers, CBLs could help them become credit visible, or shift their credit
scores up or down. Our descriptive evidence suggests that both shifts likely occur with some
frequency; e.g., 40% of CBL users in our sample pay more than 30 days late on their CBL at some
point. For lenders, CBLs provide marginal customers a point of entry or re-entry into the
mainstream financial system, opening the possibility of cross-sells. For the market, via CBL
providers reporting to credit bureaus, CBLs could help or harm market efficiency. If CBL take-up
predicts downstream behavior in ways that are not fully captured by other observables, market
efficiency could improve. If the post-CBL credit score is a less predictive measure of behavior
than the pre-CBL credit score, market efficiency could worsen.

    We start by estimating CBL treatment effects on consumers, and on lender cross-sells, using
an encouragement design that randomizes take-up requirements. St. Louis Community Credit
Union (SLCCU) has offered CBLs since 2009 and worked with the research team from September
2014 through February 2015 to identify a sample of over 1,500 SLCCU members who expressed
interest in a CBL. Nearly 20% of our sample lacked a FICO® score at baseline, and scores are low




5
  Operationally, the lender typically first disburses loan proceeds in whole to a locked savings account it
controls, and then releases proceeds to the borrower, either in parts after each of the borrower's payments
or in whole after the borrower makes all of the payments. In our setting the lender releases proceeds after
each payment. This setup imposes modest liquidity demands on the CBL user, who need only come up with
$54 on the payment due date and can get $50 of the $54 back within minutes of making the payment. Credit
unions tend to calibrate the fee to roughly cover the cost of the staff time required to administer the CBL,
with the intent of generating returns downstream through cross-sells and/or helping their membership
(credit unions are mutually-owned and often operate like nonprofits).

                                                                                                          2
overall (baseline sample mean FICO® of 560, sd 65 points, compared to a national average about
700), making our sample suitable for studying CBLs. 6

    We then randomly assigned these individuals to one of two arms: a "CBL Arm" that followed
SLCCU's standard enrollment process for a CBL, and an "Extra Step Arm" facing an additional
requirement to complete five modules of online financial education, taking about 50-60 minutes
in total, either onsite or offsite. Only six individuals in the Extra Step Arm even started the online
financial education, and thus it should have no treatment effect. 7 The CBL Arm had a take-up rate
of 30% within 18 months of entering the study, while the take-up rate in the Extra Step Arm was
only 12%. The financial education requirement thus strongly deterred CBL adoption (this has its
own policy implications, as we discuss below).

    We measure FICO® Scores and credit market behaviors using four data pulls obtained from
one of the three major credit bureaus: one at baseline, and three more at endlines of roughly 6
months, 12 months, and 18 months post-random assignment. Our two main outcomes are whether
the consumer has a FICO® Score, and their score conditional on having one at baseline. Having a
credit score is an important step for consumers in becoming credit-visible and potentially signaling
a positive credit history. It is also an important step for lenders and the market in the sense that a
scoring company only reports a consumer's score when it has sufficient confidence in its predictive
power. The numerical credit score itself is important, as discussed above, because of its widespread
use in credit and other markets.

    Averaging across the three endlines, we find a null average intent-to-treat effect of the CBL on
the likelihood of having a credit score (1.8pp, se 1.5pp, Extra Step Arm baseline mean 0.84). We
also find a null average treatment effect on the credit score (-2 points, se 3 points, Extra Step Arm
baseline mean 561), among the subsample of individuals with a credit score at baseline.




6
  FICO® is a registered trademark of the Fair Isaac Corporation. For more information on aggregate score
trends and distributions see, e.g., https://wallethub.com/edu/cs/average-credit-scores/25578/ , dated May 6
2020 and accessed September 12, 2020.
7
  The financial education content did not include anything specifically about credit builder loans, and
participants were not informed about the content of the financial education modules at the time of
randomization: they were simply told they needed to "complete five online lessons" that would take about
an hour or less.

                                                                                                         3
    These null average effects obscure important heterogeneity in treatment effects (HTEs), most
starkly by baseline installment credit activity. We are motivated to examine this margin of
heterogeneity by theory, practice, and machine learning estimation that is designed to "let the data
speak".

    In theory, those with existing loans may benefit less from CBLs since they already have a
recent credit history. Those with existing installment loans may struggle to manage their existing
loan obligation(s) in tandem with a CBL, e.g., if learning and/or behavioral considerations are
important. On the other hand, those with existing loans may have experience and/or better access
to liquidity that helps them successfully manage the CBL.

    In practice, baseline installment borrowing is prevalent (over 60% at baseline), and readily
observable. Should it drive treatment effects, any CBL provider could market and screen on it.

    We let the data speak in two steps. First, we use a causal forest aggregate test for overall
treatment effect heterogeneity. This test rejects the hypothesis of homogeneous treatment effects
on credit scores at the first two endlines (p-values of 0.00 at 6-months and 0.05 at 12-months).
Second, we examine readily observable potential correlates of the causal forest's predicted
conditional average treatment effect (CATE) for each consumer and find that the data strongly
reject the hypothesis of homogeneity with respect to baseline installment activity. Most strikingly,
those in the bottom tercile of the distribution of installment credit activity at baseline have a mean
CATE on their 6-month credit score of +23 points (se 7 points), while those in the top tercile have
a mean CATE of -13 points (se 6 points). We examine many other potential drivers of HTEs, but
none is as robustly significantly correlated with CATEs in statistical or economic terms.

    These HTEs imply economically significant magnitudes, whether in intent-to-treat units that
identify effects of CBL access or treatment-on-the-treated units that identify effects of CBL usage.
We report the former because they are more cleanly interpretable in our setup; a rough estimate of
the latter would inflate the ITT coefficients by roughly a factor of five. 8 But even the ITT effects




8
 We get this multiplier by scaling up the ITT estimates by the reciprocal of the differential take-rate
between the two experimental arms: 1.00/0.18 = 5.56.

                                                                                                     4
on baseline installment activity sub-groups, or the ITT difference across these sub-groups, are
large enough to move someone across credit score bins that affect market access and terms. 9

    This heterogeneity could be due to differential consumer behavior. Or it could be due to
differential firm behavior, with FICO scoring the same behavior differently for people with
different credit histories. We cannot test the latter hypothesis, as we are not privy to the proprietary
model behind the FICO® Score. We can test the former hypothesis, and do find evidence
supporting it. Specifically, we find HTEs on two categories of behaviors that factor into credit
scoring: credit mix and repayment performance. The repayment performance results are the most
striking, with no evidence of TEs on delinquency for those in the lower two terciles of baseline
installment activity, but 0.22 sd more delinquency (se 0.08 sd) for those in the CBL arm and the
top tercile. The bulk of this effect is likely driven by non-CBL delinquency. Thus even though the
CBL studied here imposes minimal liquidity constraints in principle, adding a CBL to existing
credit obligations seems too much for many borrowers to manage successfully in practice. 10 We
lack the ability to identify why, but offer some speculation, and guidance for future work testing
models of consumer decision making, in the Conclusion.

    Turning to treatment effects on other SLCCU products (cross-sells), there is some evidence
that the CBL increases savings balances (average treatment effect is $248, se $121). This is
consistent with some consumers using the CBL for what it is, functionally, aside from the credit
reporting: a costly commitment to save. But this inference is not robust to other functional forms
of savings balances, or to counting checking account balances together with savings account
balances. For other SLCCU outcomes, we find no evidence of effects on customer retention, and
some evidence that non-CBL borrowing from SLCCU increases for those in the bottom tercile of
baseline installment activity (4.9 pp, se 2.7).


9
   See, e.g., one of the three main credit bureau's description of credit score bins here,
https://www.experian.com/blogs/ask-experian/infographic-what-are-the-different-scoring-ranges/ (June
23, 2020, accessed October 6, 2020). The implied treatment-on-the-treated (ToT) effects would be large
enough to move someone across multiple score bins. E.g., consider someone with the baseline mean credit
score in our sample, 560. Increasing their score by 23x5 = 115 points--our rough ToT estimate for those
with low baseline installment activity at baseline--moves them from being clearly "sub-prime" (a "very
poor" score, 579 and below), to "prime" (670 and above).
10
   Footnote 5 and Section 2-A elaborate on liquidity requirements. We attempted to engage participants in
qualitative follow-up discussions to better understand participants' experiences with the CBL, particularly
regarding cash flow management, but we were stymied by a low response rate.

                                                                                                         5
      Last, but not least, we examine impacts of the CBL on market information, using three different
predictive tests.

      Our first predictive test focuses on self-selection: on whether CBL take-up reveals information
about a consumer's future credit score. We find that CBL takers, relative to non-takers in the CBL
Arm, show estimated credit score improvements of 13 points (se 4 points) or 17 points (se 5 points)
over the post-treatment months, depending on specification. In theory, this upward trend is a
combination of selection and the CBL average treatment effect. In practice, since the average ITT
effect is a precisely estimated zero, the upward trend reveals strong positive (advantageous)
selection: those who choose to open a CBL are improving irrespective of the CBL itself. This
suggests that CBL take-up provides a valuable signal to lenders, and that credit bureaus should
consider reporting CBLs as a distinct category rather than lumping them together with standard
installment loans.

      Our second and third predictive tests examine whether CBL-influenced credit scores at 12-
months are better or worse predictors of default at 18-months than 12-month scores less-influenced
by the CBL. For these tests we focus on the margins where we do see treatment effects on credit
scores, by comparing gradients and fits within baseline installment credit activity groups across
the CBL vs. Extra-Step arms. The results yield some cause for concern that CBL weakens the
predictive power of the credit score in cases where it causes the score to decline. How much cause
for concern is an open question, as these gradient and fit tests are not as well identified as the rest
of our analyses.

      All told, we add to extant literatures in several respects. First, we use random variation to help
separately identify CBL selection and treatment effects. 11 Our experimental findings deliver some
surprising results and implications, principally that CBL providers should consider screening out
consumers with existing installment loan obligations. 12 Second, and closely related to the first, our
findings that a CBL with modest liquidity requirements causes delinquency on non-CBL loans, at
least for those with pre-existing installment debt, adds to work on consumer liquidity constraints,
cash flow management, and financial distress (e.g., Gelman et al. 2018; Olafsson and Pagel 2018;
Dobbie and Song 2020). Third, we replicate and expand on the key finding from prior CBL

11
     See also Liberman et al (2020) on signaling and treatment effects in the U.K. payday loan market.
12
     We discuss other approaches to CBL-seeking consumers with existing loan obligations in the Conclusion.

                                                                                                         6
studies--CBL usage is advantageously selected (Chenven 2014; Wolff 2016)--and infer that
credit bureaus could better harness this information revelation by reporting CBLs as a distinct
product category. We thereby build bridges to work on credit history as a public good that may
lead for-profit firms to under-invest in information acquisition (e.g., Petersen and Rajan 1995),
and on whether and how credit bureaus reduce asymmetric information (e.g., de Janvry, McIntosh,
and Sadoulet 2010; Hertzberg, Liberti, and Paravisini 2011; Manso 2013; Garmaise and Natividad
2017; Kovbasyuk, Larinsky, and Spagnolo 2019). Fourth, our findings suggest that "product-
linked" financial education requirements may be counterproductive, despite strong policy and
programmatic interest in that approach (Askari 2009; Sledge, Gordon, and Kinsley 2011; Reyes et
al. 2013).

2. Study setting and design

A. Implementing partner and credit building product

   We partnered with St. Louis Community Credit Union (SLCCU) to design and implement our
study. SLCCU, a certified Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI), serves
approximately 51,000 members who live or work in the greater St. Louis area. SLCCU has 11
branches (including three located within social service agencies), provides access to online
financial education and phone-based credit counseling and education, and offers numerous
financial products designed to improve members' financial stability. SLCCU has offered the
"Credit Builder Loan" ("CBL") since 2009 and had originated approximately 4,400 CBLs at the
onset of the study.

   SLCCU markets and structures the CBL per credit union and CDFI industry standards. It
markets the CBL as an opportunity to build credit history and improve credit scores (Figure 1
shows the marketing materials used by SLCCU, both in our study and routinely). The terms are
such that no money changes hands at origination. Instead, the credit union places $600 in a
restricted access savings account (an escrow account, basically). Borrowers then make 12 monthly
payments of approximately $54 and the credit union releases $50 from the restricted savings
account back to the consumer's regular savings account immediately upon receipt of payment each
month. As such, the payments portion of the CBL functions like a costly commitment savings
account, yielding a certain and negative pecuniary return on saving; e.g., if the consumer makes


                                                                                               7
all 12 CBL payments and does not make any withdrawals, they will have invested $648 over the
course of the year and yielded $600 at year's end.

     CBL payments, both timely and late, are reported to each of the three major credit bureaus as
a standard installment loan, using standard definitions of delinquency (e.g., a loan is first reported
delinquent if a payment is more than 30 days late). According to SLCCU policy, if a delinquent
CBL borrower does not bring her CBL current within 10 days of the delinquency, the credit union
closes out the loan by transferring the restricted portion of the loan amount to pay off the remaining
principal balance, "successfully" paying off the loan from a credit bureau perspective.

     Approximately 40 percent of CBL users in our sample made at least one payment more than
30 days late (Figure 2). This high rate of delinquency indicates that CBLs could backfire, at least
for some borrowers.

B. Data

     We have three data sources: a baseline survey, SLCCU accounts, and FICO® Scores and credit
report attributes from one of the three major credit bureaus. Surveyors administer the baseline
survey as part of the CBL marketing process, as described below. The survey captures
demographics, some aspects of financial status, and attitudes. SLCCU administrative data is pulled
monthly for everyone in our sample. These data capture CBL performance and usage of other loan
and deposit products.

     The bureau data capture snapshots of borrowing and repayment activity and one widely-used
credit score, the FICO® Score. 13 We obtain snapshots at baseline (on a biweekly rolling basis as
participants entered the study), at approximately 6 and 12 months post-random assignment, and at
>=18 months post-assignment (with a maximum of 24 months, depending on assignment date).
The credit bureau did not share loan-level data; e.g., our measure of 30-day delinquency is the
number of loans, include any CBL, on which the person is >=30 days late. Some bureau variables
are disaggregated to the person*loan type-level--e.g., number and balance of installment or
revolving loans--but not delinquency. CBLs are reported as installment loans, both in our data
and in the credit reports visible to lenders and other firms.


13
  Per a research agreement with the bureau, we obtain the data through "soft" credit pulls that do not impact
credit scores and do not get access to clients' entire reports (hence the lack of "tradeline"-level data).

                                                                                                           8
C. Sampling and experimental design

     Figure 2 illustrates our sampling and experimental design. Our goal for survey sampling was
to create a sample frame of SLCCU members who are generally interested in improving their
credit. Between October 2014 and February 2015, research staff ("surveyors") enrolled
participants into the study at seven of the SLCCU branches. Surveyors approached individuals in
the branch and first asked if they were generally interested in building their credit. Individuals
responding affirmatively were escorted to a private office and asked for consent to participate in a
"research study focused on credit markets and products". 14 In total, 2,310 individuals consented
and started the short baseline survey. Of these 2,310 we infer that 2,269 were SLCCU members at
baseline, as evidenced by a match to SLCCU administrative data.

     Our goal for the experiment was to engineer variation in CBL take-up within a sample of
SLCCU members who are interested in a CBL. After the survey, surveyors described the CBL and
elicited participant interest in the CBL specifically (as distinct from credit building generally). We
remove the 738 "Uninterested" individuals from the experiment sample: we do not randomly
assign these individuals to an experimental arm. The remaining 1,531 expressed interest in the
CBL and comprise the "experimental sample". 15 Surveyors randomized these 1,531 participants,
in real-time and at the individual level, 16 into one of two arms: a "CBL Arm" that is encouraged
to open the CBL on the spot, per standard SLCCU procedures; 17 or an "Extra Step Arm" that is

14
   Surveys and treatments were delivered in private spaces within the credit union branches to preserve
privacy and minimize the possibility of one applicant hearing about what another applicant receives.
15
   Study participants were compensated for their time (about 15-20 minutes) with a $5 gift card to a local
grocery store. SLCCU preferred paper surveys and surveyors overnighted them periodically to research
team headquarters; unfortunately, one package containing about 50 surveys was lost (including some who
did not receive a random assignment). Thus we have random assignment but no survey data for these 50
individuals. Missingness is balanced across the two experiment arms.
16
   Each surveyor used a random number generator on a computer provided, maintained, and monitored by
the research team. We also randomly assigned two other treatments. First, an independent cross-
randomization provided half the survey sample (unconditional on CBL interest) with information on phone-
based credit counseling and financial education. Second, six months after opening the CBL product, half
of CBL takers were invited to set up an automatic transfer from checking to savings that would start six
months later, after the last CBL payment. Take up of these two treatments was 2% and 0% and thus we
exclude them from the analysis
17
   If a CBL Arm member was ready to open a CBL on the spot, our surveyors would escort them to a credit
union representative who would further describe the product, establish payment dates, and originate the
CBL. CBL Arm members who were not immediately ready to open a CBL received three forms of follow-

                                                                                                        9
encouraged to open the CBL but told they must first complete approximately 50 minutes of free,
online financial education prior to opening. 18 The financial education course is one of SLCCU's
standard offerings and clients can complete it from a branch computer or any other web-connected
device.

D. Sample characteristics and randomization balance

    Table 1 presents baseline summary statistics and randomization balance tests, on our
experiment sample, for 17 key outcome variables and sources of potential heterogeneity. Columns
1 and 2 present descriptive statistics, separately for the CBL (N=789) and Extra-Step (N=742)
Arms. Column 3 presents an estimate of the difference across the two arms for each variable. The
overall pattern is consistent with a valid randomization: only one variable has a difference that is
close to statistically significant at conventional cutoffs, and the difference on that variable (age) is
economically small. A caveat is that many of the statistically null point estimates here have
confidence intervals that include economically meaningful differences.

    Demographically, our experiment sample is predominantly female, unmarried, and Black.
Only 25% of our sample has a college degree. Mean age is about 43, with an sd of 15, and the
support of its distribution spans most working ages.

    In terms of credit history, a bit more than 80% of our sample has a FICO® score at baseline.
Table 2's transition matrices show that most movement on this variable goes in the direction of
obtaining a score: nearly 50% of those unscored at baseline are scored at the 18-month endline,
while only about 4% of those scored at baseline lack a score at the 18-month endline. A consumer
can have a credit report with information on specific debts, without being scored, if FICO cannot
estimate risk with sufficient confidence. Returning to Table 1, scores are low on average among
those with scores, albeit with substantial heterogeneity: the mean is about 560 and the sd about 65.
FICO® Scores can range from 300 to 850, and most of our sample is well below the cutoffs for a
"prime" borrower (usually 640 or 680). Sub-prime consumers typically face high prices and
rationing (see e.g., the evidence on utilization in the next paragraph). Many individuals have

up: nudges from a teller any time they transacted in a branch; phone calls attempting to set up an
appointment to open a CBL; and two emails.
18
   Participants could satisfy the requirement by completing five (or more) modules out of eight available:
Savings and Investments, Mortgages, Overdraft Protection, Payment Types and Credit Cards, Credit Scores
and Reports, Identity Protection, Insurance and Taxes, and Financing Higher Education

                                                                                                       10
substantial past borrowing experience, with a mean and sd of lifetime loans of about eight each.
And many individuals have outstanding loans at baseline: over 60% have one or installment loans,
and over 45% have one or more revolving loans. 19 Nearly 50% of these borrowers have been
delinquent during the past 12 months.

     Focusing next on liquidity, liquid asset holdings at SLCCU are low for most of the sample:
64% holds less than the required CBL monthly payment amount ($54) in their SLCCU deposit
accounts at baseline. 20 And among those with an open credit line at baseline, mean utilization is
greater than 100%: the average person with a revolving credit line in our sample has exceeded
their credit line(s). Together with prevalent low credit scores and delinquency, these patterns
suggest that liquidity constraints bind for most of our sample.

3. Results

A. CBL take-up and average treatment effects

     Our randomization induced large differences in CBL take-up, defined as opening a CBL within
18 months of entering the study. 21 Table 3 presents the average treatment effects (ITT) on take-up
(column 1), having a credit score (column 2) and credit score (column 3).

     Recall that the main proximate goal of a CBL is to help consumers improve their credit scores.
We examine whether and how CBLs achieve this goal by using the four credit reports we have
per-person, and our random assignment to either the CBL or Extra-Step Arm, to estimate intent-
to-treat (ITT) effects using OLS equations of the following form:

 (1)          =  + (  ×  ) +  +    + 
                                                                   




19
   The traditional credit bureaus have broad but not entirely comprehensive coverage of borrowing, so some
people we classify as non-borrowers may in fact have an outstanding loan.
20
   The 1/0 variables for baseline borrowing activity, delinquency, and liquid assets are not shown in Table
1 because they are each part of broader indices that are shown.
21
   Approximately 50 percent of take-up occurred on the same day as the survey and offer, 71 percent
occurred within the first 30 days, and 97 percent occurred within the first year. Appendix Table 1 shows
our key baseline characteristics do not have strong univariate correlations with take-up, with one potentially
noteworthy exception being that takers in the CBL arm have lower credit scores than non-takers (-14 points,
se 6).

                                                                                                           11
   Here Y is a credit report variable for person i at time t, where t includes the baseline and the
three endlines (pulled roughly 6, 12, and 18 months post-random assignment). CBL Arm=1 if i was
randomly assigned to that arm; the Extra-Step Arm is the omitted category. The CBL interaction
with Post identifies the average effect of CBL access across the three endlines. Because we have
multiple observations per person we include person fixed effects  (thereby absorbing the main
effect CBL Armi) and cluster standard errors at the person level (the unit of randomization).

   The strong first stage (Column 1, 18pp differential take-up rate with an se of 2pp) serves two
purposes. The first is methodological: it enables us to estimate the causal effects of CBL access
(in Section 3-B). The second is substantive: it sheds light on the deterrent effect of financial
education, even when financial education is offered through a convenient delivery channel and at
a seemingly opportune moment. The financial education requirement serves as a deterrent even
though it was not enforced: only two of the 86 takers in the Extra Step Arm completed the
requirement, because credit union staffers had the discretion to waive it. This is important, as it
also removes the possibility that the Extra Arm group benefited from the financial education.

   The average treatment effect is null on each of the primary outcome variables. Column 2 shows
a 1.8pp point estimate of the CBL ITT effect on the likelihood of having a FICO® score, on a base
of a control mean of 87% across the follow-up period. The standard error of 1.5pp implies that the
confidence interval includes meaningful but not large effects on the extensive margin of scoring,
at least in ITT terms. Column 4 shows a -1.9 point estimate of CBL's effect on the FICO® score,
conditional on having a score at baseline, on a base of 567. The standard error of 2.7 points implies
a fairly precisely estimated zero in ITT terms. Columns 3 and 5 disaggregate the treatment effect
by endline and show no strong evidence of differences or dynamics across endlines.

B. Heterogeneous treatment effects

   The null average treatment effects mask important heterogeneity. To examine heterogeneity,
we first chose an extensive set of model "inputs"--potential sources of HTEs--for a machine
learning model to search across. In doing so we grouped correlated baseline variables into indices,
to reduce collinearity and preserve degrees of freedom. The notes to Table 4 detail the inputs.

   We then test for overall (sometimes referred to as "aggregate" or "omnibus") heterogeneity
with a generalized random forest model (Wager and Athey 2018; Athey and Wager 2019; Athey,


                                                                                                  12
Tibshirani, and Wager 2019). Table 4 Panel A reports the coefficient and p-value for each of the
model's two key test statistics, separately for each outcome-endline combination. The Mean Forest
Prediction tests whether the model predicts the outcome accurately: a substantial deviation from 1
is cause for concern, but we find no such evidence across any of the outcome-endline
combinations. The Differential Forest Prediction tests the null of treatment effect heterogeneity,
and which we reject for the continuous score outcome at 6 months (p=0.003) and 12 months
(p=0.05), but not at 18 months (p=0.62). For the binary outcome of having a credit score, we only
find suggestive evidence of heterogeneity at 6 months (p=0.08), which is likely a by-product of
there being less variation to predict-- most people already have a credit score at baseline and then
keep it over time (Table 2).

   Figure 4 plots the generalized random forest's predicted conditional average treatment effect
(CATE) for each outcome-endline combination for each consumer. The y-axis shows the estimated
treatment effect magnitude, and the x-axis orders observations by that magnitude such that the
curve is weakly increasing from left-to-right. Focusing on the continuous score, the range of
CATEs illustrates considerable heterogeneity at 6 months and 12 months; e.g., the 27 or so point
difference between the lowest and highest TEs is economically large (as discussed above, it is
important to keep in mind these that treatment-on-the-treated effects are probably on the order of
5x larger than the ITT ones reported in our exhibits). Another key inference is that these person-
specific CATEs fall fairly neatly into three bins: we see about one-third of the sample with a
substantial negative TE, about one-third with close to zero, and about one-third with a substantial
positive TE. As such we split the sample into CATE terciles in Table 4 Panel B, and find further
evidence of economically meaningful heterogeneity: at 6 months, the estimated difference in
treatment effects between the top and bottom CATE terciles is 15.06 (+/- 10.98). At 12 months,
the difference is 10.87 (+/- 13.32).

   Table 5 examines the univariate correlates of the CATEs from the causal forest analysis. This
table makes three concessions for the sake of brevity and focus. First, we focus on the continuous
credit score outcome instead of the extensive margin outcome, because the omnibus test finds more
evidence of HTEs on the former. Second, we focus on the 6- and 12 month-endlines, because the
omnibus test does not find evidence of heterogeneity at 18 months. Third, because the analysis is
univariate, the selection of correlates is guided by applicability (e.g., demographics and credit


                                                                                                 13
history variables that policymakers and lenders could use for targeting) as well theoretical
considerations (e.g., including a liquidity index because it may capture the ease with an individual
can make each month's payments).

     For each of these correlates, Table 5 presents the correlate's mean for individuals in the lowest
CATE tercile (column 1) and for individuals the highest CATE tercile (column 2), where the
CATEs are estimated by the causal forest presented in Table 4 Column 4 for the 6-month endline
(Panel A here) and in Table 4 Column 5 for the 12-month endline (Panel B here). Column 3 then
reports the p-value of the difference between the correlate's means in Columns 1 and 2. Column 3
permits inference about whether a particular variable correlates with the CATE. But this inference
does not reveal whether any correlation is economically important or spans both positive and
negative predicted treatment effects. For that, we turn to columns 4-6, where we compare CATE
means across correlate terciles.

     A driving correlate--a key source of HTEs--should satisfy four criteria: (1) An economically
important difference in the input across bottom and top CATE terciles in Columns 1 vs. 2; (2) That
difference being statistically significant (p-value < conventional thresholds in Column 3); (3) An
economically important difference in the CATE across the top and bottom input terciles in
Columns 4 vs. 5; (4) That difference being statistically significant (p-value < conventional
thresholds in Column 6).

     The only correlate satisfying each of those criteria at both endlines is the installment activity
index calculated from baseline credit reports, and thus we focus on this margin of HTEs in the rest
of our analyses. 22 As detailed in the Data Appendix, this index is comprised of three components:
number of open installment loans, any open installment loan, and the number of new credit
inquiries during the previous 12 months. The latter component covers inquiries for revolving as
well as installment loans, but we include it in the installment index because it is strongly correlated
with the other installment index components and not with the revolving index components.

     Table 5 Columns 1-3 show large differences in the baseline installment activity index across
the top and bottom terciles of predicted treatment effects, with 1.32 sd less activity (p-value=0.00)


22
  Because this is our key margin of heterogeneity, Appendix Tables 2a and 2b repeat Table 1's full sample
descriptive statistics and balance checks within the top and bottom terciles of baseline installment activity.

                                                                                                           14
for those in the top TE tercile at the 6-month endline, and 0.35 sd less activity at the 12-month
endline. Columns 4 and 5 show that those with less baseline installment activity have large positive
treatment effects at each endline (23 points and 17 points, with ses of 8 points), while those with
more baseline installment activity have negative treatment effects at each endline (-13 points and
-10 points, with ses of 6 points). The estimated difference of 35 points at the 6-month endline has
a p-value of 0.00, and the estimated difference of 27 points at the 12-month endline has a p-value
of 0.01 (Column 6).

     Our takeaways from Table 5 are that those less installment activity at baseline fare well with
CBLs, and that those with more installment activity fare worse relatively speaking, and poorly
absolutely speaking. A practical implication is that CBL providers could secure higher average
treatment effects, and more uniformly positive treatment effects, with two simple and
complementary strategies. First, target-market to consumers with less installment activity. Second,
screen out consumers with more installment activity, or at least discourage them from taking up a
CBL. 23

     The results in Table 5 raise the question of whether differences in treatment effects are due to
differences in CBL-induced credit behaviors -- specifically, in factors used as inputs to the FICO®
scoring model. A leading alternative hypothesis is that those with different baseline installment
credit activity respond similarly to the CBL, but that their similar behavior is scored differently by
the model. This alternative hypothesis is viable given the limited modeling information that Fair-
Isaac publicly reveals: "The importance of these categories may vary from one person to
another...". 24

     Table 6 uses variants of equation (1) to estimate CBL treatment effects on credit behaviors.
Columns 1-5 present estimates for behavior indices measuring four of the five behavior factors
FICO states it uses in its scoring model: "New Credit", "Payment History" (delinquency),
"Amounts Owed" (which includes both "Balances" and a "Utilization" measure), and "Credit
Mix". (We lack a direct measure of the fifth factor behind the FICO® score, "Length of Credit
History".) For each measure of each factor we present average treatment effects in Panel A. These


23
   Untabulated results suggest that providers can obtain similar results by simply targeting or screening on
one component of our index: whether someone has any outstanding installment loan.
24
   https://www.myfico.com/credit-education/whats-in-your-credit-score , accessed September 23, 2020.

                                                                                                         15
average effects are just for completeness and not the focus of our analysis and discussion, which
is on the tests for HTEs by baseline installment activity (Panel B). Columns 6 and 7 present
additional results, on CBL delinquency, which is not broken out separately in the bureau (because,
as discussed above, the delinquency measure in Column 2 includes CBLs, due to reporting and
data limitations) but tracked by our partner credit union.

     Table 6 Panel B Column 1 shows little evidence of any HTEs for new credit activity.

     But Column 2 shows large (0.20 sd) differences in TEs on delinquency between the top tercile
of baseline installment activity and the other terciles. Higher values here indicate more
delinquency and default, and so the HTE is driven by a deterioration in performance for the high-
installment tercile (0.22 sd increase in poor performance, se 0.08 sd). Columns 6 and 7 suggest the
pattern in Column 2 is not driven by the CBL itself, for two reasons. First, we do not see HTEs on
CBL delinquency; in particular, there is little evidence that those in the highest tercile of baseline
installment activity have higher CBL delinquency. Second, Column 6, which uses three endline
snapshots of SLCCU data to measure delinquency and thereby mirrors our credit bureau data
structure, shows that the magnitude of any treatment effect on CBL delinquency measured at any
single point in time is small. This is because any CBL delinquency only appears "on the books"
for less than a month, due to SLCCU's practice of curing any 30-day CBL delinquency with the
remaining escrow balance and then immediately closing the CBL account (Section 2-A). 25

     Turning to the "Amounts Owed" factor, Panel B's Columns 3 and 4 show suggestive evidence
of larger TEs on the bottom tercile than the others. Even if this pattern were statistically stronger,
its implication for scoring would less clear than for the other factors. High utilization is scored
negatively but there may be non-monotonicity; e.g., some middle range of utilization may be
scored more favorably than none.

     Panel B's Column 5 suggests large differences between in TEs on credit mix between the
bottom tercile and the others. For those in the bottom tercile, CBL access increases the likelihood
of having both an installment and revolving loan open by 0.12 sd (se 0.06 sd). The point estimates

25
  Column 7 confirms that measuring CBL delinquency across multiple SLCCU data snapshots produces
average TEs on delinquency that are closer to what one would expect given the 18% take-up differential
between the CBL and Extra-Step arms.


                                                                                                   16
for the other terciles are negative (-0.16 and -0.09 sd) and substantially different (p-values on the
difference from the bottom tercile of 0.01 and 0.04). Since having both loan types open is scored
positively, this heterogeneity in credit mix could be driving the installment activity HTEs on credit
scores.

      Altogether, these results are consistent with the CBL inducing differential responses in credit
mix and delinquency that drive the HTEs by baseline installment activity in Table 5. 26

C. Impacts on usage of other SLCCU products

      Table 7 examines CBL treatment effects on the usage of other SLCCU products, using the
same specifications we use for Table 6. These results help round out the picture of how consumer
financial behavior changes as creditworthiness builds (or deteriorates), on whether the CBL helps
individuals build savings (SLCCU does not focus on this extensively in its marketing, but other
CBL providers do), and on the bottom-line viability of CBLs from the supply-side perspective.
Odd-numbered columns estimate average treatment effects for the full sample across the three
endlines, and even-numbered columns estimate treatment effects separately by baseline
installment credit activity terciles.

      Columns 1 and 2 show no evidence of treatment effects on membership retention (1pp with se
1pp), although the confidence intervals do not rule out economically meaningful effects on attrition
given that only 7% of the full sample is no longer an SLCCU member by the 18-month endline.
Columns 3 and 4 show no treatment effect of the CBL on non-CBL borrowing from SLCCU on
average (1pp, se 2pp, control mean 0.32), but with suggestive evidence of heterogeneity: the TE
on those in the bottom tercile of baseline installment credit activity is an estimated 4.9pp (se 2.7pp)
increase, while the TEs on those in other terciles are imprecisely estimated nulls (-0.1pp with ses
of 3.1 and 4.0pp).

      Columns 5-8 examine treatment effects on deposit account balances. These are key outcomes
for understanding whether there is a flypaper effect of CBL proceeds. Positive treatment effects
on balances would be consistent with members using CBL for what it is, mechanically, aside from
its credit reporting feature: a costly commitment savings device. We see some evidence that CBL

26
     Appendix Table 3 shows similar results when we limit the sample to those with a credit score at baseline.


                                                                                                           17
increases the level of savings balances, with the full sample result in Column 5 ($248, se $121)
perhaps being driven by those in the upper terciles of installment credit activity at baseline in
Column 6. But Appendix Table 4 Columns 1-3 shows this pattern is not entirely robust to
alternative functional forms of savings balances. We add checking account balances together with
savings in Table 7 Columns 7 and 8 and Appendix Table 4 Columns 4-6, finding imprecisely
estimated null TEs on balances in these specifications. Overall, our estimates are too imprecise to
yield sharp inferences on CBL effects on deposit account balances.

   Summarizing Table 7, we find little evidence that the CBL backfires from the provider's
perspective, and some statistically weak hints of benefits.

D. Effects on market information

   Next, we investigate how the CBL affects the quality of information available to the market,
with three predictive analyses.

   The first analysis, in Table 8, tests for self-selection: does CBL take-up help predict someone's
future credit score? The idea here is that a consumer's CBL take-up decision may reveal something
about their credit risk trajectory that otherwise would be unobserved to lenders. We implement
selection tests that predict each of our two main credit score outcomes by: a) restricting the sample
frame to the CBL Arm, since the CBL Arm faced the usual take-up process; and b) replacing the
random assignment indicator in equation (1) with an indicator for whether someone took-up a
CBL. Normally this "naïve" specification would capture an unidentifiable combination of
treatment and selection effects, but given a null for average treatment effects (Table 3) the naïve
specification identifies selection in the full sample.

   Two specifications per outcome take different but complementary approaches to identifying
selection. The specification in Table 8's odd-numbered columns assumes that the relevant margin
for selection on unobservables is anything not captured by baseline levels (recall that our empirical
models include person fixed effects whenever we have multiple observations per person, as we do
here). Even-numbered columns assume the relevant margin for selection on unobservables is
anything not captured by baseline levels and trends that can vary with the baseline score level (we
use Post Double Selection LASSO to select which Post*Baseline score bin terms to include).



                                                                                                  18
   Table 8 shows strong evidence of positive (advantageous) selection on CBL take-up, for both
outcomes and both approaches to controlling for observables. Columns 1 and 2 show that CBL
takers are 10pp or 11pp more likely (se 3pp and 2pp) to have a credit score in the endline period
than non-takers in the two specifications. Columns 3 and 4 show that CBL takers who enter the
sample with a credit score have scores that are 17 points (se 5) or 13 points (se 4) higher during
the endline period. Figure 3 suggests that this is due to CBL takers catching up to CBL non-takers:
CBL takers increase their scores on average over the first six months and then flatten, while non-
taker scores remain roughly constant from baseline through the endlines.

   In all, Table 8 implies that CBLs attract consumers who are on an upward trajectory that is not
fully captured by baseline observables. This has market implications: lenders can use CBLs to
identify consumers whose creditworthiness is about to start improving. We speculate that credit
bureaus could facilitate even stronger advantageous self-selection by distinguishing CBLs from
standard installment loans in their data.

   The second and third predictive tests focus on whether a CBL-influenced credit score is better,
or worse, at predicting default, as measured by the score's gradient (second test) and its fit (third
test). CBLs might capture valuable information and thereby improve the predictive power of the
credit score or distort information and thereby reduce the score's predictive power. As noted at the
outset, distortion seems like a real possibility given that the CBL is not a loan in an economic
sense--it functions like a commitment contract for saving--yet is reported to credit bureaus as a
standard installment loan.

   Our tests compare the 12-month endline credit score's default gradient or fit for the
delinquency index from the 18 month-endline, across the CBL versus Extra Step arms. (The
predicted outcome here is the same delinquency index we use in prior tables.) Focusing on the
predictive power of 12-month endline scores allows time for the CBL to exert any salutary or
distortionary influence on the predictive content of the credit score. Since the CBL is more likely
to exert influence if it changes scores, we focus here on our key margin of HTEs, although we also
present results on the full sample for completeness. If the CBL changes the scores' predictive
power, then e.g., the 12-month score*CBL Arm*Bottom tercile baseline installment activity
coefficient or fit will differ from the 12-month score*Extra-Step Arm*Bottom tercile baseline
installment activity coefficient or fit. A caveat is that these tests may be underpowered and/or

                                                                                                  19
biased-against finding distortion due to two limitations with our setup. First, the six months
between 12 and 18 months may not be enough time for marginal delinquencies to emerge. Second,
our measures of delinquency and default include CBL delinquency, due to data limitations
described in Section 2-B, and because there is mechanically more CBL delinquency in the CBL
Arm by virtue of the strong first-stage, our predictive tests are biased towards finding an
improvement in predictive accuracy of the credit scores (although, as discussed vis a vis Table 6,
that bias might be small due to reporting and measurement nuances).

    Table 9 presents results from the gradient tests. As expected, given the null average TE on
credit scores, Column 1 shows no statistically significant difference in the default-score gradient
across the CBL and Extra-Step arms (p-value 0.26), and the point estimate on the difference is
small in economic terms: a 0.01 sd difference per 100-point change in credit score. Column 2
decomposes this average gradient for our key margin of heterogeneity and here finds economically
small differences in predictive power within each of the baseline installment loan activity terciles.
However, the hint that CBL weakens predictive power for those in the top tercile (a 0.02 sd flatter
gradient, with a 0.08 p-value on the difference) generates some cause for concern given the
aforementioned caveat that these estimates are biased in the opposite direction, i.e., against finding
distortion.

    Figure 5 presents the results from the fit tests. Specifically, we test whether the CBL changes
the 12-month endline credit score's ability to explain the variance of our delinquency index, using
receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curves. A greater area under the curve (AUC) indicates a
better fit. The 45-degree line shows what the ROC curve would be if the 12-month endline credit
score had no power to predict delinquency 6 months later. Because a ROC curve requires a discrete
predicted (outcome) variable, we cut the delinquency index at its median, with those above the
median defaulting more. We then compare the AUCs for the CBL vs. Extra Step arms, calculating
standard errors and p-values using the DeLong et al (1988) method. As expected in the full sample,
there is little difference in the AUCs across the CBL vs. Extra-Step arms (p-value on the difference
of 0.64). We also find no evidence for distortion in the lowest-tercile installment activity group,
where the fit for those in the CBL arm suggests weakly greater predictive power: 0.76 vs. 0.73 for
those in the Extra-Step arm (p-value 0.65). But as with the gradient test, the fit results for the top
tercile of baseline installment activity generate some cause for concern, as here the 12-month credit


                                                                                                   20
score explain less variance in delinquency in the CBL arm (0.84 vs. 0.89). This difference has a p-
value of 0.20, but its true magnitude is likely somewhat greater and economically meaningful.

   All told, our predictive tests suggest that CBLs induce self-selection on upward credit score
trajectory but may weaken the predictive power of those scores. Together with the weakly positive
average treatment effect on the extensive margin of scoring (Table 3 Column 2)-- on moving
consumers from "credit invisible" to visible ­ the full picture suggests that CBLs provide valuable
information to the market but that changes to CBL marketing, screening, and/or reporting may be
needed to minimize distortion. We discuss such changes in the next section.

4. Conclusion

   We use a randomized encouragement design and predictive modeling to examine impacts of a
credit-builder loan (CBL) on borrowers, providers, and credit market information. The results are
mixed, but promising.

   The CBL studied here has null average treatment effects on consumer credit scores, but these
average effects obscure important heterogeneity on a readily observable margin: baseline
installment borrowing. Those with more activity at baseline experience large credit score drops
from the CBL, while those with less obtain the intended large credit score increase. Perhaps most
strikingly, our results suggest that the CBL increases overall non-CBL delinquency among
borrowers with higher levels of baseline installment activity. Together with high delinquency rates
on the CBL itself (approximately 40%), this suggests that adding CBL's seemingly modest
liquidity requirement is too much for many consumers to manage.

   CBL effects at the market level also show some signs of being mixed. On the positive side, we
find that CBL takers are substantially more likely to obtain or improve their credit scores over the
next 6-18 months on average, conditional on their baseline score, implying that lenders can use
CBLs to advantageously select borrowers who are on an upward trajectory. As such our results
also illustrate how merely comparing outcomes before versus after product take-up, a common
advertising strategy of CBL providers, is misleading. On the potentially negative side, we find
some suggestive evidence that CBLs distort market information weakens the predictive power of
the credit score in cases where it causes the score to decline.



                                                                                                 21
    With respect to overall efficiency, our estimates of the CBL's effects on consumers, providers,
and the market suggest that CBLs could be efficient, and perhaps Pareto-improving, with some
modest design changes. Providers should consider remediating or screening out those with pre-
existing installment debt (both because they have negative average treatment effects, and because
market efficiency may worsen for this sub-group as per our predictive tests). Credit bureaus should
consider reporting CBLs as a distinct category rather than as a traditional installment loan (as they
do with distinct categories for unsecured vs. secured credit cards). In short, our results suggest a
path to CBL designs that make nearly everyone better off while doing little harm to anyone else.

    Expanding a bit on implications for providers, we see three potential product/program design
implications to explore going forward. First, it may be counterproductive to try building
consumers' financial knowledge with "product-linked" financial education. We find that a modest
financial education requirement decreases product (CBL) take-up by nearly 20 percentage points,
even among our sample of consumers that had expressed interest in credit building generally and
the CBL specifically. Second, providers should test various approaches to dealing with the
possibility that CBLs backfire for those with pre-existing installment debt. Possibilities include:
screening out existing borrowers; offering or requiring a scaffolded approach that focuses first on
timely repayment of existing obligations and then segues into another traditional loan or CBL;
offering or requiring help with cash flow management; informing and/or reminding users that they
need only part with $54 for a few minutes on the payment due date, as $50 of each payment is
available to be returned to the customer upon demand. Third, automation of marketing, screening,
and payment functions is likely essential for CBL providers to operate at scale, as the small deal
sizes required to meet consumer needs and constraints imply a high ratio of fixed costs to potential
revenues. The recent emergence of fintech providers is encouraging in this regard, and it will be
interesting to see whether credit unions and other providers with strong digital operations follow
suit.

    Testing CBL design changes, together with testing whether our results replicate, offers exciting
possibilities for revealing insights into fundamental aspects of consumer decision making. The
differential effects we find on baseline installment debt activity beg for particular scrutiny. Is
coming up with a very short-term outlay of $54 really so disruptive to customers with pre-existing




                                                                                                  22
installment loans, and if so... why? And why don't consumers with a pre-existing installment loans
anticipate this disruption and simply decline the CBL?

   We suspect our results are best explained by a behavioral model with limited attention to future
liquidity constraints and/or over-confidence about making future payments, or limited capacity to
manage multiple tasks due to scarcity in time, effort, and/or attention. Perhaps such biases or
limitations are more prevalent among those with more pre-existing installment activity, or more
binding for those with more claims on future cash flows or more logistical claims on their time
and effort. Concepts of scarcity as put forward by Mullainathan and Shafir (2013) can lead to
predictions of both negative treatment effects (e.g., lack of capacity to manage one more
obligation) and positive treatment effects (e.g., via tunneling and thus hyper-attention to
particularly salient tasks, see Kaur et al. (2020); Lichand and Mani (2020); Ong et al. (2019)), and
so a key challenge going forward is developing testable models that sharpen understanding of
whether and how scarcity leads to better or worse decision making.

   Altogether our results highlight some key questions for future research and policy/product
development. For research, we need to better understand how to model the decision making of
very resource-constrained consumers. For policy and product development, efforts to help
households build stronger credit records need to consider how to target more effectively and how
such efforts affect market efficiency as well as consumers.




                                                                                                 23
                                       REFERENCES
Askari, A. 2009. "Banks and Financial Education: Integrating Practice, Products, and
        Partnerships." Community Investments 21 (2): 23­26.
Athey, Susan, Julie Tibshirani, and Stefan Wager. 2019. "Generalized Random Forests." The
        Annals of Statistics 47 (2): 1148­78.
Athey, Susan, and Stefan Wager. 2019. "Estimating Treatment Effects with Causal Forests: An
        Application." Observational Studies 5: 36­51.
Ballance, Joshua, Robert Clifford, and Daniel Shoag. 2020. "`No More Credit Score': Employer
        Credit Check Bans and Signal Substitution." Labour Economics 63 (April): 101769.
Bartik, Alex, and Scott Nelson. 2020. "Credit Reports as Resumes: The Incidence of Pre-
        Employment Credit Screening."
Bos, Marieke, Emily Breza, and Andres Liberman. 2018. "The Labor Market Effects of Credit
        Market Information." Review of Financial Studies 31 (6): 2005­37.
Brevoort, Kenneth P, Philipp Grimm, and Michelle Kambara. 2015. "Data Point: Credit
        Invisibles." Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
Brevoort, Kenneth P, and Michelle Kambara. 2017. "Data Point: Becoming Credit Visibles."
        Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
Brooks, Jennifer, Kasey Wiedrich, Lebaron Sims, and Solana Rice. 2015. "Excluded from the
        Financial Mainstream: How the Economic Recovery Is Bypassing Millions of
        Americans." Corporation for Enterprise Development.
Chenven, Sarah. 2014. "The Power of Credit Building: Credit Building Strategies for Funders."
        Asset Funders Network.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. 2012. "Key Dimensions and Processes in the U.S. Credit
        Reporting System: A Review of How the Nation's Largest Credit Bureaus Manage
        Consumer Data." CFPB.
DeLong, Elizabeth R., David M. DeLong, and Daniel L. Clarke-Pearson. 1988. "Comparing the
        Areas under Two or More Correlated Receiver Operating Characteristic Curves: A
        Nonparametric Approach." Biometrics 44 (3): 837­45.
Dobbie, Will, Paul GoldsmithPinkham, Neale Mahoney, and Jae Song. 2020. "Bad Credit, No
        Problem? Credit and Labor Market Consequences of Bad Credit Reports." The Journal of
        Finance 75 (5): 2377­2419.
Dobbie, Will, and Jae Song. 2020. "Targeted Debt Relief and the Origins of Financial Distress:
        Experimental Evidence from Distressed Credit Card Borrowers." American Economic
        Review 110 (4): 984­1018.
Garmaise, Mark J., and Gabriel Natividad. 2017. "Consumer Default, Credit Reporting, and
        Borrowing Constraints." The Journal of Finance 72 (5): 2331­68.
Gelman, Michael, Shachar Kariv, Matthew D. Shapiro, Dan Silverman, and Steven Tadelis.
        2018. "How Individuals Respond to a Liquidity Shock: Evidence from the 2013
        Government Shutdown." Journal of Public Economics, July.
Hertzberg, Andrew, Jose Liberti, and Daniel Paravisini. 2011. "Public Information and
        Coordination: Evidence from a Credit Registry Expansion." The Journal of Finance 66
        (2): 379­412.
Janvry, Alain de, Craig McIntosh, and Elisabeth Sadoulet. 2010. "The Supply and Demand Side
        Impacts of Credit Market Information." Journal of Development Economics 93 (2): 173­
        88.


                                                                                           24
Kaiser, Tim, Annamaria Lusardi, Lukas Menkhoff, and Carly Urban. 2020. "Financial Education
        Affects Financial Knowledge and Downstream Behaviors."
Kaur, Supreet, Sendhil Mullainathan, Frank Schilbach, and Suanna Oh. 2020. "Does Financial
        Strain Lower Worker Productivity?"
Kovbasyuk, Sergey, Artem Larinsky, and Giancarlo Spagnolo. 2019. "Limited Records and
        Credit Cycles."
Liberman, Andres, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikram Pathania. 2020. "High-Cost Debt and
        Perceived Creditworthiness: Evidence from the U.K." Review of Economic Studies
        forthcoming.
Lichand, Guilherme, and Anandi Mani. 2020. "Cognitive Droughts."
Manso, Gustavo. 2013. "Feedback Effects of Credit Ratings." Journal of Financial Economics
        109 (2): 535­48.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Eldar Shafir. 2013. Scarcity: Why Having Too Little Means so Much.
        New York: Times Books, Henry Holt and Company.
Olafsson, Arna, and Michaela Pagel. 2018. "The Liquid Hand-to-Mouth: Evidence from
        Personal Finance Management Software." The Review of Financial Studies 31 (11):
        4398­4446.
Ong, Qiyan, Walter Theseira, and Irene Y. H. Ng. 2019. "Reducing Debt Improves
        Psychological Functioning and Changes Decision-Making in the Poor." Proceedings of
        the National Academy of Sciences 116 (15): 7244­49.
Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 1995. "The Effect of Credit Market Competition
        on Lending Relationships." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (2): 407­43.
Pulliam Weston, Liz. 2010. "Lifetime Cost of Bad Credit: $201,712." MSN Money (blog).
        February 19, 2010.
Reyes, B., E. Lopez, S. Phillips, and K. Schroeder. 2013. "Building Credit for the Underbanked:
        Social Lending as a Tool for Credit Improvement."
Sledge, Joshua, Sarah Gordon, and Matthew Kinsley. 2011. "Making the Shift from Financial
        Education to Financial Capability: Evidence from the Financial Capability Innovation
        Fund." Center for Financial Services Innovation.
Wager, Stefan, and Susan Athey. 2018. "Estimation and Inference of Heterogeneous Treatment
        Effects Using Random Forests." Journal of the American Statistical Association 113
        (523): 1228­42.
Wolff, Sarah. 2016. "Providing a Fresh Start: An Analysis of Self-Help Federal Credit Union's
        Fresh Start Product." Self-Help Credit Union.
Zinman, Jonathan. 2015. "Household Debt: Facts, Puzzles, Theories, and Policies." Annual
        Review of Economics 7 (1): 251­76.




                                                                                             25
Figure 1. CBL Marketing Materials




                                    26
                Figure 2. Sample construction, experimental design, and CBL usage

                                                                                             Any delinquency
                                                                                              [n=96; 96 in
                                     Randomization                                            bureau data]

                                                                        Opened a CBL
                                                                        [n=233; 232 in            Never
                                                      CBL arm            bureau data]           delinquent
                                                   [n=789; 775 in                             [n=137; 136 in
                                                    bureau data]         Didn't open a         bureau data]
                                                                         CBL [n=556;
                                                                         543 in bureau
                                                                             data]
                              Interested in
                                  CBL
                             [n=1531; 1507                                                   Any delinquency
                            in bureau data]                                                   [n=27; 26 in
                                                  Extra Step arm:       Opened a CBL          bureau data]
  Elicit interest in                                 Financial
     improving                                       education           [n=87; 86 in
  credit [n=2269]                                 required prior to      bureau data]
                           Uninterested in            opening                                     Never
                               CBL                                       Didn't open a          delinquent
                                                   [n=742; 732 in                              [n=60; 60 in
                                                                         CBL [n=655;
                           [n=738; 625 in           bureau data]
                                                                         646 in bureau         bureau data]
                            bureau data]                                     data]

Note: "CBL"= Credit Builder Loan. Sample sizes include only those matched to the credit union's administrative
data and hence inferred to be a credit union member at baseline. The sample sizes shown to be "in bureau data"
are those in the study sample whom we were able to match to a credit report at baseline.


                                                                                                               27
                                                     Figure 3. Selection into CBL:
                                        Mean FICO® Score 8 over time (CBL Arm Only)
                600




                575
FICO® Score 8




                550




                525




                500
                       CBL non-    CBL takers                CBL non- CBL takers   CBL non-   CBL takers   CBL non- CBL takers
                        takers                                takers                takers                  takers

                             Baseline                           6-month endline      12-month endline         18-month endline

                      Note: Error bars show the 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                                                                 28
Note: Conditional Average Treatment Effects (CATE), estimated using Generalized Random Forests package in R. Sample sizes are lower here (than e.g.,
the number of individuals with data for each outcome in Table 3) because we are doing each outcome-endline combination separately, and because of
missing values on input variables.

                                                                                                                                                       29
Note: Each graph shows receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. We discretize at each 12-month endline credit score as a cutoff and predict more-risky behavior (i.e.
defaulting) for those with scores below the cutoff and less-risky behavior (i.e. not defaulting) for those with scores above the cutoff. This aligns with what credit scores are
constructed to do, which is to predict default ordinally. We then compare each person's prediction based on their 12-month score with their true value of the 18-month endline
discretized delinquency index to calculate the true and false positive rates. ROCs require a discrete classification of the outcome to be predicted, so we discretize our 18-month
endline delinquency index (see Data Appendix for details) at the median index value. As before, a higher value--the above median indicator--indicates more default. The true
positive rate, on the y-axis, is (number of people correctly classified as more-risky at 12 months)/(number of observed more-risky people at 18 months). The false positive rate,
on the x-axis, is (number of people incorrectly classified as more-risky at 12 months)/(number of observed less-risky people at 18 months). The areas under the curve (AUCs)
for the Extra Step and CBL arms are shown below each graph along with the p-value of a chi-squared test of their equality (Delong, Delong, Clarke-Pearson 1988). The
Reference (45-degree) line shows a ROC with no predictive power.

                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                Table 1. Baseline characteristics and randomization balance for experiment sample
                                                                 (1)                (2)               (3)
                                                                       Mean (sd)               Univariate diff:
                                                             CBL Arm          Extra Step Arm      (2) - (1)
                                                     Sample:                                         (se)
                                                               N=789              N=742
Age                                                            43.823             42.475           -1.348
                                                              (15.056)           (15.328)         (0.777)
Female                                                          0.642              0.655            0.014
                                                               (0.480)            (0.476)         (0.024)
Married                                                         0.241              0.229           -0.012
                                                               (0.428)            (0.421)         (0.022)
Number of adults in household                                   1.611              1.629           0.019
                                                               (0.788)            (0.791)         (0.041)
Number of children in household                                 0.845              0.807           -0.038
                                                               (1.237)            (1.229)         (0.064)
Race - Black                                                    0.875              0.883            0.008
                                                               (0.331)            (0.322)         (0.017)
College or more                                                 0.264              0.253           -0.011
                                                               (0.441)            (0.435)         (0.023)
Financial risk-taking scale (standardized)                      0.000              0.039           0.039
                                                               (1.000)            (1.008)         (0.052)
Self-control and credit knowledge index (standardized)          0.000              0.051            0.051
                                                               (1.000)            (0.947)         (0.050)
Liquidity index (standardized)                                  0.000             -0.005           -0.005
                                                               (1.000)            (0.928)         (0.049)
Delinquency index (standardized)                                0.000             -0.074           -0.074
                                                               (1.000)            (0.925)         (0.050)
1 = Higher than median of index of default outcomes             0.595              0.598            0.004
                                                               (0.491)            (0.491)         (0.025)
1 = Scored on FICO                                              0.840              0.809           -0.031
                                                               (0.367)            (0.394)         (0.020)
Baseline FICO Score                                           561.489            564.256            2.767
                                                              (64.317)           (66.749)         (3.727)
Installment credit activity at baseline index (standardized)    0.000             -0.047           -0.047
                                                               (1.000)            (1.000)         (0.052)
Revolving credit activity at baseline index (standardized)      0.000              0.006            0.006
                                                               (1.000)            (1.026)         (0.052)
Number of prior loans, lifetime                                 7.773              7.220           -0.553
                                                               (9.131)            (7.725)         (0.445)
Unit of observation is an individual. Index variables are standardized to the Extra Step Arm; see Data Appendix for
details on index components and construction. Sample size varies across rows due to missing observations.




                                                                                                                 31
                           Table 2. Transition matrix for having a credit score
                               (1)        (2)            (3)           (4)       (5)           (6)
                                            CBL Arm                             Extra Step Arm
                                  Have score at Do not have                  Have score at Do not have
                                   18-month      score at 18-                 18-month      score at 18-
                              N=    endline     month endline            N=    endline     month endline
                           N=         668             91                         632             85
Have score at baseline        622   96.95%          3.05%                609   95.07%          4.93%
Do not have score at baseline 137   47.45%         52.55%                108   49.07%         50.93%
Unit of observation is an individual. Sample size is slightly reduced from baseline because here it is limited
to persons with a credit report at our 18-month endline.




                                                                                                                 32
                                 Table 3. CBL average treatment effects on take-up and main outcomes
                                                               (1)               (2)           (3)                   (4)            (5)
                                                            Take-up:
                                  Dependent variable:                         1 = has FICO® Score 8                   FICO® Score 8
                                                         1 = opened CBL
                                             Sample:           Full                     Full                       Have score at baseline
CBL Arm                                                       0.184
                                                             (0.020)
CBL Arm * Post                                                                  0.018                              -1.888
                                                                               (0.015)                             (2.730)
CBL Arm * 6 month endline                                                                     0.008                               -2.428
                                                                                             (0.014)                              (2.615)
CBL Arm * 12 month endline                                                                    0.020                               -1.267
                                                                                             (0.017)                              (3.262)
CBL Arm * 18 month endline                                                                    0.028                               -1.981
                                                                                             (0.020)                              (3.745)

Observations                                                     1531               5978          5978              4865           4865
Individuals                                                                         1507          1507              1238           1238
Mean dependent variable in Extra Step Arm                       0.119               0.873         0.873              567            567
SD dependent variable in Extra Step Arm                         0.324               0.333         0.333               67             67
Mean dependent variable in Extra Step Arm at baseline           0.119               0.840         0.840              561            561
SD dependent variable in Extra Step Arm at baseline             0.324               0.367         0.367               64             64
We define CBL take-up as opening a CBL within 18 months of random assignment. Column (1) presents results from a single OLS
regression of the dependent variable described in the column heading on the variable(s) shown in the applicable rows. Unit of observation for
column (1) is a person at baseline. Columns (2) and (3) present results from a single OLS regression of the dependent variables described in
the column heading on the variables shown in the applicable rows, Post, and person fixed effects. Unit of observation for columns (2) and (3)
is a person-credit report, with four observations for most persons: baseline, and three endlines at 6, 12, and 18 months post-treatment
assignment, all three of which are included in the Post indicator for the experiment period. Number of observations is lower than the number
of individuals x 4 credit reports, because a small number of credit reports lack information on one or more dependent variables, including
whether the person is scored. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the person-level.




                                                                                                                                            33
                  Table 4. Causal forest aggregate test for CBL treatment effect heterogeneity
                                                   (1)        (2)      (3)           (4)       (5)     (6)
                         Dependent variable:        1 = has FICO® Score 8                FICO® Score 8
                                     Endline:     6 mo       12 mo    18 mo         6 mo     12 mo    18 mo
Panel A: Aggregate test for treatment effect heterogeneity
                                    Coefficient: 0.946           -0.974     -2.398         1.366       0.789      -0.274
  Differential forest prediction
                                        p-value: 0.077            0.831      0.993         0.003       0.053      0.623
                                      Coefficient:    0.994      0.955       1.011         1.004       1.023      1.087
  Mean forest prediction
                                         p-value:     0.293      0.451       0.205         0.057       0.382      0.405
Panel B: Average treatment effect by terciles of conditional average treatment effect
  Bottom tercile of CATE                             -0.03      0.01      0.01             -8.30       -5.56       4.46
                                                    (0.03)     (0.03)    (0.00)            (3.99)      (5.22)     (6.13)
  Top tercile of CATE                                0.00       0.01      0.01              6.76        5.31       -1.15
                                                    (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.04)            (3.93)      (4.34)     (4.98)

  Difference of top tercile - bottom tercile          0.03        0.00       0.00          15.06       10.87      -5.61
  95% confidence interval range (+/-)                 0.07        0.08       0.08          10.98       13.32      15.48
  Number of observations                              1413        1374       1330          1164        1126       1073
Unit of observation is a person-endline. For each column in this table-- each outcome-endline combination-- we ran
a casual forest using the generalized random forest (GRF) package in R (Athey et al. 2019; R version 1.0.1, grf
version 0.10.4) to predict the outcome listed in the column heading and obtain the CBL's conditional average
treatment effects (CATE) on it. Panel A shows the test calibration of each forest: the differential forest coefficient
and its p-value, and the mean forest coefficient and its p-value. Using the forest prediction on held-out data, these
tests compute the best linear fit with two regressors, the target estimand and the mean forest prediction. The p-value
of the "differential forest prediction" coefficient is the key omnibus test for the presence of heterogeneity, with
rejection of the null of 0 implying rejection of the null of homogeneous treatment effects. A coefficient of 1 for
"mean forest prediction" suggests that the mean forest prediction is accurate. Panel B uses the predicted CATE for
each observation to divide observations into CATE terciles (see Figure 4 and its discussion in the text for why
terciles are warranted) and reports statistics for the top and bottom terciles. The right hand side variables included in
the causal forest for the binary outcome "1 = Has FICO® Score 8" are: age; number of adults in the household;
number of children in the household; standardized risk taking score; number of open trade lines; savings balance and
combined savings and checking balance (both in hundreds of dollars, winsorized at 95th percentile); dummies equal
to one if baseline survey is missing, credit report is missing, the participant is female, the participant's race is Black,
the participant is married, the participant has attended college, the participant's household income is less than 30k,
the participant is still an SLCCU member, and the participant has a non-CBL loan; and standardized indices of
insecurity, self-control, attention to credit status, credit process knowledge, delinquency, new credit, and lack of
liquidity. The right hand side variables included in the causal forest for the continuous outcome of FICO® Score 8
are those listed above, with the addition of baseline FICO® score and a standardized index of the amount that the
respondent owes based on account balances. Sample sizes are lower here (than e.g., the number of individuals with
data for each outcome in Table 3) because we are doing each outcome-endline combination separately, and because
of missing values on input variables.




                                                                                                                           34
                                               Table 5. Potential sources of CBL treatment effect heterogeneity on FICO® Score
                                                                         (1)                  (2)            (3)              (4)                    (5)                     (6)
                                                                   Mean (se) by treatment effect terciles              Average treatment effect on credit score
                                                                                                                             by baseline variable terciles
                                                                   Observations in     Observations in                  Observations in       Observations in
                                                                    lowest tercile      highest tercile    p-value       lowest tercile        highest tercile             p-value
                                                                    (=0 for binary      (=1 for binary                   (=0 for binary        (=1 for binary
                                                                                                          (1) = (2)                                                        (1) = (2)
                                                                      variables)           variables)                      variables)            variables)
Panel A. 6 -month endline
  Age                                                                  36.75                  50.02            0.00                  -12.13                12.68             0.01
                                                                      (0.65)                 (0.65)                                  (6.29)                (7.55)
  Female                                                                0.67                   0.64            0.41                   -6.45                 -0.29            0.46
                                                                      (0.02)                 (0.02)                                  (7.03)                (4.65)
  Married                                                               0.26                   0.22            0.28                   -2.16                 -0.65            0.86
                                                                      (0.02)                 (0.02)                                  (4.51)                (7.59)
  Number of adults in household                                         1.57                   1.55            0.80                   -0.51                -17.97            0.22
                                                                      (0.04)                 (0.04)                                  (5.15)               (13.14)
  Number of children in household                                       1.02                   0.67            0.00                   1.45                 -10.48            0.21
                                                                      (0.06)                 (0.06)                                  (5.38)                (7.74)
  Race - Black                                                          0.88                   0.88            0.91                  -10.41                 -1.04            0.52
                                                                      (0.02)                 (0.02)                                 (13.92)                (3.95)
  College or more                                                       0.36                   0.19            0.00                   -0.54                 -5.85            0.55
                                                                      (0.02)                 (0.02)                                  (4.38)                (7.71)
  Financial risk-taking scale (standardized)                            0.12                  -0.04            0.02                   6.65                  5.23             0.91
                                                                      (0.05)                 (0.05)                                  (6.29)               (11.06)
  Self-control and credit knowledge index (standardized)                0.44                  -0.14            0.00                   5.63                  -2.72            0.37
                                                                      (0.05)                 (0.05)                                  (6.63)                (6.63)
  Liquidity index (standardized)                                        0.05                  -0.08            0.07                   -4.00                 7.58             0.23
                                                                      (0.05)                 (0.05)                                  (5.43)                (8.03)
  Baseline FICO® Score                                                577.65                 543.80            0.00                   2.98                  -1.58            0.55
                                                                      (3.10)                 (3.10)                                  (4.02)                (6.43)
  Installment credit activity at baseline index (standardized)          0.75                  -0.52            0.00                  22.79                 -12.70            0.00
                                                                      (0.04)                 (0.04)                                  (7.74)                (5.61)
  Revolving credit activity at baseline index (standardized)            0.33                  -0.09            0.00                   -4.12                 2.90             0.45
                                                                      (0.05)                 (0.05)                                  (4.72)                (7.92)
  Number of prior loans, lifetime                                      10.37                   5.13            0.00                   5.94                  -3.47            0.35
                                                                      (0.40)                 (0.40)                                  (7.57)                (6.66)
Panel B. 12- month endline
  Age                                                                  47.66                 43.46             0.00                   -2.38                 9.97             0.22
                                                                       (0.79)                (0.79)                                  (6.75)                (7.62)
  Female                                                                0.62                   0.69            0.03                   -9.40                  5.10            0.11
                                                                       (0.02)                (0.02)                                  (7.57)                (4.78)
  Married                                                               0.27                   0.24            0.41                    3.29                 -6.51            0.30
                                                                       (0.02)                (0.02)                                  (4.69)                (8.14)
  Number of adults in household                                         1.62                   1.61            0.87                    5.04                -24.26            0.04
                                                                       (0.04)                (0.04)                                  (5.51)               (13.31)
  Number of children in household                                       0.58                   0.90            0.00                    3.41                -14.02            0.07
                                                                       (0.06)                (0.06)                                  (5.67)                (7.88)
  Race - Black                                                          0.83                   0.88            0.07                   -5.72                  1.47            0.63
                                                                       (0.02)                (0.02)                                 (14.18)                (4.15)
  College or more                                                       0.35                   0.23            0.00                    0.71                 -0.10            0.93
                                                                       (0.02)                (0.02)                                  (4.65)                (7.88)
  Financial risk-taking scale (standardized)                            -0.03                  0.08            0.12                    6.48                  2.63            0.77
                                                                       (0.05)                (0.05)                                  (6.43)               (11.81)
  Self-control and credit knowledge index (standardized)                0.11                   0.09            0.70                    1.76                  2.64            0.93
                                                                       (0.05)                (0.05)                                  (7.11)                (6.92)
  Liquidity index (standardized)                                        0.38                  -0.14            0.00                    0.56                  5.16            0.65
                                                                       (0.05)                (0.05)                                  (5.58)                (8.47)
  Baseline FICO® Score                                                 632.23                511.69            0.00                    8.40                 -7.89            0.05
                                                                       (2.08)                (2.09)                                  (4.29)                (7.07)
  Installment credit activity at baseline index (standardized)          0.29                  -0.06            0.00                  17.42                 -10.04            0.01
                                                                       (0.05)                (0.05)                                  (8.05)                (6.01)
  Revolving credit activity at baseline index (standardized)            0.57                  -0.13            0.00                   -1.76                  5.29            0.47
                                                                       (0.05)                (0.05)                                  (5.19)                (8.16)
  Number of prior loans, lifetime                                       8.71                   7.14            0.01                    0.14                  3.05            0.79
                                                                       (0.40)                (0.40)                                  (8.10)                (7.12)
Notes: For columns (1) and (2), each row with a continuous (binary) variable shows the results of an OLS regression (t-test) of the variable listed in the row on a dummy for
those observations classified in the highest treatment effect tercile (equal to 1) and a dummy for those observations classified in the lowest treatment effect tercile (equal to 0).
Column (3) shows the results of the t-test that the two coefficients (means) are equal. For each of columns (4) and (5), each row with a continuous (binary) variable shows the
results of an OLS regression of FICO Score on treatment for those observations classified in the tercile (binary value) listed in the column header of the variable listed in the
row. Column (6) shows the results of the t-test that the two coefficients are equal. Terciles of treatment effect are determined using the conditional average treatment effects
(CATEs) from the causal forest estimated in Table 4 Column 4 (Panel A here) or Table 4 Column 5 (Panel B here). See Data Appendix for details on index components and
construction.
                                                                                                                                                                                    35
                                                                                  Table 6. CBL average and heterogeneous treatment effects on credit behaviors
                                                                                                   (1)                 (2)                  (3)                (4)                       (5)                   (6)                 (7)

                                                                  FICO® Score 8 Factor:           New credit           Delinquency                    Amounts owed                   Credit Mix
                                                                                                                       10 measures of
                                                                                                                                                              Utilization: 4
                                                                                                                         delinquency,
                                                                                                                                                            discrete measures
                                                                                                                        collections, &       Balances:                                1=(open
                                                                                                                                                              of credit limit
                                                                                                Inquiries, number        derogatories     Revolving, auto                         installment and           Currently    Ever delinquent on
                                                    Dependent variable (index) includes:                                                                        usage and
                                                                                                   of accounts        (higher values =     loans, other                           open revolving       delinquent on CBL       CBL
                                                                                                                                                               outstanding
                                                                                                                    less timely repmt).     Installment                                 loan)
                                                                                                                                                            balances; # open
                                                                                                                        Includes CBL
                                                                                                                                                            installment loans
                                                                                                                         delinquency.

                                                                                     Sample:          Full                 Full                Full                  Full               Full                   Full                Full

                                                                                 Data source:    Credit Bureau        Credit Bureau       Credit Bureau       Credit Bureau        Credit Bureau         SLCCU Admin         SLCCU Admin
Panel A. Average effects
  CBL Arm                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.014               0.085
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (0.004)             (0.014)
  CBL Arm * Post                                                                                      0.004               0.081                -0.058             -0.002               -0.032
                                                                                                     (0.036)             (0.039)              (0.041)            (0.041)              (0.043)

  Observations                                                                                        5981                 5981                5488                  5981               5981                  4577                1531
  Individuals                                                                                         1507                 1507                1425                  1507               1507                  1531                1531

Panel B. Heterogeneity by baseline credit access
  CBL Arm * Bottom tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (i)                                                                                                                               0.017               0.099
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (0.006)             (0.021)
  CBL Arm * Middle tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (ii)                                                                                                                              0.006               0.075
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (0.005)             (0.021)
  CBL Arm * Top tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (iii)                                                                                                                                0.019               0.090
                                                                                                                                                                                                             (0.008)             (0.022)
  CBL Arm * Post * Bottom tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (iv)               0.013               0.026                0.021              0.096                0.117
                                                                                                     (0.040)             (0.060)              (0.065)            (0.069)              (0.056)
  CBL Arm * Post * Middle tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (v)                -0.046              0.001                -0.109             -0.041               -0.159
                                                                                                     (0.047)             (0.062)              (0.079)            (0.070)              (0.081)
  CBL Arm * Post * Top tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (vi)                  0.023               0.224                -0.068             -0.082               -0.085
                                                                                                     (0.084)             (0.081)              (0.063)            (0.074)              (0.082)

  p-value of (i) = (ii) or (iv) = (v)                                                                0.335                0.775               0.205              0.163                 0.005                  0.123               0.419
  p-value of (ii) = (iii) or (v) = (vi)                                                              0.474                0.028               0.689              0.687                 0.522                  0.119               0.611
  p-value of (i) = (iii) or (iv) = (vi)                                                              0.919                0.049               0.321              0.078                 0.042                  0.816               0.778
  Observations                                                                                       5970                 5970                5482               5970                  5970                   4490                1502
  Individuals                                                                                        1502                 1502                1423               1502                  1502                   1502                1502

Mean dependent variable in Extra Step Arm, baseline                                                  0.000                0.000               0.000              0.000                 0.000                   NA                  NA
Mean dependent variable in Extra Step Arm, Post                                                      -0.095               -0.036              0.099              0.100                 0.152                  0.005               0.036
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the person-level. In Columns 1-5 unit of observation is a person-credit report, with four observations for most persons: baseline, and three endlines at 6, 12, and 18 months post-treatment
assignment, all three of which are included in the Post indicator for the experiment period. Number of observations is lower than the number of individuals x 4 credit reports because some credit reports lack information on one or more
dependent variables. Unit of observation in Column 6 is a person-SLCCU data snapshot, with those snapshots timed to coincide roughly with the credit report endlines. Columns 6 and 7 use endline data only, because no one in our sample
had a CBL at baseline. Those who did not open a CBL are a coded as zero in columns 6 and 7. Each panel-column presents results from a single OLS regression of the dependent variable described in the column heading on the variable(s)
described in the applicable rows, with the regressions in Panel A columns 1 - 5 also including person fixed effects and Post, and the regressions in Panel B columns 1 - 5 also including person fixed effects and Post interacted with each of
the baseline installment credit activity terciles. Index variables are standardized to be mean zero and standard deviation one in the Extra Step Arm at baseline; see Data Appendix for details on index components and construction.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            36
                                                      Table 7. CBL treatment effects on usage of other SLCCU products
                                                                                         (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)                       (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)
                                                                                                                                                                    Balances of all
                                                                                                                   1 = Any non-CBL             Balances of all
                                                                                             1 = Remain an                                                        savings + checking
                                                                     Dependent variable:                           loan with SLCCU            savings accounts
                                                                                            SLCCU member                                                               accounts
                                                                                                                      outstanding               ($ hundreds)
                                                                                                                                                                     ($ hundreds)
                                                                                 Sample:                                               Full
Panel A: Main effects
 CBL Arm * Post                                                                              -0.008                 0.009                      2.476                1.297
                                                                                            (0.011)                (0.019)                    (1.214)              (1.669)
Panel B: Heterogeneity by baseline credit access
 CBL Arm * Post * Bottom tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (i)                  -0.010                 0.049                      0.149                0.077
                                                                                                      (0.021)                (0.027)                    (1.355)              (1.590)
 CBL Arm * Post * Middle tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (ii)                 -0.012                 -0.011                     5.519                5.456
                                                                                                      (0.021)                (0.040)                    (3.064)              (3.164)
 CBL Arm * Post * Top tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (iii)                   -0.001                 -0.011                     2.122                -1.479
                                                                                                      (0.015)                (0.031)                    (1.727)              (3.890)

p-value of (i) = (ii)                                                                                 0.730                   0.148                   0.369                   0.711
p-value of (ii) = (iii)                                                                               0.685                   0.997                   0.334                   0.167
p-value of (i) = (iii)                                                                                0.960                   0.217                   0.109                   0.129
Observations                                                                                6124       6008         6124      6008         6124       6008          6124      6008
Individuals                                                                                 1531       1502         1531      1502         1531       1502          1531      1502
Mean dependent variable in Extra Step Arm at baseline                                       1.000     1.000         0.322     0.327        4.987      5.040        7.435      7.536
Unit of observation is a person-SLCCU data snapshot, with four observations for most persons at roughly the same timing as our credit report pulls: baseline, and three endlines at
6, 12, and 18 months post-treatment assignment, all three of which are included in the Post indicator for the experiment period. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the
person-level. Each column presents results from a single OLS regression of the dependent variable described in the column heading on the variable(s) shown in the rows, Post and
person fixed effects (odd columns), with even columns including Post * Bottom tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index, Post * Middle tercile of installment credit
activity at baseline index, and Post * Top tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index instead of the Post indicator. All outcome variables here are calculated from
SLCCU administrative data. Balances are recorded as zero for those who leave the credit union.




                                                                                                                                                                                    37
                                      Table 8. Selection into CBL
                                                            (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)
                                                                1 = Has
                                    Dependent variable:                                 FICO® Score 8
                                                            FICO® Score 8
                                                                                     CBL Arm participants
                                                Sample:       Full CBL Arm             who have score
                                                                                         at baseline
 Took up CBL * Post                                         0.095         0.105       16.617       12.949
                                                           (0.025)       (0.016)      (4.639)      (4.140)

Controls for baseline variables * Post                        No           Yes           No          Yes
Number of people in sample that took up a CBL                 231          231           191         191
Observations                                                 3065         3065          2466        2466
Individuals                                                   772          772          625          625
Mean dependent variable in CBL Arm at baseline               0.810        0.810          564         564
Unit of observation is a person-credit report, with four observations for most persons: baseline, and three
endlines at 6, 12, and 18 months post-treatment assignment, all three of which are included in Post indicator
for the experiment period. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the person-level. Each column
presents results from a single OLS regression of the dependent variable described in the column heading on
the row variables described in the table, Post, and person fixed effects. Even-numbered columns include
interactions with the Post indicator selected by Post Double Selection LASSO: baseline FICO® Score 8, 1 =
baseline FICO® Score 8 in the 400s,1 = baseline FICO® Score 8 in the 500s, and 1 = baseline FICO®
Score 8 in the 600s. Heterogeneous treatment effects by baseline installment activity (Table 5) imply that we
cannot identify a pure selection effect separately for those sub-groups, and so we only estimate average
selection effects here.

                                                                                                                38
                       Table 9. Do CBLs change the predictive power of credit scores? Testing for differences in the default-score gradient
                                                                                                                                      (1)                    (2)
                                                                                                                                     Delinquency index: includes 10
                                                                                                                                         measures of delinquency,
                                                                                                                                    collections, & derogatories (higher
                                                                                                                Dependent variable:
                                                                                                                                        values = less timely repmt).
                                                                                                                                        Includes CBL delinquency.
                                                                                                                                            (18 month endline)
FICO® Score 8 (hundreds) at baseline                                                                                                      0.043             -0.047
                                                                                                                                         (0.053)           (0.051)
FICO® Score 8 (hundreds) at 12 month endline * CBL Arm (i)                                                                                -0.822
                                                                                                                                         (0.051)
FICO® Score 8 (hundreds) at 12 month endline * Extra Step Arm (ii)                                                                        -0.831
                                                                                                                                         (0.051)
FICO® Score 8 (hundreds) at 12 month endline * CBL Arm * Bottom tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (iii)                              -0.828
                                                                                                                                                           (0.050)
FICO® Score 8 (hundreds) at 12 month endline * Extra Step Arm * Bottom tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (iv)                        -0.834
                                                                                                                                                           (0.051)
FICO® Score 8 (hundreds) at 12 month endline * CBL Arm * Middle tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (v)                                -0.770
                                                                                                                                                           (0.050)
FICO® Score 8 (hundreds) at 12 month endline * Extra Step Arm * Middle tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (vi)                        -0.772
                                                                                                                                                           (0.050)
FICO® Score 8 (hundreds) at 12 month endline * CBL Arm * Top tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (vii)                                 -0.710
                                                                                                                                                           (0.052)
FICO® Score 8 (hundreds) at 12 month endline * Extra Step Arm * Top tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (viii)                         -0.733
                                                                                                                                                           (0.050)

p-value of (i) = (ii)                                                                                                                     0.255
p-value of (iii) = (iv)                                                                                                                                     0.687
p-value of (v) = (vi)                                                                                                                                       0.839
p-value of (vii) = (viii)                                                                                                                                   0.080
Observations                                                                                                                              1217              1217
Mean dependent variable in Extra Step Arm                                                                                                 0.066             0.066
Unit of observation is a person. Standard errors, in parentheses, are Huber-White. Each column presents results from a single OLS regression of the dependent variable
described in the column heading on the variables shown in the rows and FICO® Score 8 at baseline. Index variables are standardized to be mean zero and standard
deviation one in the Extra Step Arm at baseline; see Data Appendix for details on index components and construction. Sample here is limited to persons for whom we
could obtain a credit report at our 18-month endline and who have a credit score at baseline and the 12-month endline.

                                                                                                                                                                      39
                                              Data Appendix

Index construction rules
    1. Standardize each component with respect to the Extra Step Arm.
    2. Calculate the person-level mean across non-missing components (if someone is missing all
        components their index value is missing).
    3. Standardize each index with respect to the Extra Step Arm.



Variable definition details not fully specified in the tables or main text

Baseline financial risk-taking scale (Measured from baseline survey, higher values indicate greater risk
tolerance)
In Tables 1 & 5; Appendix Tables 1, 2a, & 2b.
        1. Q: "I am willing to take a risk financially if there is a chance of substantial gain."
             A: 1 = strongly disagree, 2= disagree, 3 = feel neutrally, 4= agree, 5 = strongly agree

Baseline self-control and credit knowledge index (12 components, each measured from baseline
survey, higher values indicate more self-control)
In Tables 1 & 5; Appendix Tables 1, 2a, & 2b.
        1. Q: "Before I buy something I carefully consider whether I can afford it."
             A: 1 = strongly disagree, 2= disagree, 3 = feel neutrally, 4= agree, 5 = strongly agree
        2. Q: "I tend to live for today and let tomorrow take care of itself."
             A: 1 = strongly agree, 2= agree, 3 = feel neutrally, 4= disagree, 5 = strongly disagree
        3. Q: "I set long term financial goals of five years or more and strive to achieve them."
             A: 1 = strongly disagree, 2= disagree, 3 = feel neutrally, 4= agree, 5 = strongly agree
        4. Q: "I often find that I regret spending money. I wish that when I had cash, I was better
             disciplined and saved my money rather than spent it."
             A: 1 = strongly agree, 2= agree, 3 = feel neutrally, 4= disagree, 5 = strongly disagree
        5. Q: "I have trouble finishing or completing my tasks."
             A: 1 = strongly agree, 2= agree, 3 = feel neutrally, 4= disagree, 5 = strongly disagree
        6. Q: "In the past 12 months, have you checked your credit score?"
             A: 0 = No, 1 = Yes
        7. Q: "In the past 12 months, have you obtained a copy of your credit report?"
             A: 0 = No, 1 = Yes


                                                                                                       40
        8. Correctly answered "Could your credit rating affect the amount of interest you would pay on
            a bank loan?" (Yes)
            A: 0 = No, 1 = Yes
        9. Correctly answered: "Could your health affect the amount of interest you would pay on a
            bank loan?" (No)
            A: 0 = No, 1 = Yes
        10. Correctly answered: "Could your age affect the amount of interest you would pay on a bank
            loan?" (No)
            A: 0 = No, 1 = Yes
        11. Correctly answered: "Could how much you borrow overall affect the amount of interest you
            would pay on a bank loan?" (Yes)
            A: 0 = No, 1 = Yes
        12. Correctly answered: "Could how long you take to repay the loan affect the amount of interest
            you would pay on a bank loan?" (Yes)
            A: 0 = No, 1 = Yes

Baseline liquidity index (7 components, measured from baseline survey and baseline SLCCU data, higher
values indicate more liquidity)
In Tables 1 & 5; Appendix Tables 1, 2a, & 2b.
        1. Q: "My financial situation is a source of stress in my life."
            A: 1 = strongly agree, 2= agree, 3 = feel neutrally, 4= disagree, 5 = strongly disagree
        2. Q: "In a typical month, it is difficult for me to cover my expenses and pay all my bills."
            A: 1 = strongly agree, 2= agree, 3 = feel neutrally, 4= disagree, 5 = strongly disagree
        3. Q: "I am confident that I could come up with $2000 if an unexpected need arose within the
            next month"
            A: 1 = strongly disagree, 2= disagree, 3 = feel neutrally, 4= agree, 5 = strongly agree
        4. Q: "How would you describe your overall financial situation? Would you say..."
            A: 1 = bad, 2 = not very good, 3 = okay, 4 = very good, 5 = excellent
        5. HH income is greater than $30k (0 = income less than or equal to $30K, 1 = greater than
            $30K)
        6. Savings Balance ($ hundreds, top-coded at 95%)
        7. More than $60 in savings (0 = less than or equal to $60 in savings, 1 = more than $60 in
            savings)




                                                                                                        41
Delinquency index (10 components, each measured from credit bureau data; higher values indicate more
default, delinquency, collection activity on accounts)
In Figure 5 as outcome; Tables 1 (baseline), 6 (outcome), & 9 (outcome); Appendix Tables 1 (baseline),
2a and 2b (baseline), & 3 (outcome).
        1. Account 30 days past due in the last 12 months (0 = does not have account past due, 1 = has
            account past due)
        2. Account 90 days past due in the last 12 months (0 = does not have account past due, 1 = has
            account past due)
        3. Account in collection (0 = does not have account in collection, 1 = has account in collection)
        4. Has amount past due (0 = does not have amount past due, 1 = has amount past due)
        5. Account with a major derogatory event (0 = does not have major derogatory event, 1 = has
            major derogatory event)
        6. Number of accounts 30 days past due in the last 12 months
        7. Number of accounts 90 days past due in the last 12 months
        8. Number of accounts in collection
        9. Amount past due ($)
        10. Number of accounts with a major derogatory event

Baseline installment credit activity index (3 components, each measured from credit bureau, higher
values indicate more installment credit)
In Figure 5; Tables 1, 5, 6, 7 & 9; Appendix Tables 1, 2a, 2b, 3 & 4.
        1. Number of open installment loans (transformed by taking inverse hyperbolic sine)
        2. Any open installment loan (0 = no open installment loan, 1 = any open installment loan)
        3. Number of inquiries made within last 12 months (transformed by taking inverse hyperbolic
            sine

Baseline revolving credit activity index (3 components, each measured from credit bureau, higher
values indicate more revolving credit access)
In Tables 1 & 5; Appendix Tables 1, 2a, & 2b.
        1. Number of open revolving loans (transformed by taking inverse hyperbolic sine)
        2. Any open revolving loan (0 = no open revolving loan, 1 = any open revolving loan)
        3. Utilization of revolving loans (transformed by taking inverse hyperbolic sine)




                                                                                                       42
Baseline number of prior loans, lifetime (Measured from credit bureau, higher values indicate more
loans)
In Tables 1 & 5; Appendix Tables 1, 2a, & 2b.
    1. Total number of open and closed loans.

New credit (2 components; each measured from credit bureau; higher values indicate more new credit)
In Table 6; Appendix Table 3.
         1. Number of inquiries made in the last 12 months (bureau data)
         2. The number of accounts (bureau data)

Amounts owed: Balances (3 components, each measured from credit bureau; higher values indicate
larger amounts owed)
In Table 6; Appendix Table 3.
         1. Outstanding revolving loan balance
         2. Outstanding installment loan balance
         3. Outstanding auto loan balance

Amounts owed: Utilization (5 components, each measured from credit bureau data; higher values
indicate more utilization)
In Table 6; Appendix Table 3.
         1. Revolving utilization is over 30% (0 = below 30%, 1 = above 30%; missing if no credit line)
         2. Number of open installment loans
         3. Outstanding revolving loan balance (0 = no outstanding balance, 1 = outstanding balance)
         4. Outstanding auto loan balance (0 = no outstanding balance, 1 = outstanding balance)
         5. Outstanding installment loan balance (0 = no outstanding balance, 1 = outstanding balance)

Credit mix (Measured from credit bureau data; higher value indicates more credit types open)
In Table 6; Appendix Table 3.
         1. Has an open installment loan and an open revolving loan (0 = no loan, 1 = has loan)




                                                                                                       43
                         Appendix Table 1. Do baseline observable characteristics help predict takeup of the CBL?
                                                             (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)           (7)
                                                                 CBL Arm (N=789)                  Extra-Step Arm (N=742)
                                                           Takers    Takers -                   Takers    Takers -
                                                                                  p-value                           p-value        p-value
                                                                    Non-takers                           Non-takers
                                                                                  diff = 0                          diff = 0      (1) = (4)
                                                          Mean (se) Diff (se)                 Mean (se) Diff (se)
Age                                                             43.00     0.74      0.53        42.39       -1.62       0.35        0.74
                                                               (1.00)   (1.19)                  (1.63)     (1.73)
Female                                                          0.63     -0.04      0.27         0.60       -0.05       0.37        0.64
                                                               (0.03)   (0.04)                  (0.05)     (0.05)
Married                                                         0.23      0.01      0.81         0.28        0.05       0.34        0.39
                                                               (0.03)   (0.03)                  (0.05)     (0.05)
Number of adults in household                                    1.60    -0.04      0.57         1.71        0.11       0.22        0.30
                                                               (0.05)   (0.06)                  (0.09)     (0.09)
Number of children in household                                  0.92     0.16      0.11         0.88        0.04       0.75        0.85
                                                               (0.08)   (0.10)                  (0.13)     (0.14)
Race - Black                                                     0.90     0.03      0.23         0.86       -0.02       0.67        0.26
                                                               (0.02)   (0.03)                  (0.04)     (0.04)
College or more                                                  0.27     0.02      0.49         0.38        0.14       0.01        0.05
                                                               (0.03)   (0.03)                  (0.05)     (0.05)
Financial risk-taking scale (standardized)                       0.14     0.14      0.09         0.02        0.02       0.84        0.38
                                                               (0.07)   (0.08)                  (0.11)     (0.12)
Self-control and credit knowledge index (standardized)           0.01    -0.06      0.42          0.07       0.08       0.49        0.63
                                                               (0.06)   (0.08)                  (0.10)     (0.11)
Liquidity index (standardized)                                   0.00     0.01      0.86         -0.14      -0.16       0.16        0.22
                                                               (0.06)   (0.08)                  (0.10)     (0.11)
Baseline FICO Score                                            554.38   -14.23      0.01        561.02      -0.53       0.95        0.43
                                                               (4.74)   (5.68)                  (8.06)     (8.53)
Installment credit activity at baseline index (standardized)    -0.03     0.02      0.83          0.14       0.16       0.16        0.17
                                                               (0.07)   (0.08)                  (0.11)     (0.11)
Revolving credit activity at baseline index (standardized)      -0.06    -0.09      0.25         -0.05      -0.06       0.62        0.95
                                                               (0.07)   (0.08)                  (0.11)     (0.12)
Number of prior loans, lifetime                                  7.22     0.00      1.00         8.79        1.15       0.28        0.17
                                                               (0.57)   (0.68)                  (0.93)     (0.99)
Unit of observation is an individual. As in Table 3, we define CBL take-up as opening a CBL within 18 months of random assignment. All row
variables measured at baseline, with most having sample sizes slightly lower than the full-sample N reported in the column headings, due to
survey non-response or credit report missing information. Please see Data Appendix for details on index components and construction.


                                                                                                                                              44
                                   Appendix Table 2a. Baseline characteristics
   (Same as Table 1 but sample here is restricted to those in the top tercile of installment credit activity
                                                  index at baseline)
                                                                       (1)             (2)             (3)
                                                                            Mean (sd)          Univariate diff:
                                                                  CBL Arm Extra Step Arm           (2) - (1)
                                                       Sample:                                        (se)
                                                                    N= 246           N= 244
Age                                                                  41.881          41.516          -0.365
                                                                   (14.670)         (14.578)        (1.321)
Female                                                                0.664           0.736          0.072
                                                                    (0.473)          (0.442)        (0.041)
Married                                                              0.331            0.260         -0.070
                                                                    (0.471)          (0.440)        (0.042)
Number of adults in household                                        1.616            1.612         -0.004
                                                                    (0.719)          (0.793)        (0.069)
Number of children in household                                      1.004            0.851         -0.153
                                                                    (1.230)          (1.199)        (0.111)
Race - Black                                                         0.895            0.942          0.048
                                                                    (0.308)          (0.234)        (0.025)
College or more                                                      0.388            0.365         -0.023
                                                                    (0.488)          (0.482)        (0.044)
Financial risk-taking scale (standardized)                           0.017            0.104          0.087
                                                                    (0.991)          (1.043)        (0.093)
Self-control and credit knowledge index (standardized)               0.239            0.271          0.032
                                                                    (0.999)          (0.959)        (0.089)
Liquidity index (standardized)                                       0.079            0.045          -0.033
                                                                    (1.010)          (0.918)        (0.087)
Delinquency index (standardized)                                     0.331            0.283          -0.048
                                                                    (1.050)          (0.954)        (0.091)
1 = Higher than median of index of default outcomes                  0.734            0.760          0.027
                                                                    (0.443)          (0.428)        (0.039)
1 = Scored on FICO                                                   0.988            0.996          0.008
                                                                    (0.110)          (0.064)        (0.008)
Baseline FICO Score                                                565.714          561.910          -3.803
                                                                   (56.460)         (53.620)        (4.994)
Installment credit activity at baseline index (standardized)         1.085            1.067          -0.017
                                                                    (0.353)          (0.378)        (0.033)
Revolving credit activity at baseline index (standardized)           0.354            0.301          -0.053
                                                                    (1.031)          (1.064)        (0.095)
Number of prior loans, lifetime                                      10.639           9.756          -0.883
                                                                   (10.608)          (8.443)        (0.866)
Unit of observation is an individual. Index variables are standardized to be mean zero and standard deviation one
in the Extra Step Arm; see Data Appendix for details on index components and construction. Sample size varies
across rows due to missing observations.




                                                                                                                    45
                                    Appendix Table 2b. Baseline characteristics
 (Same as Table 1 but sample here is restricted to those in the bottom tercile of installment credit activity
                                                  index at baseline)
                                                                         (1)             (2)              (3)
                                                                             Mean (sd)               Univariate
                                                                                                         diff:
                                                                     CBL Arm Extra Step Arm
                                                          Sample:                                     (2)  - (1)
                                                                      N= 283          N= 243             (se)
Age                                                                    42.745         41.943           -0.801
                                                                     (14.301)        (15.842)         (1.325)
Female                                                                 0.568           0.594            0.026
                                                                      (0.496)         (0.492)         (0.043)
Married                                                                0.148           0.184            0.036
                                                                      (0.356)         (0.388)         (0.033)
Number of adults in household                                          1.662           1.631           -0.031
                                                                      (0.900)         (0.843)         (0.077)
Number of children in household                                        0.692           0.811           0.119
                                                                      (1.090)         (1.229)         (0.103)
Race - Black                                                           0.865           0.855           -0.010
                                                                      (0.342)         (0.353)         (0.031)
College or more                                                        0.152           0.135           -0.017
                                                                      (0.360)         (0.343)         (0.031)
Financial risk-taking scale (standardized)                             0.025          -0.060           -0.084
                                                                      (1.023)         (0.998)         (0.090)
Self-control and credit knowledge index (standardized)                 -0.101          -0.134          -0.033
                                                                      (0.978)         (0.943)         (0.085)
Liquidity index (standardized)                                         -0.099          -0.148          -0.049
                                                                      (0.909)         (0.873)         (0.078)
Delinquency index (standardized)                                       -0.282          -0.407          -0.125
                                                                      (0.852)         (0.778)         (0.071)
1 = Higher than median of index of default outcomes                    0.465           0.424           -0.041
                                                                      (0.500)         (0.495)         (0.043)
1 = Scored on FICO                                                     0.605           0.534           -0.071
                                                                      (0.490)         (0.500)         (0.043)
Baseline FICO Score                                                   529.027        542.854           13.827
                                                                     (61.548)        (73.668)         (7.874)
Installment credit activity at baseline Index (standardized)           -1.205          -1.178           0.027
                                                                      (0.343)         (0.333)         (0.029)
Revolving credit activity at baseline index (standardized)             -0.429          -0.409           0.021
                                                                      (0.799)         (0.826)         (0.071)
Number of prior loans, lifetime                                        4.077           3.980           -0.098
                                                                      (5.589)         (4.969)         (0.490)
Unit of observation is an individual. Index variables are standardized to be mean zero and standard deviation one
in the Extra Step Arm; see Data Appendix for details on index components and construction. Sample size varies
across columns due to missing observations.

                                                                                                               46
                                                                       Appendix Table 3. CBL average and heterogeneous treatment effects on credit behaviors
                                                                         (Same as Table 6 but here sample is restricted to those who have a score at baseline)
                                                                                                (1)                  (2)                 (3)                (4)                          (5)                  (6)                 (7)

                                                                FICO® Score 8 Factor:      New Credit               Delinquency                   Amounts Owed                       Credit Mix
                                                                                                                   10 measures of                             Utilization: 4
                                                                                                                     delinquency,                           discrete measures
                                                                                                                                           Balances:                                  1 = (open            Currently
                                                                                                                    collections, &                            of credit limit                                               Ever delinquent
                                                                                          Inquiries, Number                             Revolving, auto                            installment and       delinquent on
                                                     Dependent variable (index) includes:                            derogatories                               usage and                                                      on CBL
                                                                                             of Accounts                                 loans, other                              open revolving             CBL
                                                                                                                  (higher values =                             outstanding
                                                                                                                                          installment                                    loan)
                                                                                                                      less timely                           balances; # open
                                                                                                                      repayment)                            installment loans
                                                                                 Sample:                                                                  Have score at baseline
Panel A. Main effects
  CBL Arm                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.011               0.091
                                                                                                                                                                                                            (0.004)             (0.015)
  CBL Arm * Post                                                                                 0.000                 0.096                -0.064               -0.021                -0.042
                                                                                                (0.041)               (0.043)               (0.043)              (0.047)               (0.050)

  Observations                                                                                   4945                  4945                  4929                 4945                  4945                 3701                1238
  Individuals                                                                                    1238                  1238                  1238                 1238                  1238                 1238                1238

Panel B. Heterogeneity by baseline credit access
CBL Arm * Bottom tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (i)                                                                                                                                0.013               0.120
                                                                                                                                                                                                            (0.007)             (0.030)
CBL Arm * Middle tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (ii)                                                                                                                               0.005               0.072
                                                                                                                                                                                                            (0.005)             (0.022)
CBL Arm * Top tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (iii)                                                                                                                                 0.015               0.090
                                                                                                                                                                                                            (0.007)             (0.022)
CBL Arm * Post * Bottom tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (iv)            -0.026                0.009                  0.006                0.115                 0.185
                                                                                                (0.048)               (0.070)               (0.073)              (0.104)               (0.086)
CBL Arm * Post * Middle tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (v)             -0.016                0.023                 -0.106               -0.041                -0.156
                                                                                                (0.043)               (0.063)               (0.082)              (0.074)               (0.084)
CBL Arm * Post * Top tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (vi)                0.030                0.218                 -0.069               -0.085                -0.078
                                                                                                (0.085)               (0.081)               (0.063)              (0.074)               (0.082)

p-value of (i) = (ii) or (iv) = (v)                                                              0.875                 0.879                 0.308                0.221                0.005                 0.333               0.182
p-value of (ii) = (iii) or (v) = (vi)                                                            0.628                 0.058                 0.717                0.671                0.508                 0.223               0.545
p-value of (i) = (iii) or (iv) = (vi)                                                            0.564                 0.051                 0.440                0.117                0.027                 0.834               0.407
Observations                                                                                     4945                  4945                  4929                 4945                 4945                  3701                1238

Individuals                                                                                      1238                  1238                  1238                 1238                 1238                  1238                 1238
Mean dependent variable in Extra Step Arm at baseline                                            0.139                 0.156                 0.057                0.151                0.139                  NA                   NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the person-level. In Columns 1-5 unit of observation is a person-credit report, with four observations for most persons: baseline, and three endlines at 6, 12, and 18 months post-treatment
assignment, all three of which are included in the Post indicator for the experiment period. Number of observations is lower than the number of individuals x 4 credit reports because some credit reports lack information on one or more
dependent variables. Unit of observation in Column 6 is a person-SLCCU data snapshot, with those snapshots timed to coincide roughly with the credit report endlines. Columns 6 and 7 use endline data only, because no one in our
sample had a CBL at baseline. Those who did not open a CBL are a coded as zero in columns 6 and 7. Each panel-column presents results from a single OLS regression of the dependent variable described in the column heading on the
variable(s) described in the applicable rows, with the regressions in Panel A columns 1 - 5 also including person fixed effects and Post, and the regressions in Panel B columns 1 - 5 also including person fixed effects and Post
interacted with each of the baseline installment credit activity terciles. Index variables are standardized to be mean zero and standard deviation one in the Extra Step Arm at baseline; see Data Appendix for details on index components
and construction.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              47
                                            Appendix Table 4. CBL treatment effects on SLCCU account balances
                                  (Same as Table 7 Columns 5-8 but here with different functional forms of outcome variables)
                                                                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)           (5)               (6)
                                                                    Dependent variable:                                    Account balances ($ hundreds)
                                                                                                              Savings                                  Savings + checking
                                                                                            Winsorized      Winsorized      Inverse            Winsorized    Winsorized       Inverse
                                                                                               (95%)          (99%)        Hyperbolic            (95%)          (99%)        Hyperbolic
                                                                                                                             Sine                                              Sine
                                                                                Sample:                                                 Full
Panel A. Main effects
 CBL Arm * Post                                                                                 0.329          0.970          0.069              0.128          1.034           0.036
                                                                                               (0.279)        (0.615)        (0.058)            (0.495)        (0.909)         (0.084)
Observations                                                                                    6124           6124           6124               6124           6124            6124
Individuals                                                                                     1531           1531           1531               1531           1531            1531

Panel B. Heterogeneity by installment credit activity at baseline
 CBL Arm * Post * Bottom tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (i)           0.112          -0.143         0.013               0.185         0.152           -0.023
                                                                                               (0.405)        (0.991)        (0.090)            (0.713)        (1.508)         (0.134)
  CBL Arm * Post * Middle tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (ii)         0.082          1.376          0.102              -0.509         0.721           0.033
                                                                                               (0.552)        (1.116)        (0.106)            (0.983)        (1.683)         (0.156)
  CBL Arm * Post * Top tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index (ii)            0.801          1.847          0.095              0.764          2.416           0.133
                                                                                               (0.509)        (1.153)        (0.106)            (0.903)        (1.643)         (0.150)

p-value of (i) = (ii)                                                                          0.965           0.309          0.522              0.568          0.801           0.786
p-value of (ii) = (iii)                                                                        0.339           0.769          0.964              0.340          0.471           0.645
p-value of (i) = (iii)                                                                         0.290           0.191          0.555              0.615          0.310           0.439
Observations                                                                                   6008            6008           6008               6008           6008            6008
Individuals                                                                                    1502            1502           1502               1502           1502            1502

Mean dependent variable in Extra Step Arm at baseline                                          2.160           3.724          0.739              4.053          6.088           1.016
Unit of observation is a person-SLCCU data snapshot, with four observations for most persons at roughly the same timing as our credit report pulls: baseline, and three endlines at 6,
12, and 18 months post-treatment assignment, all three of which are included in the Post indicator for the experiment period. Standard errors, in parentheses, are clustered at the person-
level. Each column-panel presents results from a single OLS regression of the dependent variable described in the column heading on the variable(s) shown in the rows, Post and
person fixed effects (Panel A), with Panel B regressions including Post * Bottom tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index, Post * Middle tercile of installment credit
activity at baseline index, and Post * Top tercile of installment credit activity at baseline index instead of the Post indicator. All outcome variables here are calculated from SLCCU
administrative data. Balances are recorded as zero for those who leave the credit union. Outcomes in columns (1) and (4) replace observations greater than the 95th percentile with the
value of the observation at the 95th percentile. Outcomes in columns (2) and (5) replace observations greater than the 99th percentile with the value of the observation at the 99th
percentile.



                                                                                                                                                                                         48
