                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               DECOMPOSING FIRM VALUE

                                       Frederico Belo
                                          Vito Gala
                                      Juliana Salomao
                                     Maria Ana Vitorino

                                     Working Paper 26112
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26112


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019


We thank Svetlana Bryzgalova, Andres Donangelo, Bernard Dumas, Andrea Eisfeldt, Joao
Gomes, Matthieu Gomez, Francois Gourio, Ravi Mattu, Vasant Naik, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh,
Stavros Panageas, Luke Taylor (GSU-CEAR conference discussant), Toni Whited (NBER AP
discussant), Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang for helpful suggestions, and seminar and conference
participants at the BI Norwegian Business School (CAPR workshop on investment and
production-based asset pricing), Cambridge Judge Business School, Chicago Fed, Georgia State
University (CEAR-Finance conference), HEC-University of Lausanne, Imperial College Business
School, INSEAD, London Business School, London School of Economics, Maastricht
University, NBER Summer Institute Asset Pricing, Philadelphia Fed, PIMCO, Queen Mary
University of London, Society of Economic Dynamics (SED), Texas A&M University,
University of Amsterdam, University of California, Los Angeles (Anderson), University of
Michigan (Ross), University of Pennsylvania (Wharton), University of Southern California
(Marshall), and University of Toronto (Rotman) for helpful comments. John Pokorny and Yao
Deng provided excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views contained herein
are the authors' but not necessarily those of Pacific Investment Management Company (PIMCO)
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Frederico Belo, Vito Gala, Juliana Salomao, and Maria Ana Vitorino. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Decomposing Firm Value
Frederico Belo, Vito Gala, Juliana Salomao, and Maria Ana Vitorino
NBER Working Paper No. 26112
July 2019
JEL No. D21,D22,E22,E24,G12,G32

                                         ABSTRACT

What are the economic determinants of a firm's market value? We answer this question through
the lens of a generalized neoclassical model of investment with physical capital, quasi-fixed
labor, and two types of intangible capital, knowledge and brand capital as inputs. We estimate the
structural model using firm-level data on U.S. publicly traded firms and use the estimated
parameter values to infer the contribution of each input for explaining firm's market value in the
last four decades. The model performs well in explaining both cross-sectional and time-series
variation in firms' market values across industries, with a time-series R2 of up to 61%, and a
cross-sectional R2 of up to 95%. The relative importance of each input for firm value varies
across industries and over time. On average, physical capital accounts for 30% to 40% of firm's
market value, installed labor force accounts for 14% to 22%, knowledge capital accounts for 20%
to 43%, and brand capital accounts for 6% to 25%. The importance of physical capital for firm
value decreased in the last decades, while the importance of knowledge capital increased,
especially in high-tech industries. Overall, our analysis provides direct empirical evidence
supporting models with multiple capital inputs as main sources of firm value, and shows the
importance of the non-physical capital inputs for firm value.

Frederico Belo                                  Juliana Salomao
Carlson School of Management                    University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota                         Minneapolis, MN 55455
321 19th Avenue South                           jsalomao@umn.edu
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and INSEAD                                      Maria Ana Vitorino
and also NBER                                   University of Minnesota
fbelo@umn.edu                                   Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                                and INSEAD
Vito Gala                                       vitorino@umn.edu
PIMCO
650 Newport Center Drive
Newport Beach, CA 92660
vito.gala@gmail.com
1    Introduction
Understanding the economic determinants of a firm's market value is an important question that
has attracted substantial research in finance and economics. We address this question through
the lens of a generalized neoclassical model of investment with four different types of quasi-fixed
inputs: physical capital (machines and plants), labor (workers), and two types of intangible capital,
namely knowledge capital (accumulated investment in innovation activities), and brand capital
(accumulated investment in improving brand awareness). This rich model of the firm incorporates
the evidence from Hall (2001), McGrattan and Prescott (2000), and Merz and Yashiv (2007) that
intangible capital and installed labor force are important components of firms' stock market values
at the aggregate level. Through structural estimation, and using data for a large cross section of
publicly traded firms in the U.S. economy, we use the model to quantify the relative importance of
the various capital inputs and labor for understanding firms' market values, both across industries
and over time.
    In the model, changing the quantity of the capital inputs and labor is costly, which we capture
through standard adjustment cost functions. For physical and intangible capital inputs these costs
include, for example, planning and installation costs, and costs related with production being
temporarily interrupted. For labor, these costs include the costs of hiring and firing workers, as
well as the costs of training new workers. The firm's equilibrium valuation ratio depends on the
shadow price and the quantity of each installed input, and the shadow prices can be inferred
from investment and hiring data through the specification of an adjustment costs function. If the
operating profit function and the adjustment costs function are both homogeneous of degree one
(the Hayashi 1982 conditions), the market value of each input is the product of the input's shadow
price and the corresponding stock variable. The total market value of the firm is then the sum of
the market value of all the inputs, and this additive property allows us to compute the contribution
of each input for firm value in a straightforward manner.
    To take the model to the data, we need to measure the firm-level stocks of each capital input and
labor. For physical capital and labor, the data is readily available from the firm's 10-K reports.
For knowledge capital and brand capital, the capital stock data is not readily available given
its intangible nature. Following previous studies, we construct firm-level measures of knowledge
capital stock and brand capital stock from firm-level accounting data on research and development
(R&D) expenses, and data on advertising expenses, respectively. Accordingly, we interpret R&D
expenditures as a firm's investment to generate new (or improve current) ideas. Similarly, we
interpret advertising expenses as a firm's investment to enhance the value of brand names and
increase brand awareness. We accumulate these expenditures using the perpetual inventory method
to obtain the capital stocks for knowledge capital and brand capital.
    We estimate the model by minimizing the distance between the observed and the model-implied
valuation ratios (market value of equity plus net debt-to-book value of capital stocks). To abstract
from idiosyncratic shock responses that add noise to the firm-level data, we estimate the model using
portfolio-level moments as in Belo, Xue, and Zhang (2013) (henceforth BXZ), who in turn follow
the original estimation approach in Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009) (henceforth LWZ). We consider
portfolios sorted on proxies of the firm's lagged market value of the capital and labor inputs. This
sorting generates a large dispersion in the explanatory variables which helps the identification of
the model parameters. We perform the estimation in a pooled sample that includes all firms in the
economy, and also separately within different industries. Following Belo et al. (2017), we split the
sample into low, and high labor-skill industries (henceforth low-, and high-skill industries), based
on the industry-level average fraction of workers in that industry that are classified as high-skill


                                                 2
workers. To a first approximation these industries correspond to low-, and high-tech sectors of the
economy.
     We modify the portfolio-level estimation procedure in BXZ and LWZ in two important ways.
First, to estimate the model parameters, we target cross-sectional portfolio-level moments rather
than a portfolio-level aggregate valuation ratio. This modification is important to recover the true
firm-level structural parameters since the procedure in BXZ and LWZ is subject to an aggregation
bias. Second, we match the realized time series of the portfolio-level valuation ratios as close as
possible, as opposed to just the time series average of the valuation ratios as in BXZ and LWZ.
This modification is important in the context of our analysis because the contribution of some of
the inputs for firm value changes over time.
     Our main empirical findings can be summarized as follows. In the pooled sample, the model
performs well in explaining both the time-series and the cross-sectional variation of the valuation
ratios across portfolios, with a time-series R2 of 61% and a cross-sectional R2 of 94%. The model
fit is particularly good in high-skill industries, with a time-series R2 of 60%, whereas the model fit
in the low-skill industries is more modest, with a time-series R2 of 38%. The cross-sectional fit is
good in both industries, with cross-sectional R2 s above 94%.
     To help understand the good fit of the model and the relative importance of each capital input
and labor for firm's valuation, we estimate restricted versions of the model using subsets of the
inputs. Consistent with BXZ, the standard one-physical-capital input model does a reasonable
job explaining the cross-sectional variation in the average valuation ratio across portfolios with
a cross-sectional R2 of 50% in low-skill industries, and of 75% in high-skill industries. But the
one-physical-capital input model fails to explain the time-series variation in the valuation ratios,
with a time-series R2 of effectively 0% in low-skill industries, and 21% in high-skill industries.
Thus, we conclude that the benefit of incorporating additional quasi-fixed inputs in the neoclassical
investment model comes primarily from improving the model's ability to capture the time-series
variation in firms' valuation ratios.
     Comparing across alternative model specifications, we find that the contribution of each input
for the improvement of the model fit relative to the one-physical-capital input model varies across
industries. Adding labor and, especially, knowledge capital, to the one-physical-capital input model
has a first-order impact on the quality of the model fit in both industries (and especially in high-skill
industries), whereas adding brand capital has a significantly impact on the quality of the model fit
in low-skill industries only.
     More important, the parameter estimates allow us to quantitatively evaluate the relative
contribution of each input for firm value. In the pooled sample, and depending on how the data
is aggregated for reporting purposes, we find that, on average, physical capital accounts for 22%
to 30% of firms' market value, installed labor force accounts for 23% to 27%, knowledge capital
accounts for 38% to 47%, and brand capital accounts for the remaining 5% to 9%. Thus, on average,
the non-physical capital inputs account for the majority, between 70% and 80%, of firms' market
value.
     The relative importance of the capital and labor inputs for firms' market value varies
substantially across industries. On average, the contribution of physical capital is higher in low-skill
industries (about 40% to 43% of a firm's market value) than in high-skill industries (about 21% to
30% of a firm's market value). This result suggests that the standard one-physical-capital input
model is a more appropriate model of the firm in low-skill industries than in high-skill industries.
Related, we show that the contribution of labor and knowledge capital for firm value increases with
the average labor-skill level of the industry. In low-skill industries, the contribution of labor and
knowledge capital is on average only 14% to 18% and 20% to 22%, respectively, whereas in high-skill


                                                   3
industries the contribution is 21% to 24% and 43% to 53%, respectively. This result suggests that
adding labor and knowledge capital to the one-physical-capital input model is especially important
for understanding the valuation of firms in high-skill industries.
     In addition, we find that the contribution of brand capital for firm value decreases with the
average labor-skill level of the industry. Brand capital appears to be very important in low-skill
industries, where it accounts on average for about 25% of firm value, but not so much in high-
skill industries where it accounts on average for about 6% of firm value. Thus, our estimates
show that, even though intangible capital is an important component of the firm's market value
across all industries, the type of intangible capital (knowledge or brand capital) that matters the
most for firm value varies across industries. This result highlights the importance of considering
heterogeneous measures of intangible capital in empirical work.
     The estimated contributions of each input for firm value also vary substantially over time. In the
last four decades, in the pooled sample, the importance of knowledge capital increased significantly
from 24.9% in the 1970s to 44.8% in the 2010s. The increased importance of knowledge capital
crowded out the importance of physical capital. The importance of physical capital for firm value
has significantly decreased from 30.9% in the 1970s to 20.7% in the 2010s. The contribution
of labor and brand capital for firm value do not exhibit an obvious trend as their values have
remained relatively constant over the sample period. The decline in the contribution of physical
capital for firm value and the increase in the contribution of knowledge capital for firm value is
present in both low- and high-skill industries (although the change is more pronounced in high-skill
industries). This result suggests that the trends in the relative contribution of the inputs observed
in the pooled sample is not due to changes in the industry composition in the U.S. economy but
rather seems to be driven by a trend in the overall economy.
     What explains the estimated firm-value decomposition? As noted, the value of each input is
determined by the product of the shadow price of each input, which depends on investment and
hiring data and the adjustment cost parameters, and the book-value of the inputs, which we can
measure from accounting data. Thus, understanding the adjustment cost estimates is important for
understanding the relative contribution of each input for firm value. In the case of labor, without
labor adjustment costs, the shadow price of labor is zero because firms do not sell nor buy workers
as they do with capital goods, but the market value of labor might be different from zero when
it is costly to adjust the labor force (due to a nonzero labor shadow price). This is because, in
equilibrium, firms extract rents from labor as a compensation for the costs of adjusting the labor
force in the future. The same logic applies to the other capital inputs. The difference relative to
labor is that the book value of these inputs is not zero, even without adjustment costs, because firms
can sell (or buy) capital. For example, in the one-physical-capital input model, without capital
adjustment costs, the book value of the firm is equal to the book value of the physical capital stock
(with a minor adjustment due to the corporate tax rate).
     Our estimates show that adjusting the four inputs in response to changing economic conditions
is fairly costly, especially labor and knowledge capital. Using the estimates from the pooled
sample, we find that a firm's annual labor adjustment costs represent on average about 6.5%
of total annual sales, consistent with estimates in Merz and Yashiv (2007). In addition, knowledge
capital adjustment costs represent on average about 10% of total annual sales. These figures are
significantly higher than the physical capital and brand capital average adjustment costs of about
0.9% and 0.5% of total annual sales, respectively.
     The estimated size of the adjustment costs of the different capital and labor inputs varies
substantially across industries, and, except for brand capital, are higher in high-skill industries.
The fraction of sales lost due to labor adjustment costs is on average 2.6% in low-skill industries


                                                  4
and 6.8% in high-skill industries. Thus, consistent with previous studies, we find that it is more
costly to replace high-skill than low-skill workers (see discussion in related literature section below).
Similarly, the fraction of sales lost due to knowledge capital adjustment costs is on average 2.4%
in low-skill industries and 13.3% in high-skill industries. The difference in the size of adjustment
costs across industries is less pronounced for physical capital. The fraction of sales lost due to
physical capital adjustment costs is on average 1.2% in low-skill industries and 1.5% in high-
skill industries. The positive relationship between adjustment costs and average labor-skill of the
industry is reversed for brand capital. The fraction of sales lost due to brand capital adjustment
costs is on average 1.7% in low-skill industries and 0.3% in high-skill industries.
    Finally, we provide a series of robustness checks to establish the importance of non-physical
capital inputs for firm value. We re-estimate the model across several perturbations of the
empirical procedures and for different data samples. First, we estimate the model assuming a more
general adjustment costs function that allows adjustment costs to be asymmetric. The estimated
contributions of each input for firm value and the adjustment costs under this specification are very
similar to ones from the benchmark model. Second, we consider a larger number of portfolios as
test assets and different portfolio sorts. Again, the contribution of each input for firm value and
the estimated adjustment costs are robust. Third, we also investigate the robustness of the findings
using an alternative industry classification. We estimate the adjustment costs parameters separately
for each Fama-French industry, and provide industry-specific values. While the decomposition
across inputs is heterogeneous, physical capital still accounts for less than 50% of the firm value
across industries. Fourth, using firm- (instead of portfolio-) level estimation, reveals that, even
in the presence of noise in firm-level data, the estimated contribution of the non-physical capital
inputs for firm value is still substantial, approximately 60%. Fifth, we re-estimate a restricted
version of the model without knowledge capital using the sub-sample of firms excluded from the
main sample due to missing (or always zero) R&D expenses data, and find that, similar to the
main model results, the non-physical capital inputs (labor and brand capital) account for a large
fraction (more than 38%) of firm's value in this alternative sample.
    As an application of our findings, our analysis provides new insights about which types of
inputs contribute the most to the difference in returns between growth stocks (which have high
valuation ratios) and value stocks (which have low valuation ratios), that is, the value premium in
financial markets. Our results show that, while the contribution of labor for firm value is higher
for growth firms than for value firms (29% versus 19%), the contribution of physical capital is
lower for growth firms than for value firms (24% versus 35%). Regarding the intangible capitals,
growth firms derive more value from knowledge capital than from brand capital (40% versus 36%)
while value firms derive more value from brand capital than from knowledge capital (10% versus
6%). These results are consistent with the notation that value firms derive more value from current
assets in the form of physical capital and established brand capital, while growth firms derive more
value from growth opportunities in the form of labor and knowledge capital. Thus, frictions in
labor, knowledge capital, and brand capital, in addition to frictions in physical capital, seem to be
important for understanding the value premium in financial markets.
    Taken together, our results provide direct empirical evidence supporting models with multiple
capital inputs as main sources of firm value, and show the importance of non-physical capital inputs
for firm value.


   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature. Section 3
presents the model. Section 4 introduces the functional forms, describes the estimation procedure


                                                   5
and the data. Section 5 presents the results. Section 6 presents a series of robustness checks.
Finally, Section 7 concludes. A separate appendix with additional results and robustness checks is
posted online.


2       Related Literature

Our work is related to the large literature on firm valuation.1 Our approach is most closely
related to the supply approach to valuation developed in BXZ, but extended to a setup in which
multiple and heterogeneous capital inputs and labor, not just physical capital, can contribute to a
firm's market value. Following the important work of Ohlson (1995), a large number of empirical
studies have regressed firm valuation ratios on several firm characteristics. We differ from these
empirical studies in that the relationship between valuation ratios and firm characteristics in our
model has a structural interpretation, in particular, the parameter estimates can be linked to the
firm's technology. Thus, our estimates and functional forms can guide future research of models of
investment with several capital inputs.
    Our paper is also related to the asset pricing literature on intangible capital and firm risk.
Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013) estimate the value of organization capital using a model of
the sharing rule between a firm's owners and its key talent. They show that firms with more
organization capital are riskier than firms with less organization capital. Following Lev and
Radhakrishnan (2005), the authors construct a broad measure of organization capital using selling,
general and administrative (SG&A) expenses. Indeed, this measure includes not just the value of
the labor force (as it accounts for the costs of training workers), but also knowledge capital (as
it often includes R&D expenditures), and brand capital (as it accounts for advertising expenses),
among other non-capital input related expenses.2 Since our goal is to decompose the value of
the firm and to understand the relative contribution of labor and the different intangible capital
inputs for firms' market value, we focus on measures of the separate components rather than using
this broad measure of organization capital (in the robustness section below we also consider a
version of the model using this broad measure of intangible capital). This is important because the
type of intangible capital (knowledge versus brand capital) that matters the most for firm value
varies significantly across industries. Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2012) study the risk characteristics
of intangible capital. Li and Liu (2012) and Vitorino (2014) study the importance of intangible
capital in a q-theory model via structural estimation. We build on their work by considering a
general model that includes both knowledge and brand capital, and also frictions in the adjustment
of the labor input. By considering a more general framework we can provide a more accurate
assessment of the contribution of each input to firm value.
    A growing literature has further shown the importance of intangible capital for corporate
decisions. Falato, Kadyrzhanova, and Sim (2014), building on earlier work by Corrado, Hulten, and
Sichel (2009) and Corrado and Hulten (2010), show that intangible capital is the most important
firm-level determinant of corporate cash holdings, with the rise in intangible capital being a
fundamental driver of the secular trend in U.S. corporate cash holdings over the last decades.
We differ from these studies because our structural model allows us to measure the market value
of the capital inputs (given by the product of the shadow price of the input with the book-value of
the input), not just the book value of the inputs. As we show, a firm-value decomposition based
    1
   See BXZ for an overview of the firm valuation literature in Finance, Economics, and Accounting.
    2
   As discussed in Peters and Taylor (2017), companies typically report SG&A and R&D separately, but Compustat
almost always adds R&D expenses to SG&A, reporting them together in the variable XSGA.


                                                      6
on book value of the capital inputs is significantly different from a decomposition based on the
market value of the inputs. In addition, the total book value of the inputs is unable to explain the
time-series and cross-sectional variation in market values across firms.
    Peters and Taylor (2017) propose a new measure of Tobin's Q that accounts for intangible
capital, and show that their measure is a superior proxy for explaining total firm investment in
physical and intangible capital. Our structural model of the firm, which also incorporates intangible
capital, provides a quantitative decomposition of Tobin's Q into the value of each capital input
according to the optimal corporate policies including labor hiring, and investment in physical and
intangible capital. In addition, Peters and Taylor (2017) document that the investment-q relation
works best in high-tech sectors. Andrei, Mann, and Moyen (2018) confirm this finding and show
that it can be rationalized in an augmented investment model with corporate learning about firms'
cash flows. Consistent with these findings, we show that an augmented investment model with two
types of intangible capital and quasi-fixed labor inputs matches the data in the high-tech sector
particularly well, further improving the fit relative to the one-physical-capital input model.
    An important strand of the asset pricing literature documents the effect of labor-market frictions
on stock returns and firm value.3 The theoretical approach in this paper is related to the work of
Merz and Yashiv (2007), who build upon the earlier work by Cochrane (1991). Merz and Yashiv
(2007) consider an aggregate representative firm facing adjustment costs in both capital and labor,
and focus on the estimation of the production and adjustment costs functions. They show that
adding labor adjustment costs substantially improves the model's ability to capture the dynamics
of the aggregate stock market value. We build on the Merz and Yashiv (2007)'s setup by including
two additional types of costly intangible capital. Further, extending the model to the firm-level
allows us to exploit not only time-series data, but also firm-level cross-sectional data. Building
on Merz and Yashiv (2007), Belo, Lin, and Bazdresch (2014) shows that labor hiring negatively
predicts future returns in the cross section both in model simulations and in the data. In our
work, we focus on equity valuation ratios and we provide a structural estimation of the frictions in
(physical and intangible) capital and labor.
    Our work is also related to the large literature on labor demand and capital investment which
investigates the importance of capital and labor adjustment costs to explain investment and hiring
dynamics.4 The estimated economic magnitude of adjustment costs is still subject to debate.
For example, Shapiro (1986) shows that large estimates of labor adjustment costs are important
to match investment and hiring dynamics, particularly for non-production workers. Hall (2004),
however, shows estimates for both capital and labor adjustment costs that are negligible at the two-
digit SIC industry level. We add to this literature by providing structural estimates of adjustment
costs for multiples types of capital and labor inputs based on financial market data.
    Finally, our paper also contributes to the literature on the importance of capital heterogeneity.
Abel (1985) provides closed-form solutions for firm market value in a q-theory model with several
factors of production, and Abel and Eberly (2001) provide empirical evidence on the relevance of
    3
      A partial list of studies linking labor market variables to asset prices includes Mayers (1972), Fama and Schwert
(1977), Campbell (1996), Jagannathan and Wang (1996), Jagannathan, Kubota, and Takehara (1998), Santos and
Veronesi (2005), Boyd, Hu, and Jagannathan (2005), and Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008). The interpretation
of the empirical facts in these studies is silent about the production-side of the economy (technology).
    4
      See, for example, on capital: Cooper and Haltiwanger (1997), Caballero et al. (1995), Cooper, Haltiwanger, and
Power (1999) and Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006); on labor: Hamermesh (1989), Bentolila and Bertola (1990), Davis
and Haltiwanger (1992), Caballero and Engel (1993), Caballero, Engel, and Haltiwanger (1997), Cooper, Haltiwanger,
and Willis (2015); on joint estimation of capital and labor adjustment costs: Shapiro (1986), Galeotti and Schiantarelli
(1991), Hall (2004), Merz and Yashiv (2007) and Bloom (2009). Bond and Van Reenen (2007) survey the literature,
and Hamermesh (1996) reviews a set of direct estimates of labor adjustment costs.


                                                           7
capital heterogeneity. Using a dataset of Japanese firms, Hayashi and Inoue (1991) find strong
empirical support for the relationship between aggregate capital growth and Tobin's Q derived in
a model with multiple capital goods. Similarly, Chirinko (1993) estimates an investment model
with multiple capital inputs and adjustment technologies, and finds significant evidence in favor of
capital heterogeneity. Gon¸
                          calves, Xue, and Zhang (2017) show that an investment-based model with
both physical capital and current assets can simultaneously capture the cross-sectional variation in
average returns across a large set of portfolios. These papers, however, do not look at valuation
moments, and hence at the firm value decomposition, as we do here.


3     The Model of the Firm
The model is a neoclassical model of the firm as in LWZ/BXZ (we use their notation whenever
possible), extended to a setup with several quasi-fixed inputs. Time is discrete and the horizon
infinite. Firms choose costlessly adjustable inputs (e.g., materials, energy) each period, while
taking their prices as given, to maximize operating profits (revenues minus the expenditures on
these inputs). Because we treat labor and intangible capital as quasi-fixed inputs, the labor costs
and the investments in intangible capital are excluded from our definition of operating profits.
Taking these operating profits as given, firms optimally choose the physical and intangible capital
investments, hiring, and debt to maximize their market value of equity.
    To save on notation, we denote a firm's i set of capital and labor input stocks at time t, as
K it (variables in bold represent a vector). This set includes the physical capital stock (Kit  P ), the
                                                   K                                     B
labor stock (Lit ), the knowledge capital stock (Kit ), and the brand capital stock (Kit ). Similarly,
we denote a firm's i set of investments in the inputs (hiring in the case of the labor input) at time
                                                                   P ), the investment in labor stock,
t, as Iit . This set includes the investment in physical capital (Iit
that is, gross hiring (Hit ), the investment in knowledge capital (IitK ), and the investment in brand
            B
capital (Iit ).
    The laws of motion of the firm's capital inputs and labor force are given by:


                                     P        P         P    P
                                    Kit +1 = Iit + (1 - it )Kit                                     (1)
                                                             L
                                    Lit+1 =      Hit + (1 - it )Lit                                 (2)
                                     K            K         K     K
                                    Kit +1   =   Iit + (1 - it )Kit                                 (3)
                                     B            B         B    B
                                    Kit +1   =   Iit + (1 - it )Kit ,                               (4)

where it P ,  K and  B are the exogenous depreciation rates of physical, knowledge and brand
             it        it
capital, respectively. itL is the employee quit rate, i.e., the rate at which the workers leave the firm

for voluntary reasons.

3.1   Technology
The operating profit function for firm i at time t is it  (Kit , Xit ), in which Xit denotes a vector
of exogenous aggregate and firm-specific shocks. Firms incur adjustment costs when investing and
hiring. The adjustment costs function is denoted Cit  C (Iit , Kit ). This function is increasing
and convex in investment and hiring, and decreasing in the capital stocks and the labor force. We
specify the functional forms in the empirical section below.
    We assume that the firm's operating profit function and adjustment costs function are both
homogeneous of degree one. As we show in Section 3.3, these assumptions allow us to obtain a

                                                    8
closed-form expression for the firm's equilibrium market value in the model, which depends on
the model parameters and on firm-level data. This greatly simplifies the estimation of the model
because it allow us to structurally estimate the model directly using real data, as opposed to
indirectly through simulated data (for example, using the simulated method of moments).
    It is important to note that the assumption of homogeneity of degree one of the operating profit
function does not imply the assumption of perfect competition, nor that the firm's production
function exhibits constant returns to scale. To show this more formally, in the online appendix, we
consider the maximization problem of a firm with a production function that exhibits decreasing
returns to scale in physical capital (for simplicity, we assume that the firm only uses this capital
input for production), and that faces a downward sloping demand curve (that is, it has market
power, potentially driven by intangible capital). The firm's stock of intangible capital does not enter
in the production function directly as an input, but it affects demand: a higher stock of intangible
capital increases consumers' willingness to pay for the firm's goods. We show that, in this setup,
there exists a set of parameter values in which the operating profit function is homogeneous of
degree one in the two capital inputs (physical and intangible capital). This example further shows
that knowledge or brand capital might matter for firms' value not necessarily through their effect
on production (as in the case of physical capital and labor), but through their effect on consumers'
willingness to pay, and hence on demand and profits. Indeed, our model specification with an
homogeneous of degree one operating profit function in the four inputs can be reinterpreted as
a model of the firm in which the production function has decreasing returns to scale in physical
capital and labor and the firm has market power, potentially driven by the firm's stock of intangible
(knowledge or brand) capital.

3.2    Taxable Profits and Firm's Payouts
We allow firms to finance investments with debt. At the beginning of time t, firm i issues an amount
of debt, denoted Bit+1 , which must be repaid at the beginning of time t + 1.5 rit
                                                                                 B denotes the gross

corporate bond return on Bit .
    We can write taxable corporate profits as operating profits minus intangible capital investments
(which are expensed), labor costs, physical capital depreciation, adjustment costs, and interest
expense:
                              K    B               P P             B
                       it - Iit - Iit - Wit Lit - it Kit - Cit - (rit - 1)Bit .
   Thus, adjustment costs are expensed, consistent with treating them as foregone operating
profits.
   Let it be the corporate tax rate. The payout of firm i is then given by:6
                           K     B                 P             B          P P          B
 Dit  (1 - t )[it - Cit - Iit - Iit - Wit Lit ] - Iit + Bit+1 - rit Bit + t it Kit + t (rit - 1)Bit , (5)
           P K P is the depreciation tax shield and  (r B - 1)B is the interest tax shield.
in which t it it                                    t it       it
   5
      We include debt in the model to better match the data, but we keep the financing side of the firm simple and
frictionless to focus on the production side of the firm as the main driver of the model fit.
    6
      Note that physical capital investment and intangible capital investments are treated differently given the different
accounting rules. Investment in physical capital is spread out over time and expensed as depreciation, while the
intangible capital costs (which in our case are R&D and advertising expenses) are mostly treated as expenses at the
time that they occur.




                                                            9
3.3   Equity Value
Firm i takes the stochastic discount factor, denoted Mt+1 , from period t to t + 1 as given when
maximizing its cum-dividend market value of equity:
                                                                           
                                                                           
                    Vit                      max              
                                                                     Et          Mt+   t Dit+ t
                                                                                                  ,    (6)
                           {Iit+   t ,Kit+   t+1 ,Bit+   t+1 } t=0
                                                                           t=0

subject to a transversality condition given by limT  Et [Mt+T Bit+T +1 ] = 0, and the laws of motion
for the capital inputs and labor given by equations (1) to (4).
    Let Pit  Vit - Dit be the ex-dividend equity value. In the appendix we show that, given the
homogeneity of degree one of the operating profit and adjustment costs functions, the firm's value
maximization implies that:
                                     P P         L           K K         B B
                      Pit + Bit+1 = qit Kit+1 + qit Lit+1 + qit Kit+1 + qit Kit+1 ,                    (7)
in which
                                      P                         P
                                     qit      1 + (1 - t )Cit /Iit                                     (8)
                                       L
                                     qit      (1 - t )Cit /Hit                                         (9)
                                      K                                    K
                                     qit      (1 - t ) 1 +           Cit /Iit                         (10)
                                      B                                    B
                                     qit      (1 - t ) 1 +           Cit /Iit     ,                   (11)
and Cit /x denotes the first derivative of the adjustment costs function with respect to variable
         P , q L , q K and q B measure the shadow prices of physical capital, labor, knowledge capital,
x, and qit    it    it      it
and brand capital, respectively (the Lagrange multipliers of equations (1) to (4)). The valuation
equation (7) is simply an extension of Hayashi (1982)'s result to a multi-factor inputs setting.
This equation allows us to compute the firm's market value from real variables only (investment
rates and capital/labor input stocks). Thus, in contrast with standard valuation approaches in
the literature (as is the case, for example, of the discounted cash flow method), our approach does
not require assumptions about unobserved firm characteristics such as future cash flows, terminal
values, or specific stochastic discount factors.
     According to equation (7) the firm's market value is given by the sum of the value of the
firm's installed labor and capital inputs. This additive feature allows us to compute the fraction
of firm value that is attributed to each input (henceforth referred simply as "input-shares") in a
straightforward manner as follows:
                                                        P KP
                                                       qit  it+1
                         µP
                          it   =      P KP        LL          K K K + qB K B
                                                                                                      (12)
                                     qit it+1 + q it it+1  + qit it+1  it it+1
                                                                LL
                                                              qit  it+1
                         µL
                          it =        P KP              L             K KK          BKB
                                                                                                      (13)
                                     qit it+1      +   qit Lit+1 + qit   it+1    + qit it+1
                                                               K    K
                                                              qit Kit+1
                        µK
                         it    =      P KP              L             K KK          BKB
                                                                                                      (14)
                                     qit it+1 +        qit Lit+1 + qit   it+1    + qit it+1
                                                               BKB
                                                              qit   it+1
                        µB
                         it =         P KP              LL            K KK          BKB
                                                                                              .       (15)
                                     qit it+1 +        qit  it+1  +  qit it+1    + qit it+1

    The fundamental goal of the empirical analysis is to characterize these shares, including their
variation across industries and over time.

                                                            10
4     Estimation Methodology
In this section we specify the functional forms and describe the estimation procedure. In addition,
we describe the data, including the measurement of the intangible capital stocks, and report
descriptive statistics of the key variables used in the analysis.

4.1   Functional Forms
The valuation equation (7) only requires the specification of the adjustment costs function, not of
the operating profit function. We consider the following quadratic adjustment costs function:
                     P    2                      2                    K    2                B    2
              P     Iit        P      L    Hit                 K     Iit        K      B   Iit        B
        Cit =         P
                              Kit   +                Wit Lit +         K
                                                                               Kit   +       B
                                                                                                     Kit ,   (16)
              2     Kit               2    Lit                 2     Kit               2   Kit
in which Wit is the wage rate (which the firm takes as given), and P , L , K , B > 0 are the
parameters that control the magnitude of the adjustment costs of each input. Labor adjustment
costs are proportional to the firm's wage bill, as in Bloom (2009). This helps to make the units
of the labor adjustment costs (measured in number of workers) similar to the other capital inputs
which are measured in (real) dollar values, an adjustment that is important for the empirical results
below.
    This functional form implies that the shadow prices of labor and the capital inputs can be
inferred from firm-level data on investment, hiring, capital and labor stocks, wages, and taxes, and
are given by:
                                                                    P
                                                                   Iit
                                     P
                                    qit    1 + (1 - t )P             P
                                                                                                             (17)
                                                                   Kit
                                     L                      Hit
                                    qit  (1 - t )L                  Wit                                      (18)
                                                            Lit
                                                                     K
                                                                    Iit
                                     K
                                    qit    (1 - t ) 1 + K             K
                                                                                                             (19)
                                                                    Kit
                                                                     B
                                                                    Iit
                                     B
                                    qit  (1 - t ) 1 + B               B
                                                                           .                                 (20)
                                                                    Kit
     We adopt a simple quadratic adjustment cost specification for parsimonious reasons and to
avoid parameter proliferation. There are several implicit assumptions in our simple specification
that are worth discussing. First, we assume that adjustment costs depend on the gross (as opposed
to net) flow of the inputs. For example, in the case of labor, firms may incur adjustment costs even
if the number of workers does not change (net flow is zero) but there is labor turnover, because the
firm needs to hire and train the new workers. The importance of using gross labor flows instead
to net flows is consistent with the empirical evidence in Hamermesh (1995). For consistency, we
adopt the same specification for all the inputs.
     Second, we only consider smooth adjustment costs and thus ignore non-convex adjustment costs
that lead to lumpy investment. According to the analysis in Section 3.3, the assumption of smooth
adjustment costs allow us to derive a closed form expression for the firm's equilibrium value as
a function of firm real variables and model parameters, which greatly simplifies the estimation of
the model. This specification is reasonable in our context because our sample (described below)
consists of publicly listed firms for which the evidence of inaction/lumpiness in investment is more
limited than for establishment-level data.

                                                       11
    Third, we assume symmetry across positive and negative input adjustments (e.g., in the case
of labor, the adjustment cost of hiring or firing one worker is the same), and we also assume that
the curvature of the adjustment costs function is two (quadratic). In robustness checks (Section
6.1), we relax the symmetry assumption and we also consider a more flexible representation of the
adjustment costs function in which we allow the value of the curvature parameter to be different
from two (and different across inputs). In both alternative specifications, we obtain a model fit
that is similar to the simpler specification considered here.

4.2   Estimation Procedure
The valuation equation (7) links firm value to the value of its labor and capital inputs. Since firm
values are not necessarily stationary, it is useful to scale the variables in this equation for estimation
purposes. Accordingly, we scale the variables in the equation by dividing them by the sum of the
firm's capital inputs, which we denote as Ait+1 , a measure of the firm's total (effective) assets given
by Ait+1  Kit  P        K        B
                +1 + Kit+1 + Kit+1 . For scaling purposes, we do not include labor in this definition
of total assets because labor is measured in different units (number of workers as opposed to dollars
in real terms). Accordingly, we write a firm's valuation ratio (V Rit  (Pit + Bit+1 ) /Ait+1 ) as:
                                        P
                                       Kit                       K           B
                                  P        +1    L Lit+1     K Kit+1     B Kit+1
                         V Rit = qit          + qit       + qit       + qit       .                  (21)
                                       Ait+1        Ait+1       Ait+1       Ait+1
The left-hand side (LHS) of equation (21) can be directly measured in the data from equity price
and debt data (and measures of the capital stocks, which we discuss below). The right hand side
(RHS) of equation (21) is the predicted valuation ratio from the model, which we will denote as
V Rit , and depends on firm-level real variables and model parameters.
     Equation (21) establishes an exact relationship between a firm's observed valuation ratio and
its model-implied valuation ratio at each point in time. Using equation (21) and firm-level data to
directly estimate the model parameters is challenging, however. First, firm-level data can be very
noisy and measurement error in the data can make estimation at the firm-level very sensitive to
outliers. Second, firm-level moments are sensitive to firm entry and exit, and are likely affected
by missing observations. These are important considerations in our analysis due to the length of
the firm-panel studied and because the R&D and advertising expenses data needed to construct
the knowledge capital and brand capital stocks are missing for a nontrivial fraction of the firms in
Compustat (as discussed in Section 4.4 below).
     To circumvent the previous issues while maximizing the use of the information in our sample,
we estimate the model parameters using portfolio-level moments as in BXZ, which in turn follow
the original approach in LWZ. The use of portfolio-level moments, a common practice in the asset
pricing literature, has several attractive features in our context. First, it allows us to reduce the
noise in the firm-level data, and hence obtain arguably more accurate estimates that are less subject
to an attenuation bias (akin to a more accurate estimation of the betas in empirical asset pricing).
Second, portfolio-level moments are arguably less sensitive, and hence more stable, to firm entry
and exit, and to missing firm-level observations. Finally, it allows us to characterize the data in a
more parsimonious manner because the number of portfolios is naturally smaller than the number
of firms in the data.
     We proceed as follows. In theory, at each point in time, any cross-sectional moment of the
observed firm-level valuation ratios in the LHS of equation (21) should be equal to any corresponding
cross-sectional moment of the model-implied firm-level valuation ratios in the RHS of equation (21).
Accordingly, for each portfolio j and for each year t, we compute the cross-sectional mean (XSM)

                                                     12
                                XSM ) and the model-implied valuation ratio (V R                                               XSM
observed valuation ratio (V Rjt                                                  jt                                                  ) of the firms
in the portfolio. Specifically, we compute:

                                                                 XSM                  V Rit
                                                              V Rjt  =
                                                                                       Njt
                                                                                  i

                                                    XSM                      V Rit
                                             V Rjt         () =                    , i  portfolio j,
                                                                              Njt
                                                                         i

where  represents the vector of structural parameters, i.e.,  = [P , L , K , B ], and Njt is the
number of firms in portfolio j at time t. We target cross-sectional mean valuation ratios because
these moments capture the economic behavior of a typical (average) firm in the economy, which is
what the theory model is designed to study.7
    We then proceed under the standard assumption that the portfolio-level valuation ratio moments
are observed with error by the econometrician:

                                                          XSM                 XSM
                                                       V Rjt  = V Rjt                 () + jt ,                                                  (22)

where  captures measurement error in the portfolio-level moments.8 Based on equation (22), we
then estimate the model parameters by minimizing the squared distance between the portfolio-level
observed and model-implied valuation ratio moments at each point in time:
                                                                 T       N                                          2
                                                          1                      XSM                XSM
                                    = arg min                                 V Rjt  - V Rjt                  ()        ,                        (23)
                                                         TN
                                                                t=1 j =1

where T is the number of years in the sample, and N is the number of portfolios. An attractive
feature of our estimation approach is that it corresponds to a simple linear ordinary least squares
(OLS) estimation of (modified) portfolio-level average valuation ratios on portfolio-level averages
of firm-characteristics. This is due to the linear relationship between the model-implied valuation
ratio and the parameters, combined with the use of portfolio-level cross-sectional means as target
moments.9
     Finally, we compute Newey-West standard errors with lag equal to three years, to account for
possible cross-sectional and time-series correlations.
   7
     Arguably, our model is less appropriate for the valuation of superstar firms, such as Apple or Facebook, which
are likely to derive a large part of their market value from features not captured by our model.
   8
     Mismeasured components of the valuation ratio such as the market value of debt and the capital inputs can be
better observed by firms than by econometricians. Furthermore, the intrinsic value of equity can temporarily diverge
from the market value of equity.
   9
     To show this claim more formally, define the following variables:
                                P             K            B
                  (Pjt +Bjt+1 -Kjt +1 -(1-t )Kjt+1 -(1-t )Kjt+1 )
V Rjt = N1   jt                        Ajt+1
                                                                  (the modified valuation ratio), IP Ajt = N1
                                                                                                            jt
                                                                                                               (1 -
                      ij                                                                                                                        ij
          P                                                                                                       K
    I P Kit+1                                           it Wit Lit+1                                        I K Kit+1
t ) Kit
      P A
         it+1
              ,       HLAjt =     1
                                 Njt
                                            (1 -   t ) H
                                                       Lit  Ait+1
                                                                     ,   IKAjt =       1
                                                                                      Njt
                                                                                                 (1 -   t ) Kit
                                                                                                              K A
                                                                                                                 it+1
                                                                                                                      ,     and IBAjt =    1
                                                                                                                                          Njt
                                                                                                                                                     (1 -
      it                               ij                                                   ij                it                                ij
       B     B
      Iit   Kit +1
t )     B
      Kit   Ait+1
                     . We can then write equation (22) as:

                                       V Rjt = P IP Ajt + L HLAjt + K IKAjt + B IBAjt + jt                                                           (24)

which establishes a linear relation between the portfolio-level modified valuation ratio and portfolio-level
characteristics. Thus, our objective function in (23) corresponds to a simple linear OLS regression of equation
(24).


                                                                             13
    We note that our estimation procedure differs from the portfolio-level estimation procedure
in BXZ and LWZ in two important ways. First, in each period t, we target the cross-sectional
portfolio-level mean instead of targeting a portfolio-level aggregate valuation ratio (which aggregates
each portfolio-level characteristic separately using the Fama and French 1993 approach). This
modification is important to recover the true firm-level structural parameters since, as we show in
the online appendix, the procedure in BXZ/LWZ is subject to an aggregation bias which precludes
the parameter estimates from having a structural interpretation (see also, Zhang 2017, Gon¸      calves,
Xue, and Zhang 2017, and Belo, Deng, and Salomao 2019, for a discussion of the aggregation
bias in LWZ). Naturally, the ability to recover the firm-level structural parameters is crucial to
provide a proper decomposition of the market value of the firm. Second, our estimation procedure
requires the model to match the realized time series of the portfolio-level valuation ratios as close
as possible, not just their time series average as in BZX and LWZ. This is important in the context
of our analysis because the contribution of some of the inputs for firm value changes over time.
As a result, the time-series data provides relevant information for the identification of the model
parameters.

4.3   Industry Classification and Portfolio Sorts
We estimate the model both in a pooled sample with all firms in the economy (hence assuming
an homogeneous adjustment cost technology across firms), and separately for different industries
(hence allowing for heterogeneity in the adjustment cost technology across industries). We consider
an industry classification that is based on the labor-skill level (we define this variable below).
Accordingly, we split the sample in two industries, which we refer to as low- and high-skill industries.
To a first approximation these industries correspond to low- and high-tech sectors of the economy.
    The classification of industries according to labor skill (relative to other industry classifications
available in the literature) is interesting for the purposes of our analysis because there are a priori
reasons to expect that the adjustment costs parameters, and hence the importance of capital
and labor inputs for firm value, vary in a systematic way across low- and high-skill industries.
First, as discussed in Belo et al. (2017) (also, see references therein) previous empirical studies
find that it is more costly to replace a high-skill worker than a low-skill worker. This suggests
that the labor adjustment costs parameters should be relatively higher in high-skill industries
which, all else equal, imply that labor should also represent a higher fraction of firm value in high-
skill industries. Second, Belo et al. (2017) also provide evidence that investment in intangible
capital inputs such as R&D expenditures is relatively higher in high-skill industries. Taken
together, this suggests that the relative importance of the different capital and labor inputs for
firm value should vary across industries with different skill levels. Naturally, the estimation can
be performed based on any industry classification. Thus, as a robustness check, we also perform
the estimation and corresponding firm-value decomposition based on a standard Fama and French
industry classification. We discuss the results in Subsection 6.3.
    As noted above, the estimation is performed at the portfolio-level. To minimize the influence of
the choice of a particular sorting variable on the results, we estimate the model combining several
sorting variables. In choosing the sorting variables, we consider firm-level variables that are likely
to generate a large spread in the RHS variables of equation (21), in order to span the entire state
space which helps the identification of the model parameters. Accordingly, we consider four sets
of portfolios sorted based on the following proxies of the lagged market values of each input: the
product of the physical capital investment rate and scaled physical capital, the product of the hiring
rate times wages and scaled labor force, the product of the knowledge capital investment rate and


                                                   14
scaled knowledge capital, and the product of the brand capital investment rate and scaled brand
capital.10 We then follow Fama and French (1993) in constructing the portfolios. Specifically, we
sort all stocks in June of each year t into ten portfolios based on the deciles of the sorting variable
of each firm for the fiscal year ending in t - 1. The portfolios are re-balanced at the end of each
June. This procedure gives a total of 40 portfolios across all sorts.

4.4     Data
Here we describe the data and, in particular, we explain how we construct the capital stocks.
Sample selection: Our sample consists of U.S publicly traded firms from 1950 to 2016 (our
estimation period starts in 1975 but we use data prior to 1975 to construct the initial intangible
capital stocks as described below). Our estimation sample starts in 1975 because that is the year in
which the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) required firms to disclose and expense all
research and development (R&D) expenditures (used in the construction of the knowledge capital
stock) during the year in which these expenses were incurred. The firm-level data are from the
Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP)/Compustat Merged (CCM) ­ Fundamentals Annual
database. We limit our analysis to firms incorporated in the US (Compustat fic="USA") that trade
on major stock exchanges (NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ) (CRSP exchange codes 1, 2, and 3),
for which the native currency is US dollars (Compustat curcd="USD"), and that have information
on their ordinary common shares traded (CRSP share codes 10 and 11). We exclude firms with
primary standard industrial classifications (SIC) between 4900 and 4999 (regulated utilities) and
between 6000 and 6999 (financial services). We drop firm-year observations with missing market
values, number of employees or physical capital. In the main sample, we only include firms that
report R&D expenses at least once during their lifetime. Further, we drop firm-year observations
with missing advertising or R&D data whenever we are not able to fill in the missing data as
described below. The final main sample used for the baseline estimation of the model includes
annual data from 4, 610 firms for the period from 1975 to 2016, which corresponds to 52, 010
firm-year observations.
Physical capital data: The initial physical capital stock, KiP  0 , is given by net property, plant, and
equipment (data item PPENT). The capital depreciation rate, it         K , is the amount of depreciation

(data item DP) divided by the beginning of the period capital stock. We then construct a measure
of the firm's capital stock at current prices. Specifically, we construct an investment-price adjusted
capital stock that accounts for changes in the real cost of physical capital investment by repricing
                                                                                                                        PP
last period's capital stock using today's price of investment (PtP ) as Kt
                                                                         P = K P (1 -  ) t+1 + I
                                                                           +1 t       t PP       t+1 .
                                                                                                                         t+1
Following Zhang (2017) we infer physical capital investment from the the law of motion of capital
by inverting the previous law of motion of physical capital equation and solving for investment
  10                                                                                    P it+1            KP
    For example, according to equation (21), the value of physical capital is given by qit Ait+1
                                                                                                 . Using equation (17),
we can write this value as:
                                        P                          P         P
                                    P Kit+1                       Iit     Kit  +1
                                  qit       = 1 + (1 - t )P         P
                                                                                  ,
                                      Ait+1                      Kit      Ait+1
                                   P         P
                                  Iit       Kit +1
and hence by sorting on             P
                                  Kit       Ait+1
                                                         , this sorting maximizes the variation of the value of the physical capital
stock across firms, as captured by the second term inside the main brackets. Accordingly, the four sorting variables
        P     P                                            K       K                B     B
       Iit   Kit +1         Hit         Wit Lit+1         Iit     Kit +1           Iit   Kit +1
are:     P
       Kit   Ait+1
                        ,   Lit          Ait+1
                                                     ,      K
                                                          Kit     Ait+1
                                                                           , and     B
                                                                                   Kit   Ait+1
                                                                                                  . These values proxy for the market
values of each input.



                                                                           15
(accounting for inflation). This procedure guarantees that the investment and physical capital
data are consistent with the law of motion for physical capital in the model.11
    There is no readily available data on a price of investment index for our physical capital
stock, which is mostly composed of structures and equipment. The Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) provides a price index for a broad investment series that includes investment in structures,
equipment, and intellectual property products (which should be excluded in our analysis because
it corresponds to intangible capital), and for each of these three items separately.12 Thus, we first
recover the real values for each of the series "structures" and "equipment" by dividing the nominal
values of these two series reported by the BEA in the NIPA table 5.3.5 by their corresponding price
indices reported by the BEA in the NIPA table 5.3.4. We then calculate a price index for physical
capital that includes only structures and equipment (but not intellectual propriety) in the same
manner as the BEA constructs price deflators by dividing the nominal-dollar value of a series by its
calculated real value. More specifically, we proceed by dividing the sum of the nominal investment
in structures and equipment (reported in the NIPA table 5.3.5) by the sum of the real investment
in structures and equipment (recovered by us as described above).
Labor data: The labor stock, Lit , is the number of employees (Compustat data item EMP). The
labor market data on wage rates and labor quit rates is not available at the firm level for most
firms (the firm-level wage bill data in Compustat is missing for more than 80% of the firms in our
sample). Thus, we measure these variables at the industry level as follows.
    To compute the wage rate per worker, Wit , we use annual data from the BEA, National Income
and Product Accounts (NIPA), Section 6. The industry-level wage rate per worker is given by
the ratio of the total compensation of employees (which includes wage and salary accruals and
supplements to wages and salaries) to the total number of employees in the industry. We use
compensation of employees by industry from Tables 6.2B-D and the number of (full-time and part-
time) employees by industry from Tables 6.4B-D. To merge the wage data with our firm-level data
from Compustat/CRSP, we created a mapping between the wage data and the Standard Industry
Classification (SIC) 1987 and the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) 2002
codes using the industries description in the BEA tables.
    We measure the annual employee quit rate it  L using data for 16 major industry groups based

on NAICS codes from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) available from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). Because this data is only available since 2001, we extend the data
backwards as follows. We estimate a time-varying quit rate by regressing, for each major industry
group in JOLTS, the industry level quit rates on real GDP growth, unemployment rate, the labor
vacancy rate, and a measure of labor-market tightness.13 The fit of the regression for each industry
  11                                                                                 P
      Several studies (for example, LWZ) measure investment in physical capital, Iit   , as capital expenditures (item
CAPX) minus sales of property, plant, and equipment (item SPPE), and set SPPE to zero if missing. As shown in
Zhang (2017), this procedure generates investment series that violate the assumed law of motion of physical capital
in several observations. The main reason for this fact is that CAPX excludes acquisitions, that is, increases in the
firm's capital stock due to the acquisition of other firms.
   12
      The price index for the broad investment series is called "Gross Private Domestic Investment: Fixed Investment:
Nonresidential (implicit price deflator)" (series id A008RD3Q086SBEA in FRED).
   13
      For the real GDP growth we use the series:                 Real Gross Domestic Product (U.S. Bureau of
Economic Analysis, series A191RL1A225NBEA, retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis;
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/A191RL1A225NBEA, April 30, 2018). As for the unemployment rate we use the
series: Civilian Unemployment Rate [UNRATE](U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, retrieved from FRED, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/UNRATE, April 30, 2018.). For the labor vacancy rate
we use the Help Wanted Index (HWI) referenced in Barnichon (2010) and provided in Regis Barnichon's website.
The HWI is provided at the monthly level, in the regressions we use the yearly average. We construct a measure of
labor market tightness as the ratio of the vacancy rate and the unemployment rate.


                                                         16
is quite good, with a median time-series R2 of 88% across industries. For each industry, we then
extend the quit rate back to cover the entire sample prior to 2001. We also use the same procedure
to estimate a time-varying aggregate JOLTS quit rate for the industry group "Total Private" (i.e.,
an overall quit rate), and assign this rate to firms that belong to industries not covered in JOLTS
or that have a missing industry code. This procedure allows us to have variation in the employee
quit rate both in the cross-section and in the time-series.
Knowledge capital data: Following Falato, Kadyrzhanova, and Sim (2014) we construct the firm's
stock of knowledge capital from past expenditures data on R&D (Compustat data item XRD) and
using the perpetual inventory method as follows:14

                                      K       K      K       PtK
                                                               +1    K
                                     Kt +1 = Kt (1 -  )           + It +1 ,                                 (25)
                                                             PtK
where PtK is the BEA price index for intellectual property products, R&D, from the Federal Reserve
Economic Data (FRED) database.15 To implement the law of motion in equation (25) we must
choose an initial stock and a depreciation rate. Using the perpetual inventory method, we set the
initial stock to:
                                                     K
                                                    I0
                                    K
                                  K0   = K                       ,
                                          g +  K -  K (1 -  K )
in which I0K is the firm's investment in knowledge capital in the first year in the sample, and  K is

the average (net) growth rate of the price index for R&D, which is 3.2% in the sample period used
for the estimation. We let g K be industry specific and set it to be equal to the average growth rate
of the R&D investments in that industry; in practice, we consider 10 industries classified based on
the average labor skill level of the industry (we describe the labor skill data below). As for the
knowledge capital depreciation rate, we use the recommended depreciation rates of R&D assets
based on the BEA-NSF dataset as calculated by Li (2012a) and reported for each industry on Li
(2012a)'s Table 4, column 3. For the companies/industries not reported in Li (2012a) we use a
15% depreciation rate following Peters and Taylor (2017). Once we have the initial capital stock,
we iterate forward using the appropriate depreciation rate, R&D expenses, and investment price
index. The investment rate on knowledge capital is then given by the ratio of the current period
investment and the beginning of the period corresponding knowledge capital stock It     K /K K .
                                                                                             t
    It is important to note that the XRD item in Compustat often includes not just the R&D
expenses reported by companies but also the R&D acquired by companies that is deemed to not
have alternative future use (data item RDIP). Thus, we remove RDIP from XRD whenever it is
included by Compustat, because, as a write-off, it should not be interpreted as an investment.16
    We treat missing R&D data as follows. In 1972, the APB Opinion No. 22 made the disclosure of
R&D expenditures in financial statements mandatory and the SEC started to require the reporting
  14
     See also Lev and Radhakrishnan (2005), Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013), and Li and Liu (2012) for similar
applications. The Bureau of Economic Analysis uses a similar methodology to construct a stock of Research and
Development capital, see Sliker (2007). Corrado et al. (2004) identifies R&D as the largest source of business
investment on intangibles.
  15
     Specifically, we use the annual series "Gross Private Domestic Investment: Fixed Investment: Nonresidential:
Intellectual Property Products:       Research and Development (chain-type price index), Index 2009=100"
(Y006RG3A086NBEA) provided by the BEA.
  16
     RDIP is included in XRD whenever the item XRD FN (XRD footnote) in Compustat has values BW
(Includes In-Process, Acquired, or Purchased Research and Development) or BV (Includes In-Process, Acquired,
or Purchased Research and Development and engineering expense or customer- or government-sponsored research
and development). Note also that RDIP (In-Process R&D Expense) is coded by Compustat as negative, so to remove
RDIP from XRD we subtract the absolute value of RDIP from XRD.


                                                       17
of R&D in the Annual 10-K reports (SEC No.125). However, until 1975, when the FASB started
to require the expensing of all R&D expenditures during the year incurred, disclosure of R&D in
the firms' financial statements was still limited. Given this, after 1975, we assume that if R&D
is missing, it corresponds to zero. Also, in order to use as much data as possible, and because
there is a significant share of companies that reports R&D prior to 1975, we construct the stocks
of knowledge capital starting in 1970 (whenever possible). Even tough we only estimate the model
starting in 1975, this procedure allows us to mitigate the negative impact on our analysis of the
potential mis-measurement of the initial knowledge capital stock for the firms present in the sample
which have data prior to 1975.
Brand capital data: The construction of the brand capital stock is analogous to the construction
of the knowledge capital stock. Following Belo, Lin, and Vitorino (2014) and Vitorino (2014),
we construct the firm's stock of the brand capital from past expenditures data on advertising
(Compustat data item XAD) and using the perpetual inventory model as follows:17

                                       B       B      B       PtB
                                                                +1    B
                                      Kt +1 = Kt (1 -  )           + It +1 ,                                   (26)
                                                              PtB
where PtB is the advertising industry's output price index (PPI), available from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics.18 The initial stock of brand capital is set to:
                                                           B
                                                          I0
                                         B
                                        K0 =                            ,
                                                g B +  B -  B (1 -  B )
in which I0  B is the firm's investment in brand capital in the first year in the sample, and  B is

the average (net) growth rate of the price index for advertising expenses, which is 5.4% in the
sample period used for the estimation. We let g B be industry specific and set it to be equal
to the average growth rate of advertising expenses in that industry (using the same 10-industry
classification described in the construction of the knowledge capital stock). As in Vitorino (2014),
we use a depreciation rate for brand capital of 20%. Once we have the initial capital stock, we
iterate forward using the depreciation rate, advertising expenses, and investment price index. The
investment rate on brand capital is then given by the ratio of the current period investment and
the beginning of the period corresponding brand capital stock It  B /K B .
                                                                       t
    We treat the missing XAD data as follows. In 1994, the SEC passed Financial Reporting
Release 44 (FRR 44), which eliminated the disclosure requirement of advertising expenditures in
  17
     According to Compustat, advertising is usually an indirect operating cost that is reported by companies as a
selling expense within SG&A. Whenever advertising expenditures are reported separately from SG&A (in a note
or in a supplementary schedule in the 10-K reports), Compustat includes them in data item XAD. Ptok, Jindal,
and Reinartz (2018) discusses in detail the use of several Compustat variables to operationalize various Marketing-
related constructs. Their results suggest that XAD from Compustat is a satisfactory measure of advertising spending.
  18
     Specifically, the price index for brand capital is the average yearly Producer Price Index by Industry:
Advertising Agencies (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Producer Price Index by Industry: Advertising Agencies"
[PCU541810541810], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis). Because this data series only
starts in 1996, we extrapolate backwards using as predictors "Personal Consumption Expenditures: Chain-type
Price Index, Index 2009=100 (BEA)", "Gross Private Domestic Investment: Fixed Investment: Nonresidential:
Intellectual Property Products (chain-type price index), Index 2009=100", "Gross Private Domestic Investment:
Fixed Investment: Nonresidential: Intellectual Property Products: Research and Development (chain-type price
index), Index 2009=100 (BEA)", "Gross Private Domestic Investment: Fixed Investment: Nonresidential: Intellectual
Property Products: Entertainment, Literary, and Artistic Originals (chain-type price index), Index 2009=100 (BEA)",
and "Private fixed investment, chained price index: Nonresidential: Intellectual property products: Software, Index
2009=100 (BEA)" from the period of 1929 until 1995). (Note: the IPP software series only starts in 1959 so it only
enters as a predictor after 1959).


                                                        18
public firms' annual reports. Before the passage of FAR 44 (which became effective on December
20, 1994), public firms were required to report advertising spending if it exceeded 1 percent of their
total sales (according to the SEC Release AS-125, which became effective for financial statements
for periods ending on or after Dec 31, 1972). Based on this we calculate the brand capital
stocks using data starting in 1972 when companies start to report advertising expenses in the
"Supplementary Income Statement Information" schedule. We impute missing advertising data
based on the observed Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A) expenses using the firm-level
average ratio of advertising expenses-to-SG&A ratio for the years in which neither of these values
is missing. Given the different disclosure requirements throughout the years, however, we cap the
imputed amount at 1% of sales for the years from 1972 through 1993 (to make the imputed values
consistent with the reporting standards). We exclude from the sample all the firms with missing
XAD during the entire sample period.
Discussion on the limitations of the intangible capital data: Our measurement of the firm-level
intangible capital stocks follows previous work whenever possible taking into account legal reporting
requirements and how the data is treated in Compustat. In constructing these stocks, however, it
is important to recognize that there are several implicit empirical choices that one has to make, and
which can potentially have some impact on the results. For example, although the total amount
of intangible capital (here, knowledge capital and brand capital) of a firm is given by the sum of
externally acquired and internally created intangible capital, our measures of knowledge and brand
capital relate to internally created intangible capital only. We focus on internally created intangible
capital due to several data limitations. First, when one company purchases another, externally
generated or acquired intangible assets are recorded by companies as assets in the balance sheet
and are recorded by Compustat in item INTAN (Intangibles) which corresponds to the sum of the
items INTANO (Other Intangibles) and GDWL (Goodwill). Other intangibles refers to identifiable
intangible assets.19 Goodwill is recorded as the residual between the cost of an acquired business
and the fair market value of net tangible assets and identifiable intangible assets. This means that
even though Goodwill is recorded as an intangible asset on the acquiring company's balance sheet,
goodwill is often contaminated by non intangibles (such as market premium for physical assets).
    In addition, the treatment and reporting of externally created intangible assets has not been
consistent over time. For example, up to 2001, when a firm acquired another company, it could
choose to recognize all the intangible assets that were acquired at that time ("purchase method")
or only those that had been previously recorded by the acquired entity at the time of a previous
acquisition ("pooling-of-interests method"). After 2001, however, with accounting rule SFAS 141,
the "pooling-of-interests" method was eliminated as an option. This leads to inconsistency in the
treatment of intangibles across and within companies. Moreover, the breakdown of INTAN into
"Other Intangibles" and "Goodwill" is only available in Compustat after 2001 (Accounting rule
SFAS 142 issued in 2001 requires greater disclosure of information about goodwill and intangible
assets).
Additional firm-level variables: We measure debt, Bit , as net total debt. Specifically, we measure
net debt as long-term debt (Compustat data item DLTT) plus short-term debt (data item DLC),
minus cash (data item CHE), setting them to zero when they are missing. The market value of
equity, Pit , is the closing price per share (data item PRCC F) times the number of common shares
  19
    An asset is identifiable when it is separable ­that is, it is capable of being separated or divided from the acquired
entity and sold, transferred, licensed, rented or exchanged (regardless of whether there is an intent to do so)­, or
when it arises from contractual or other legal rights. Examples of identifiable intangible assets include computer
software, licences, trademarks, patents, films, copyrights and import quotas.


                                                           19
outstanding (data item CSHO). For firms with different fiscal-year ends the price matches the firm's
fiscal year (and thus the timing of the accounting data).
    We measure the tax rate, t , as the statutory corporate income tax for the highest bracket from
the Commerce Clearing House, annual publications, until 2010, and from Deloitte's corporate tax
rates annual publications after 2010. Stock variables with subscript t (t + 1 for debt) are measured
and recorded at the end of year t, while flow variables with subscript t are measured over the course
of year t and recorded at the end of year t + 1.
Labor skill industry classification data: We classify an industry to be a low- or high-skill industry
based on the percentage of workers in that industry that work on occupations that require a high
level of training and preparation (high-skill workers) using the Specific Vocational Preparation
(SVP) index from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT), available from the Department
of Labor, and employee data from the BLS, Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) program.
The data is from Belo et al. (2017), available from the authors' webpages. The base industry-level
data is available at the three-digit SIC level before and including year 2001, and at the four-digit
NAICS level after 2001. An industry is classified as a high labor-skill industry if it belongs to a
3-SIC or 4-NAICS industry in which the percentage of high-skill workers in that industry (defined
in Belo et al. 2017 as variable PSKILL) is above the median of the cross-sectional distribution of the
PSKILL variable. Conversely, we classify an industry as a low labor-skill industry if the percentage
of high-skill workers in that industry is below the median of the cross-sectional distribution of the
industry-level PSKILL variable. Because the data only refers to the period from 1991 to 2013, for
the period from 1975 to 1990, we use an average of the data from 1991 to 2001 and, for the period
from 2014 to 2016, we use an average of the data from 2002 to 2013. The industry classification of
each firm is very stable over time.

4.5   Summary Statistics
Panel A in Table 1 reports key summary statistics (time-series average of the cross-sectional median,
denoted as "Average", and standard deviation, denoted "S.D.") of the observed valuation ratios
and their model-implied components according to equation (21), in the pooled sample where all
firms are included ("All Firms" sample), and for the low- and high-skill industries ("Low Skill"
and "High Skill" subsamples, respectively). All ratios are winsorized at the top and bottom (if the
variable admits negative values) 1% to mitigate the impact of outliers in the analysis.
    The average valuation ratio across all firms is 1.95. This valuation ratio is higher in high-skill
industries than in low-skill industries, 2.04 versus 1.57, respectively.

                                         [Insert Table 1 here]

    In terms of the average size of the scaled (by assets) capital and labor inputs, in the pooled
sample, the largest scaled input is labor (using lagged wages as implied by equation (21)), which
amounts to 61% of total assets. The second largest input is physical capital, with 42% of total
assets. The ratio of the knowledge capital stock to total assets is 38%. The smallest capital stock
is brand capital with 10% of total assets. The relative magnitude of the ratios varies across the
different labor-skill industries. For example, the scaled physical capital stock is higher in low-skill
than in high-skill industries, 63% versus 38% of total assets, respectively. Similarly, the scaled
brand capital stock is higher in low-skill than in high-skill industries, 14% versus 9% of total assets,
respectively. Conversely, the scaled knowledge capital stock is lower in low-skill than in high-skill
industries, 13% versus 44% of total assets, respectively.


                                                  20
    The shadow prices of the labor and capital inputs in equations (17) to (20) are determined by
the investment/hiring rates. Thus, understanding the properties of the investment/hiring rates is
useful for understanding the time-series properties of the value of the inputs. Panel A in Table
1 shows that, in the pooled sample, investment in knowledge capital has the highest average rate
(28%), while investment in labor, the gross hiring rate, has the lowest rate (16%). The investment
and hiring rates are all higher, and more volatile, in high-skill than in low-skill industries. Panel
B in Table 1 also reports the investment and hiring rate cross-correlations in the low- and high-
skill industries. The table shows that, as expected, the investment/hiring rates are all positively
correlated among each other. The correlations range between 14% and 51%. These correlations are
significantly smaller than one, thus suggesting that there is at least some independent variation in
the shadow prices, and hence the market values, of the different capital and labor inputs.


5        Estimation Results
This section reports the main empirical findings.

5.1      Firm-Value Decomposition Based on Book-Values
Before estimating the model, we can make a preliminary assessment of the relative importance of
each input for firm value based on the book-value of the inputs. We can then use these book-
value input-shares as a benchmark to interpret the market-value input-shares obtained from the
estimated model.
    If adjustment costs are zero, the shadow prices of the capital and labor inputs in equations (17)
to (20) are simply one (physical capital), zero (labor), (1 - t ) (knowledge capital), and (1 - t )
(brand capital). As a result, in this scenario, the value of each input is basically given by its book-
value (adjusting for the tax rate), and the fraction of firm value attributed to each capital input
(input-shares) can be computed from equations (12) to (15). In the case of labor, the shadow price
is zero because firms cannot sell nor buy workers in the same manner that they buy or sell capital
goods. Hence, without positive labor adjustment costs, the book value of labor is zero.
    To properly characterize the data, we summarize the properties of the firm-level input-shares
in the economy using two different aggregation procedures. In the first procedure, we compute an
aggregate-level (or within each industry-skill type) share (denoted "Aggregate"). Specifically, we
compute this aggregate measure by separately summing up the numerator and the denominator
of equations (12) to (15) across all the firms in the economy (or industry), calculate the aggregate
share as the ratio of those aggregated values, and report the time-series average of this share for
each input. This aggregate measure provides a straightforward way to interpret the data but puts
significantly more weight on the large firms in the economy. Thus, in the second procedure, we
compute in each year and for each input, the cross-sectional median input-shares, and report the
time series mean of these input-shares (denoted "Average") for each input.20
                                              [Insert Table 2 here]
    20
     If we compute directly the cross-sectional median share of each input and report the time-series mean of these
input-shares, the sum of the shares does not add to 100% because the medians are not additive. Thus, we proceed
as follows. First, in each year, we compute the median scaled value of each input (for example, for physical capital,
                                                    KP
                                                    P it+1
this corresponds to the cross sectional median of qit Ait+1
                                                            ), then we compute the implied median total firm value as
the sum of the median value of each input, and finally we compute the corresponding input-shares as the ratio of the
median scaled values of each input as a fraction of the total median firm value. We then report the time-series mean
of this measure for each input.


                                                         21
    Table 2 reports the firm's book-value decomposition using the two aggregation procedures for
the pooled sample, and separately for the low- and high-skill industries. As it turns out, for
the book-value decomposition, the aggregate and the average share measures provide a similar
characterization of the data, so we focus the discussion here on the aggregate level measure.
    As noted, without labor adjustment costs, the value of the installed labor force is zero.21 In
the pooled sample, the most important input is physical capital, which represents about 64.33%
of firms' book-value. The second most important input is knowledge capital which represents
22.78% of firms' book-value, and the least important input is brand capital which represents about
12.89% of firms' book-value. These numbers vary significantly across industries. The importance
of physical capital and brand capital for the book value of the firm is significantly higher in the
low-skill than in the high-skill industries, with 71.66% versus 61.49%, respectively, for physical
capital, and with 18.23% versus 10.89%, respectively, for brand capital. Conversely, the value of
knowledge capital is significantly lower in low-skill than in high-skill industries, with 10.11% versus
27.62%, respectively. Thus, consistent with the summary statistics of the scaled capital and labor
ratios reported in Table 1, Panel A, this decomposition is suggestive that the relative importance
of the two intangible capital inputs varies across industries: knowledge capital is more important
in high-skill than in low-skill industries, while brand capital is more important in low-skill than in
high-skill industries.
    Turning to the analysis of the quality of the model, the bottom panel in Table 2 provides three
measures of model fit. Specifically, the panel reports: i) the cross-sectional R2 (denoted XS - R2 ) of
the best linear fit of the average portfolio-level valuation ratio plotted against the average portfolio-
level predicted valuation ratio; ii) the time-series R2 (denoted T S - R2 ) of the pooled portfolio-level
data (basically, this measure is the square of the correlation between the predicted and the realized
portfolio-level valuation ratios, pooling the data for all portfolios as one large time series); and iii)
the average mean absolute error (m.a.e.), computed as the time series mean of the absolute errors
of the error term of each portfolio (time series average of |V Rjt - V R     ^ jt | ), as a fraction of the
average absolute value of the valuation ratio of the portfolio (denoted m.a.e./VR).
    According to the three metrics considered here (and, in particular, given the negative cross-
sectional and time-series R2 's), the variation in the book value of the inputs is unable to capture
the cross-sectional and time-series variation of the valuation ratios of the portfolios. This result
shows that the time variation in the shadow inputs (and hence in the market value of the inputs
beyond their book values) is likely to be an important ingredient for the ability of the model to
capture the large cross-sectional and time-series variation in the valuation ratios observed in the
data.

5.2    Parameter Estimates and Model Fit
Table 3, column (1), reports the point estimates of the adjustment costs parameters for the pooled
sample. These estimates are P = 1.50 for physical capital, L = 11.26 for labor, K = 12.47
for knowledge capital, and B = 3.24 for brand capital. The adjustment costs coefficients are
statistically significant for labor and knowledge capital, which implies that we cannot reject the
hypothesis that these inputs are subject to positive adjustment costs. The positive point estimates
of the adjustment costs parameters are consistent with the model which assumes that the input
adjustment costs function is increasing in the investment/hiring rates.
  21
   We note, however, that most of the R&D expenses used to construct the knowledge capital stock are labor
compensation. Specifically, on average, 45% of R&D expenses correspond to salaries of personnel who are engaged in
R&D projects. This suggests that the value of the knowledge capital stock also partially captures the value of labor.


                                                         22
                                         [Insert Table 3 here]

    Turning to the analysis of the model fit, Table 3 shows that the model performs quite well
when estimated in the pooled sample, both in the cross-sectional and in the time-series dimensions.
The cross sectional R2 is high, 94%, even tough the model estimation does not explicitly targets
this moment. The time-series R2 is 61%. These results stand in sharp contrast with the poor fit
of the version of the model without adjustment costs and in which case firm value is only driven
by variation in the book-value of the inputs. In terms of average valuation ratio errors, the model
scaled mean absolute error (m.a.e./VR) is quite low, about 22%. Thus, the model is able to explain
about 78% of the portfolio-level observed valuation ratios (the remaining 22% reflect, for example,
measurement and misspecification errors).
    Turning to the analysis of the point estimates of the model for the low- and high-skill industries,
Table 3, columns (2) and (3) show that all the adjustment cost parameters are positive and, except
for brand capital in the high-skill industries, we can reject the hypothesis that these parameters are
zero. The estimate of the adjustment cost parameter for labor increases with the average labor-skill
level of the industry, with a value of L = 7.66 in the low-skill industries compared to L = 10.64
in the high-skill industries. Going in the opposite direction, the adjustment costs parameters for
physical capital, knowledge capital, and brand capital decrease with the average labor-skill level of
the industry.
    The model is particularly good at capturing the time-series variation in the valuation ratios in
the high-skill industries, with a time-series R2 of 60%, whereas the time-series fit in the low-skill
industries is more modest, where the R2 is 38%. The cross-sectional fit is quite good in both
industries, with a cross-sectional R2 above 94%. Figure 1 provides a visual description of the good
fit of the model in the cross section. This figure shows the scatter plot across portfolios of the
time-series average of the cross-sectional median valuation ratio observed in the data against the
value predicted by the model. The model mean absolute error in the high-skill industries is low,
22% of the average observed valuation ratio in those industries, and in the low-skill industries it is
about 38% of the average observed valuation ratio.

                                         [Insert Figure 1 here]

    The better (time series) fit of the model in high-skill industries is consistent with the findings
in Peters and Taylor (2017) and Andrei, Mann, and Moyen (2018) who show that, in a one-
capital-input model, the observed valuation ratios (market to book ratios) explain physical capital
investment better in high-tech sectors than in low-tech sectors. Part of the reason for this pattern
can be explained by the significantly higher volatility of the valuation ratios in the high-skill
industries (which implies more variation to explain), as reported in Table 1, especially given that
this higher volatility does not seem to be driven by random noise but rather by a higher variance
in the value of the capital (and labor) inputs (Panel A in Table 1 shows that the characteristics of
the firms in the high-skill industries are more volatile).

5.3   Firm Value Decomposition Based on Market-Values
The parameter estimates allow us to compute the model-implied shadow prices of each input, and
hence evaluate the contribution of each input for firm value (input-shares) based on each input's
market value. The approach used here is analogous to the analysis of the book-value decomposition
reported in Subsection 5.1. Specifically, using the estimates reported in Table 3 columns (1) to (3),
                                                                  KP                KK             KB
                                                           P it+1 , q L Lit+1 , q K it+1 , and q B it+1 ,
we compute, for each firm and in each year, the values of qit Ait+1  it Ait+1    it Ait+1       it Ait+1


                                                   23
that is, the model-implied scaled value of each capital/labor input. We then substitute these values
in equations (12) to (15) to compute, in each year, the share of the firm's value attributed to
each capital/labor input, both for the pooled sample, and for the low- and high-skill industries
separately.22
    In Table 4 we summarize the properties of the input-shares in the economy using the two
(aggregate and average) measures discussed in Subsection 2. In addition, to investigate the degree
of input-share heterogeneity in the firm-level data, Figure 2 shows the box plot (across all years)
of the firm-value input-shares for the low- and high-skill industries.

                                             [Insert Table 4 here]

                                             [Insert Figure 2 here]

    Table 4, column (1) shows that the four inputs are important determinants of firms' market
values. When the model is estimated across all firms, and using the aggregate input-share measure,
the share of physical capital is 30.36%, the share of installed labor is 22.53%, the share of knowledge
capital is 38.28%, and the share of brand capital is the remaining 8.83%. When we use the average
input-share measure, the inferences are similar, but the importance of physical and brand capital is
smaller, while the importance of labor and, especially, of knowledge capital, is higher. Specifically,
here, the share of physical capital is 21.85%, the share of installed labor is 26.61%, the share of
knowledge capital is 46.84%, and the share of brand capital is the remaining 4.70%. This analysis
reveals that physical capital accounts for less than 31% of the firm's total market value on average.
Overall, this analysis shows clearly that, in the modern economy, the non-physical capital inputs
(intangible capital and labor) are important determinants of firms' market values.
    Turning to the analysis across labor-skill industries, the results reported in Table 4 columns (2)
and (3) show that the relative importance of the capital/labor inputs exhibits substantial variation
across these industries. The average fraction of firm value attributed to labor and, especially,
to knowledge capital, increases with the average labor-skill level of the industry. In the low-skill
industries, the share of labor is on average 14.33% using the aggregate measure (18.14% using
the average measure), whereas in the high-skill industries this share is 20.85% using the aggregate
measure (24.32% using the average measure). Similarly, in the low-skill industries, the share of
knowledge capital is on average 20.34% using the aggregate measure (22.19% using the average
measure), whereas in the high-skill industries this share is 43.24% using the aggregate measure
(51.36% using the average measure).
    Going in the opposite direction, the fraction of firm value attributed to physical capital and to
brand capital decreases with the average labor-skill level of the industry. In the low-skill industries,
the share of physical capital is on average 40.16% using the aggregate measure (42.64% using
the average measure), whereas in the high-skill industries this share drops to 29.91% using the
aggregate measure (20.91% using the average measure). Similarly, in the low-skill industries, the
share of brand capital is on average 25.17% using the aggregate measure (17.03% using the average
measure), whereas in the high-skill industries this share drops to 6.02% using the aggregate measure
(3.41% using the average measure).
    Interestingly, the pattern of the input-shares across industries reveals that, even tough intangible
capital is an important component of the firm's market value across all industries, the type
  22
     Note that, with this procedure, the input-shares add up to 100% by construction. This does not mean that the
model explains the entire variation of the firm's value without any error. As discussed in Subsection 5.2, based on
the m.a.e./VR ratio, the model captures between 69% (low skill) and 78% (high skill) of the firm's valuation ratio.
Thus, our analysis here provides a decomposition of the component of firm value that is explained by the model.


                                                        24
of intangible capital (knowledge or brand capital) that matters the most for firm value varies
substantially across industries. In low-skill industries, the two intangible capital inputs have
approximately the same importance (with average input-shares between 17% and 25%) for a
combined share of around 40%-45%. But, in high skill industries, knowledge capital is significantly
more important for firm value than brand capital. Here, the combined share of the two intangible
capital inputs is between 50% and 55%, and knowledge capital accounts for about 90% of this
combined share. This result highlights the importance of considering heterogeneous measures of
intangible capital in empirical work.
    Turning to the analysis of the firm-level heterogeneity in the firm-level input-shares, Figure 2
reveals that there is substantial heterogeneity in input-shares both in low- and high-skill industries.
For example, for physical capital, the 25th and 75th percentile in low-skill industries are around
22% and 50%, respectively, and in high-skill industries they are around 10% and 30%, respectively.
For labor, the 25th and 75th percentile in low-skill industries are around 5% and 25%, respectively,
and in high-skill industries they are around 10% and 40%, respectively. For knowledge capital,
the 25th and 75th percentile in low-skill industries are around 10% and 30%, respectively, and in
high-skill industries they are around 25% and 70%, respectively. Finally, for brand capital, the
25th and 75th percentile in low-skill industries are around 5% and 30%, respectively, but in high
skill industries, the mass of the share is concentrated at very low levels, all below 10%. Thus, the
relatively low share of brand capital for firm value in high-skill industries is a pervasive feature
across all firms in these industries.

5.4   Firm Value Decomposition Over Time
The previous analyses focus on the time-series average of the input-shares in the full sample from
1975 to 2016. Here, we perform the same analysis across different sub-periods to investigate if the
relative importance of the different inputs has changed over time (we do not re-estimate the model
parameter values because these are assumed to be constant over time).

                                        [Insert Table 5 here]

                                        [Insert Figure 3 here]

    Table 5 reports the time series averages of the share of each input across decades: 1970s (1975-
1979), 1980s (1980-1989), 1990s (1990-1999), 2000s (2000-2009), and 2010s (2010-2016). To save
space, we report only the input-shares computed using the aggregate input-share measure. The
results using the average input-share measure are similar, consistent with the analysis in Subsection
5.3. Figure 3 provides a visual description of the trends in the input-shares in the data, both for
the low- and the high-skill industries.
    The table and the figure allow us to identify interesting patterns. The importance of physical
capital for firm value is significantly lower in recent years when compared to the earlier part of the
sample, while the importance of intangible capital, broadly defined, is significantly higher. But the
type of intangible capital that has gained more importance in recent years varies across industries.
In low-skill industries, there is a significant increase in the importance of brand capital, but a
relatively small increase in the importance of knowledge capital. In high-skill industries, there
is a significant increase in the importance of knowledge capital, but effectively no change in the
importance of brand capital. The importance of labor for firm value does not exhibit an obvious
trend as its share has remained relatively constant over the sample period.



                                                  25
    Taken together, the analysis in this section further highlights the importance of the non-physical
capital inputs for firm value, especially in the most recent decades, and in high-skill industries, where
the non-physical capital inputs account for, on average, more than 78% of firm value. In addition,
the change in the relative importance of each input for firm value highlights the importance of
targeting the time series of the valuation ratios in the estimation, as opposed to only targeting the
cross-sectional time-series means of the valuation ratios (as in LWZ/BXZ).

5.5   Implied Adjustment Costs
We can also use the parameter estimates to characterize the properties of the adjustment cost
function of each input. This allows us to assess whether the model fits the data with economically
reasonable parameter values, and also to better understand the relatively high importance of
labor and intangible capital inputs for firm value (recall that the positive contribution of labor
for firm value depends crucially on to existence of positive labor adjustment costs). In addition,
the characterization of the adjustment cost function of each input can be useful to guide future
research with models featuring multiple capital inputs.
    To properly characterize the properties of the adjustment costs of each input we focus on several
measures. The first set of measures are based on the realized adjustment costs of each input (that is,
ex-post adjustment cost measures which describe the equilibrium outcome). Specifically, using the
functional form specification in equation (16) and the parameter estimates, the realized adjustment
costs of each input (denoted as CP , CL, CK , and CB ) can be computed as a fraction of firm's
total annual sales (denoted as Y ) as follows:
                                                         P
                                                        Iit    2
                                                  P                 P
                                     CPit         2       P
                                                        Kit
                                                                   Kit
                                             =                                                      (27)
                                      Yit                Yit
                                                               2
                                                  L     Hit
                                     CLit         2     Nit        Wit Lit
                                             =                                                      (28)
                                      Yit                 Yit
                                                         K
                                                        Iit    2
                                                  K                 K
                                     CKit         2       K
                                                        Uit
                                                                   Kit
                                             =                                                      (29)
                                      Yit                Yit
                                                         B
                                                        Iit    2
                                                  B                 B
                                     CBit         2       B
                                                        Uit
                                                                   Kit
                                             =                           .                          (30)
                                      Yit                Yit
    The bottom panel in Table 4, columns (1) to (3), reports the average realized adjustment costs
of each input, computed as the time-series average of cross-sectional medians of the ratios (27)­(30).
To evaluate the degree of firm-level heterogeneity in the realized adjustment costs of each input in
the data, Figure 4 shows the box plot of the ratios in the low- and high-skill industries.
    Reporting the time-series average of the realized adjustment costs provides a simple way of
describing the economic importance of the adjustment costs of each input but, given the convexity
of the adjustment costs function, the average of the realized values overstates the actual magnitude
of the adjustment costs perceived by firms when making their investment and hiring decisions.
Thus, we complement the previous measures with an analysis of the estimated adjustment costs
function (the relevant object for firms when making their investment decisions, that is, an ex-ante
adjustment costs measure). Specifically, in Panel A of Figure 5, we plot the estimated adjustment
cost function of each input (considering an investment/hiring rate from -20% to +20%), and holding
fixed the median input-to-sales ratio in the industry (to properly scale the function). To further help

                                                   26
in the economic interpretation of the magnitudes of these functions, Panel B of Figure 5 reports the
estimated adjustment costs of each input using equations (27) to (30) evaluated at their (average)
median investment/hiring rates (using the values reported in the descriptive statistics in Table 1).
                                    [Insert Figures 4 and 5 here]
     In the pooled sample, the magnitude of the realized knowledge capital and labor adjustment
costs is large, whereas the magnitude of the physical and brand capital adjustment costs is very
small. The bottom panel in Table 4, column (1), shows that, on average, the fraction of (annual)
sales that is lost due to labor adjustment costs is 6.46% while the corresponding fraction for
knowledge capital is 10.05%. The fraction of sales that is lost due to physical capital adjustment
costs is only 0.90%, and for brand capital this fraction is 0.49%. Although there is no consensus in
the literature on the magnitude of labor and capital adjustment costs, the estimated values of the
adjustment costs for these two inputs are within the empirical estimates surveyed in Hamermesh
and Pfann (1996), and discussed in Merz and Yashiv (2007). For brand capital, the estimated
value of adjustment costs is lower than those estimated in Vitorino (2014) (on average, about 8%
of firm's annual sales). The difference is that we are estimating firm-level parameters whereas
Vitorino (2014) estimates portfolio-level parameters. In addition, we consider a model with four
inputs whereas Vitorino (2014) only considers physical capital and brand capital.
     Turning to the analysis of the variation in the size of the adjustment costs across industries,
the bottom panel in Table 4, columns (2) to (3), shows that the estimated labor and knowledge
capital adjustment costs increase significantly with the average labor-skill level of the industry. The
fraction of (annual) sales lost due to labor adjustment costs is on average 2.61% in the low-skill
industries, and 6.77% in the high-skill industries. This result is consistent with prior evidence
(discussed in the related literature section) that high-skill workers are more costly to replace than
low-skill workers, and which motivated our industry classification based on the level of labor skill.
Similarly, the fraction of (annual) sales lost due to knowledge capital adjustment costs is on average
2.35% in the low-skill industries, and 13.28% in the high-skill industries.
     The positive relationship between the size of the adjustment costs and the average labor-skill
of the industry is reversed for brand capital inputs, but the size of the adjustment costs of the
two inputs is quite small in both industries (between 0.30% and 1.69% of annual sales), consistent
with the analysis across all firms reported in column (1). The box plot of the realized adjustment
costs in each industry shown in Figure 4 reveals that there is substantial variation in the realized
input adjustment costs across firms. As expected, given the strong link between input-shares and
adjustment costs, the pattern in the box-plots of the realized firm-level realized adjustment costs
across industries and inputs seems to mimic the pattern and the large variation in firm-level shares
of each input reported in Figure 2.
     Figure 5 plots the estimated adjustment cost functions of each input for the low- and high-skill
industries. These plots confirm that labor and knowledge capital are (ex-ante) relatively more costly
to adjust in high-skill industries than in low-skill industries, while the opposite pattern is observed
for physical capital and brand capital, consistent with the analysis of the realized adjustment costs.
Again, the magnitude of the adjustment costs appears to be reasonable across the plausible range
of investment/hiring rates considered here. When the function is evaluated at the (average) median
investment/hiring rate of each input, the fraction of annual sales lost due to adjustment costs ranges
from 1.06% (physical capital) to 2.16% (labor) in low-skill industries. In high-skill industries, the
costs of adjustment are also very low for physical capital and brand capital (1.40% and 0.35% of
annual sales, respectively, when evaluated at the (average) median) but are higher for labor and,
especially, knowledge capital (5.54% and 11.61% of annual sales, respectively, when evaluated at

                                                  27
the (average) median). Thus, while the overall cost of adjusting intangible capital in low-skill
industries is small, this cost is high in high-skill industries. Further, the high cost of adjusting
intangible capital in high-skill industries is mostly driven by the large cost of adjusting knowledge
capital as opposed to by the cost of adjusting brand capital.
    Taken together, the parameter estimates reveal that knowledge capital and labor are the two
inputs that are most costly to adjust. This finding helps understand the high share of these inputs
in the model-implied firm-value decomposition, especially in high-skill industries.

5.6   Model Comparison
To help understand the fit of the model and the relative importance of the various capital inputs
for firm valuation, Table 3, columns (4) to (13), reports the parameter estimates and model fit
across several restricted versions of the model where we use various subsets of the four inputs.
Table 4, columns (4) to (13), reports the corresponding model-implied firm value decomposition
and adjustment cost estimates. To save space, for each of the alternative specifications, we only
report the results for the low- and high-skill industries (that is, we do not discuss here the results
for the pooled sample). Also, we focus most of the discussion on the comparison of the model fit
(cross-sectional and time-series R2 ) across specifications. To provide a meaningful comparison of
the model fit in terms of R2 , we use the same set of firms in the estimation of all models (that
is, the sample is the same as the sample used for the estimation of the baseline model), and the
observed valuation ratio of each firm (the variable we want to explain) is the same across models,
that is, it is scaled by the same sum of the capital inputs (At ) (so that the variation in the variable
we want to explain stays the same across models).
     The standard one-physical-capital input model is a natural benchmark for our model. Table 3,
columns (4) and (5), show that, consistent with BXZ, this model does a reasonable job explaining
the cross-sectional variation in the average valuation ratio across portfolios with a cross-sectional
R2 of 50% in low-skill industries, and of 75% in high-skill industries (versus 95% and 94% in the
baseline model). But the one-physical-capital input model fails to explain the time-series variation
in the valuation ratios. The time-series R2 of the one-physical-capital input model is effectively 0%
in low-skill industries, versus 38% in the baseline model, and 21% in high-skill industries, versus 60%
in the baseline model. Thus, we conclude that the benefit of incorporating additional quasi-fixed
inputs in the neoclassical investment model comes primarily from improving the model's ability
to capture the time-series variation in the valuation ratios. In addition, this result highlights the
importance of examining the time series fit of the model to assess its performance, not just its cross
sectional fit (as in LWZ/BXZ).
     In addition, the comparison of the estimated realized adjustment costs across model
specifications reveals that, when some inputs are ignored, the model estimates provide an improper
characterization of the size of an input adjustment costs. As reported in the bottom panels in
Table 3, the one-physical-capital input model seems to significantly overestimate the magnitude of
physical capital adjustment costs. In the one-physical-capital input model the fraction of annual
sales lost due to physical capital adjustment costs is on average between 6.6% and 20.2% of firms'
annual sales across industries, versus only 1.2% and 1.5% of firms' annual sales in the baseline
model. This result suggests that the one-physical-capital input model attributes to physical capital
all the costs of adjusting the other inputs.
     Comparing across all model specifications, Table 3 shows that the contribution of each input for
the improvement of the model fit varies across industries. For tractability, we focus our discussion
here on the time-series R2 (as opposed to the cross-sectional R2 ), because this metric is the most


                                                  28
informative for this analysis due to its large variation across model specifications.
     Adding labor and, especially, knowledge capital, to the one-physical-capital input model has a
first order and similar impact on the quality of the model fit in high-skill industries, whereas adding
brand capital has a significantly impact on the quality of the model fit in low-skill industries only.
When quasi-fixed labor is added to the one-physical-capital input model, the time-series R2 in low-
skill industries increases from 0% to 14% (compare columns 4 and 6) while it increases from 21% to
39% (compare columns 5 and 7) in high-skill industries. The impact of knowledge capital is even
stronger. The time-series R2 in low-skill industries increases from 0% to 21% (compare columns 4
and 8), and increases from 21% to 50% (compare columns 5 and 9) in high-skill industries, when
knowledge capital is added to the one-physical-capital input model. Finally, when brand capital is
added to the one-physical-capital input model, the time-series R2 in low-skill industries increases
significantly from 0% to 20% (compare columns 4 and 10), while in high-skill industries it increases
very little from 21% to 25% (compare columns 5 and 11).

5.7   Implications for Understanding Value and Growth
A large literature in asset pricing studies the value premium - the difference in average returns
between stocks with high valuation ratios (i.e., growth stocks) and stocks with low valuation ratios
(i.e., value stocks). Many papers offer potential explanations for the value premium based on the
impact of frictions in capital and labor inputs. However, each existing paper focuses mainly on one
or, at best, two frictions. For instance, Kogan 2001, Zhang (2005), and Gala 2014 focus on the
impact of frictions in physical capital such as costly reversibility to account for the observed value
premium. Belo, Lin, and Bazdresch (2014) and Belo et al. (2017) mainly focus on the asset pricing
implications of physical capital and labor market frictions. Following Berk, Green, and Naik (1999),
Ai and Kiku (2013) model value firms as being assets-in-place intensive, and growth firms as more
dependent on growth options, and Ai et al. 2018 generally model investment options as intangible
capital. Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2012) also focus on the risk characteristics of intangible capital
to account for the value spread in returns, and Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013) emphasize the
relevance of organizational capital for asset pricing. This paper complements the existing papers
in the literature by providing a comprehensive framework to evaluate quantitatively the relative
importance of all of these frictions taken together.
     To shed new light on which type of inputs (and corresponding input frictions) contribute the
most to the market value of growth versus value firms, and thus, to the value premium, we proceed
as follows. In each year, we split the firms into value, neutral, and growth firms based on the terciles
of the cross-sectional lagged valuation ratio distribution (we compute the terciles separately for low-
and high-skill industries). We then use the estimated adjustment costs parameters reported in Table
3, columns (1) to (3), to calculate the time-series average input-shares and adjustment costs for
value, neutral, and growth firms.

                                         [Insert Table 6 here]

    Table 6 top panel reports the average input-shares across value, neutral, and growth firms.
Using the pooled sample estimates, columns (1) to (3) show that, while labor is more important for
growth firms than for value firms (share of 29.02 versus 18.98%, respectively), physical capital is
more important for value firms than for growth firms (share of 34.87% versus 24.31%, respectively).
Regarding the intangible capital, the share of knowledge capital is uniformly higher than the share
of brand capital across both value and growth firms. But, in relative terms, growth firms derive
relatively more value from knowledge capital that growth firms (40.36% versus 36.44%, respectively)


                                                  29
while value firms derive relatively more value from brand capital than from knowledge capital (9.71%
versus 6.31%). The analysis using the industry-level parameter estimates reported in columns (4)
to (6) (low-skill), and (7) to (9) (high-skill), produces similar patterns when the interpretation is
adjusted for the fact that brand capital is overall relatively more important in low-skill industries
and knowledge-capital is relatively more important in high-skill industries. The bottom panels
in Table 6 display the realized adjustment costs for each input as shares of annual sales. The
adjustment costs reflect the patterns we see for input-shares, because, all else equal, higher input
adjustment costs imply higher input value.
    Taken together, our results are consistent with the idea that value firms derive more value from
current assets in the form of physical capital and established brand capital, while growth firms
derive more value from growth opportunities in the form of labor and knowledge capital. Frictions
in labor, knowledge capital, and brand capital, in addition to frictions in physical capital, seem to
be important for understanding the value premium in financial markets.


6     Robustness
To check the robustness of our main findings and, in particular, the importance of non-physical
capital inputs for firm value, we re-estimate the model for different data samples and across several
perturbations of the empirical procedures. First, we estimate the model assuming a more general
adjustment costs function that allows adjustment costs to be asymmetric. Second, we estimate
the model using a larger number of portfolios than in the baseline estimation. Third, we consider
an alternative industry classification and a different sorting variable for the portfolios. Fourth,
we estimate the model directly using firm-level data (as opposed to performing the estimation
using portfolios). Fifth, we re-estimate a restricted version of the model without knowledge capital
using the sub-sample of firms that were excluded from the main sample due to missing (or always
zero) R&D expenses data. Finally, we summarize the results from additional robustness checks
(which includes tests using an alternative measure of intangible capital such as organization capital,
following Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou 2013) reported in the online appendix.

6.1   Asymmetric Adjustment Costs
In the baseline model, we specify the adjustment costs function to symmetric for parsimonious
reasons and to avoid parameter proliferation. This assumption might be at odds with some
results in the large investment and labor demand literature, however. For example, Abel and
Eberly (1994) and Abel and Eberly (1996) show that allowing for asymmetry in physical capital
adjustment costs (e.g., due to investment irreversibility) improves the ability of an otherwise
standard neoclassical investment model to explain investment dynamics. Thus, here we consider
a more flexible adjustment costs function where we allow the costs of adjusting each input to be
asymmetric:
                P                IP           IP              L
          Cit = vP2    exp -vP Kit
                                 P
                                                     P
                                              P - 1 Kit +
                                       + vP Kit                2
                                                              vL
                                                                     exp -vL H
                                                                             Lit + vL Lit - 1 Wit Lit
                                                                               it     Hit

                 K
                                  it
                                   K
                                 Iit
                                              it
                                               K
                                              Iit              B               IB         IB
                                                                                                          (31)
                                                          K                                        B
               + v2    exp -vP     K
                                 Kit
                                       + vP     K
                                              Kit
                                                    -1   Kit + v 2    exp -vB Kit
                                                                                B           B - 1 Kit .
                                                                                     + vB Kit
                   K                                             B              it         it


    This function is smooth and homogeneous of degree one, hence it satisfies the requirements for
the firm value decomposition result in Subsection 3.3. To help its interpretation, Figure 6 plots this
function for the one-capital input case. The parameter i is similar to the single parameter in the
baseline specification and controls the size of the adjustment costs of input i. The novel parameter
here is vi which controls the degree of asymmetry of the function. When vi > 0 it is more costly to

                                                         30
disinvest (partial irreversibility) than it is to invest. When vi < 0 it is more costly to invest than
it is to desinvest. When vi  0, this function converges to our standard quadratic adjustment cost
specification.23 Thus, by estimating the parameter vi , we allow the data to uncover the importance
of asymmetry in adjustment costs for our results. Note that, due to the way in which we calculate
the investment in the intangible capital inputs, the gross investment rates of these inputs are never
negative. Thus, even though the asymmetry parameters for the intangible capital inputs can be
estimated, they should be interpreted with caution because the identification of the functional form
of the adjustment costs of these inputs is only based on the positive side of investment. Hence,
in what follows, we focus most of our discussion on the asymmetry parameters v for the physical
capital and labor inputs.

                                              [Insert Figure 6 here]

                                              [Insert Table 7 here]

    Table 7 reports the parameter estimates and fit of the model with asymmetric adjustment
costs.24 The evidence of asymmetry for physical capital is not strong in our sample. In low-skill
industries, the asymmetry parameter is positive, vK = 0.21, consistent with some irreversibility of
investment, but in high-skill industries the parameter is negative, vK = -0.25. In both industries,
however, we cannot reject the hypothesis that this asymmetry parameter is zero, that is, that the
capital adjustment cost function is symmetric, as in the baseline specification. For labor, there is
evidence of some degree of irreversibility in high-skill industries with vL = 2.16 (and this value is
more than 4.3 standard errors from zero), but not in low-labor-skill industries with vL = 1.19 (but
we cannot reject the hypothesis that this parameter is zero). Thus, in high-skill industries, it is
more costly to decrease the labor force (i.e., fire workers) than it is to increase it.
    Turning to the analysis of the impact on model fit, Table 7 shows that, by using the asymmetric
adjustment costs function specification, the time-series R2 of the model increases by 2 percentage
points relative to the baseline quadratic adjustment cost specification, from 38% to 40%. The
improvement in high-skill industries is slightly higher. In high-skill industries, using the asymmetric
adjustment costs function specification, the time-series R2 of the model increases by 6 percentage
points relative to the baseline quadratic adjustment cost specification, from 60% to 66%. This
improved fit comes mostly from the asymmetry in the labor adjustment costs discussed above.
    Taken together, allowing for asymmetry in the adjustment costs function seems to have only a
small impact on the quality of the model fit in our sample, especially in low-skill industries.25

6.2       Number of Portfolios
In the baseline estimation, we use 40 portfolios (10 portfolios for each of the 4 portfolio sorts) as
test assets. Here, we consider 80 portfolios (20 portfolios for each portfolio sort) as test assets, and
investigate the impact on the results.
  23                                                             I 2
       Using l'Hopital's rule, lim v2 exp -v K
                                             I    I
                                               + vK - 1 K= 2     K
                                                                       K.
                           v 0
  24
     Note that the estimation using this adjustment cost specification can no longer be performed using linear OLS.
Here, minimizing the objective function in equation (23) requires non linear least squares (NLLS) estimation. We
compute bootstrapped standard errors that are robust to cross-sectional and time-series correlation using 20% of the
sample with replacement. As shown by Cameron and Miller (2010) bootstrapping controls for the fact that errors
can be correlated across portfolios and within portfolios over time.
  25
     In the online appendix we report the full set of estimation results for the asymmetric adjustment costs
specification, including the model-implied input-shares and adjustment costs. Overall, the results are very similar to
those obtained for the baseline adjustment costs specification.


                                                         31
                                              [Insert Table 9 here]

    Table 9, columns (1) to (3), reports the estimation results using this larger number of portfolios
as test assets. The point estimates appear to be very similar in magnitude to the point estimates in
the baseline estimation. As a result, the model fit and model-implied firm-value decomposition are
all quite similar to those obtained in the baseline estimation of the model. This analysis suggests
that the point estimates in the baseline estimation are robust to a reasonable variation in the
number of portfolios used in the estimation.

6.3    Alternative Portfolio Sorts and Industry Classification
In the baseline analysis we estimate the model using portfolios sorted on proxies of the firm's lagged
value of each input. In addition, we split the samples into low- and high-skill industries according
to the average share of high-skilled workers in each industry. Naturally, the model can be estimated
using other portfolio sorts, and also using other industry classifications.
    To check the robustness of our main findings to both the portfolio sorting variable and the
industry classification, here we report the estimation results using two alternative procedures.
In the first procedure, we estimate the model parameters using 15-industry portfolios following
the 17-industry Fama and French industry classification (we exclude two industries due to data
availability), instead of sorting the portfolios on proxies for the firm's lagged value of each input.26
The results from this analysis allow us to check the robustness of the findings to the portfolio
sorting variable(s). Implicit in this analysis is the assumption that the adjustment cost technology
is similar across these industries (we estimate only one set of parameters for all firms). Thus, we
also consider a second alternative procedure in which we estimate the model parameters using the
same sorting variables of the baseline estimation but perform the estimation separately within each
Fama and French industry. The results from this analysis allow us to check the robustness of the
findings to the industry classification. To save space, given the large set of results obtained using
this second procedure, we discuss here a brief summary of the main results and report the complete
analysis using this procedure in the online appendix. Further, we report only the input-shares
computed using the aggregate input-share measure.
    Table 9, column (4) reports the estimation results using the 15-industry portfolios. The point
estimates are similar to those obtained in the baseline estimation. The only noticeable differences
are the slope coefficient on brand capital that is larger than in the baseline case (B = 11.09 here
versus B = 3.24 in the baseline estimation), and the slope coefficient on labor that is smaller than
in the baseline case (L = 6.98 here versus L = 11.26 in the baseline estimation). As a result, the
estimated share of brand capital for firm value is slightly higher here than in the baseline model
(µB = 16.87 here versus µB = 8.83 in the baseline estimation), while the estimated share of labor
capital for firm value is slightly lower here than in the baseline model (µL = 12.39 here versus
µL = 8.83 in the baseline estimation). More important, the results confirm the importance of the
non-physical capital inputs for firm value. Similar to the baseline estimation, the non-physical
capital inputs account for roughly 70% of the firm's market value.
  26
    We use the 17-industry classification posted on Kenneth French's website. We exclude the industries 14­Utilities
and 16­Financial firms due to data availability and sample restrictions. We are left with the following fifteen
industries: 1­Food, 2­Mines (Mining and Minerals), 3­Oil (Oil and Petroleum Products), 4­Clths (Textiles, Apparel
& Footware), 5­Durbl (Consumer Durables), 6­Chems (Chemicals), 7­Cnsum (Drugs, Soap, Perfumes, Tobacco), 8­
Cnstr (Construction and Construction Materials), 9­Steel (Steel Works, etc.), 10­FabPr (Fabricated Products), 11­
Machn (Machinery and Business Equipment), 12­Cars (Automobiles), 13­Trans (Transportation), 15­Rtail (Retail
Stores), 17­Other.



                                                        32
    The estimation of the model for the different Fama and French industries provides further
support for the importance of the non-physical capital inputs for firm value. In the online appendix,
we show that although the estimates of the adjustment costs parameters vary across industries, the
importance of the non-physical capital inputs is pervasive. The average share of the non-physical
inputs ranges from a minimum of 19% in the industry classified as "other", to a maximum of 72%
in the high-tech industry. In addition, the analysis of the input-shares in each industry and over
time, confirms that the decline in the share of physical capital and the corresponding increase in
the share of knowledge capital, also observed in the baseline estimation, is also pervasive across the
Fama and French industries. Thus, the decline in the physical-capital share and the increase in the
knowledge capital share is not driven by changes in the industry composition in the U.S. economy,
but rather seems to be a trend in the overall economy.

6.4   Firm-level Estimation
We perform the baseline estimation using portfolio-level moments. Alternatively, we can estimate
equation (24) by ordinary least squares directly on the firm-level data. The advantage of this latter
approach is that it does not require us to take a stand regarding a particular sorting variable to
create the portfolios. The disadvantage is that, as discussed in Subsection 4.2, this approach is
more sensitive to measurement error and the firm-level data is very noisy. Hence, the estimates are
likely to be subject to an attenuation bias.
    Table 9, columns (5) to (7), reports the estimation results using firm-level data. As expected, the
parameter estimates differ somewhat from the baseline estimation. The main noticeable differences
are the lower estimates of the labor adjustment cost parameter both in the pooled sample and
across the different labor-skill industries, and the higher estimates of the brand capital adjustment
cost parameter. This suggests that the measurement error in the labor input may be more severe
than the measurement error in the other inputs. As a result, the estimated share of labor for firm
value is lower here than in the baseline model, and the estimated share of brand capital for firm
value is higher here than in the baseline model.
    More important, the estimation results using directly the firm-level data confirm the importance
of non-physical capital for firm value. Similar to the baseline estimation, the non-physical capital
inputs account for a substantial fraction of firm value, approximately 60% both in the pooled sample
and for the different labor-skill industries.

6.5   Alternative Samples
As discussed in Section 4.4, in the main sample, we drop firms that never report (or always report
zero) R&D expenses. Ignoring these firms may not be efficient for the purposes of our analysis,
however, because these firms may be informative about the importance of the non-physical capital
inputs (labor and brand capital) for firm value. Thus, here we estimate a (restricted) version of
the model with physical capital, labor, and brand capital only, using the sample of firms that
were excluded from the main sample due to missing (or always zero) R&D expenses data. This
alternative sample includes 6, 541 firms, and 60, 316 firm-year observations.
    Table 9, columns (8) to (10), reports the estimation results obtained using this alternative
sample of non-R&D firms. The model fit is even better than the baseline sample/model, especially
in the low-skill industries. The times-series R2 ranges from 55% (low-skill industries) to 66% (high-
skill industries), whereas in the baseline sample it ranges from 38% (low-skill industries) to 60%
(high-skill industries), respectively.


                                                  33
    Across industries, the share of labor ranges from 34.2% (low-skill industries) to 14.52% (high-
skill industries), whereas the share of brand capital ranges from 8.30% (low-skill industries) to
22.6% (high-skill industries). Thus, the contribution of labor for firm value is decreasing with labor
skill, in contrast with the increasing pattern in the baseline estimation using the main sample. This
result suggests that the technology of the R&D versus non-R&D firms may be quite different in
terms of the type of workers used. The share of physical capital for non-R&D firms is significantly
higher than in the baseline model and ranges from 57.50% (low-skill industries) to 62.87% (high-skill
industries). This higher share relative to the baseline sample is perhaps not surprising given that,
by definition, the non-R&D firms have zero knowledge capital, which (across most specifications)
is the non-physical capital input that contributes the most for firm value in the baseline sample.
In addition, the firms that do not perform R&D are likely to be firms from the "old economy", and
naturally rely less on innovation and other intangibles, and more on installed physical capital.
    Taken together, the average contribution of the non-physical capital inputs for firm value in this
alternative sample is still more than 38% of firms' market value across industries. Although this
share is smaller than in the baseline model, it is still substantial, thus providing additional support
for the importance of the non-physical capital inputs for firm value.

6.6   Additional Robustness Checks
In the online appendix we report the results from additional robustness checks which we briefly
summarize here.
    First, we consider an adjustment costs specification with a more flexible curvature. Specifically,
we estimate the curvature of the adjustment costs function as an additional parameter, instead of
imposing a quadratic form. This specification is motivated by the analysis in BXZ who provide
evidence in support of a curvature parameter greater than two for the physical capital adjustment
cost function. In the online appendix, we show that allowing for a flexible curvature parameter
has a very small effect on the model fit and on the conclusions from the model. This is because
the estimated curvature parameters do not differ significantly from two. This conclusion differs
from BXZ because our estimation method recovers the firm-level structural parameters whereas
the procedure in BXZ is subject to an aggregation bias, as discussed in Subsection 4.2.
    Second, we consider an alternative (broader) measure of intangible capital, known as
organization capital, which is constructed based on Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A)
expenses data, following Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013). The main advantage of this measure
is that SG&A data is reported for most firms in Compustat, leading to less concerns with missing
data. The main disadvantage of this measure is that, as discussed in the Related Literature section,
this measure does not allow us to disentangle the importance of the different intangible capital items
for firm value because it captures several different types of intangibles. In addition, SG&A includes
expenses with training of employees (an investment in labor capital). As a result, this measure is
also likely to capture (at least part of) the contribution of labor for firm value.
    In the online appendix, we show that although this SG&A measure of intangible capital
does not allow us to differentiate across the two types of intangibles (brand and knowledge), the
decomposition across physical capital, labor and intangible capital is quite similar to that of the
baseline model. In the pooled sample, physical capital accounts for 32.12% of firm value while labor
accounts for 16.83%, and organizational capital for 51.05%. For firms in the low-skill industries,
labor accounts for 9.99% of firm's market value while in high-skill industries this number rises to
15.40%. While organization capital accounts for a larger share of firm's value in high-skill industries
(52% versus 43%), physical capital accounts for more value in low-skill industries (46.88% versus


                                                  34
32.65%).
    Finally, we also consider an augmented version of the model which includes organization capital
in addition to the four inputs (physical capital, labor, knowledge capital, and brand capital) of the
baseline model. To avoid double counting, we remove from the construction of organization capital
stock and investment the expenses in R&D and advertising. Again, we find that the overall fit of
this augmented model is similar to the fit of the more parsimonious baseline model.
   Taken together, the robustness checks analyses show that the importance of the non-physical
capital inputs for firm value appears to be a finding that is robust to reasonable variations in the
empirical procedures.


7    Conclusion
We incorporate quasi-fixed labor, knowledge capital, and brand capital into the neoclassical model
of investment, and estimate the contribution of each input for explaining firm market values in the
U.S. economy from 1975 to 2016. The model performs well in explaining both cross-sectional and
time-series variation in firms' market values across industries, with a time-series R2 of up to 61%,
and a cross-sectional R2 of up to 95%. We find that the importance of the non-physical inputs
for firm value varies across industries and is substantial (between 70% and 80). On average, while
physical capital accounts for 30% to 40% of firms' market value across industries, installed labor
force accounts for 14% to 22%, knowledge capital accounts for 20% to 43%, and brand capital for
6% to 25%. We show that financial markets assign large and positive values to the installed stocks
of the different types of inputs because they are costly to adjust, especially labor and knowledge
capital, thus allowing firms to extract some rents as compensation for the cost of adjusting the
inputs. Overall, our analysis provides direct empirical evidence supporting models with multiple
capital inputs as main sources of firm value, and shows the importance of the non-physical capital
inputs for firm value.
    We also document that the contribution of each input for firm value varies over time. The
importance of physical capital has decreased substantially over the last four decades, while the
importance of knowledge capital input has increased significantly. This trend is pervasive across
different industries and thus is not driven by changes in the industry composition in the U.S.
economy, but rather reveals a pattern in the overall economy.
    Methodologically, our estimation procedure targets portfolio-level cross-sectional moments that
allow us to estimate firm-level structural parameters and avoid the aggregation bias of the
BXZ/LWZ estimation procedure. This is useful for practical applications because it allows us
to compute market values at the firm-level, as opposed to at the portfolio-level, which is naturally
more useful in practice. Possible uses of our approach include the valuation of private firms or initial
public offerings, guidance in merger and acquisition transactions, among other applications that
require estimates of firm values. Moreover, given that our estimation procedure recovers structural
adjustment cost parameters, our estimates and functional forms can guide future research with
models featuring multiple capital inputs.
    Finally, our descriptive quantitative analysis uncovers new questions for future research. For
example, what makes brand capital relatively more important in low-skill industries than in high-
skill industries, whereas the oppositive pattern holds for knowledge capital? What is the economic
source of the large magnitude of adjustment costs in knowledge capital and, to a lesser extent, in
labor? The answer to these and other questions may help us understand better the valuation of
companies in financial markets.


                                                  35
References
Abel, Andrew and Janice Eberly (1994), "A Unified Model of Investment under Uncertainty,"
 American Economic Review, 84 (5), 1369­84.
Abel, Andrew B. (1982), "Dynamic effects of permanent and temporary tax policies in a q model
 of investment," Journal of Monetary Economics, 9 (3), 353­373.
-- (1985), "A Stochastic Model of Investment, Marginal q and the Market Value of the Firm,"
  International Economic Review, 26 (2), 305­322.
Abel, Andrew B. and Janice C. Eberly (1996), "Optimal Investment with Costly Reversibility,"
 The Review of Economic Studies, 63 (4), 581­593.
-- (2001), "Investment and q with Fixed Costs: An Empirical Analysis," Working paper, University
  of Pennsylvania.
Ai, Hengjie, Mariano Max Croce, Anthony M. Diercks, and Kai Li (2018), "News shocks and the
  production-based term structure of equity returns," The Review of Financial Studies, 31 (7),
  2423­2467.
Ai, Hengjie and Dana Kiku (2013), "Growth to value: Option exercise and the cross section of
  equity returns," Journal of Financial Economics, 107 (2), 325­349.
Andrei, Daniel, William Mann, and Nathalie Moyen (2018), "Learning and the Improving
 Relationship Between Investment and q," Working paper, University of California, Los Angeles.
Barclay, Michael J., Clifford W. Smith, and Ross L. Watts (1997), "The Determinants of Corporate
  Leverage and Dividend Policies," Journal of Financial Education, 23, 1­15.
Barnichon, Regis (2010), "Building a composite Help-Wanted Index," Economics Letters, 109,
  175­178.
Belo, Frederico and Yao Deng (2018), "On the Stock Return and Investment Return Correlation
  Puzzle," Working paper, University of Minnesota.
Belo, Frederico, Yao Deng, and Juliana Salomao (2019), "Estimating and Testing Investment-Based
  Asset Pricing Models," Working paper.
Belo, Frederico, Jun Li, Xiaoji Lin, and Xiaofei Zhao (2017), "Labor-Force Heterogeneity and Asset
  Prices: The Importance of Skilled Labor," The Review of Financial Studies, 30 (10), 3669­3709.
Belo, Frederico and Xiaoji Lin (2012), "The Inventory Growth Spread," The Review of Financial
  Studies, 25 (1), 278­313.
Belo, Frederico, Xiaoji Lin, and Santiago Bazdresch (2014), "Labor Hiring, Investment, and Stock
  Return Predictability in the Cross Section," Journal of Political Economy, 122 (1), 129­177.
Belo, Frederico, Xiaoji Lin, and Maria Ana Vitorino (2014), "Brand Capital and Firm Value,"
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 17 (1), 150­169.
Belo, Frederico, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang (2013), "A Supply Approach to Valuation," The Review
  of Financial Studies, 26 (12), 3029­3067.
Bentolila, Samuel and Giuseppe Bertola (1990), "Firing Costs and Labour Demand: How Bad is
  Eurosclerosis?" The Review of Economic Studies, 57 (3), 381­402.
Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik (1999), "Optimal Investment, Growth
  Options, and Security Returns," The Journal of Finance, 54 (5), 1553­1607.



                                               36
Bloom, Nicholas (2009), "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks," Econometrica, 77 (3), 623­685.
Bond, Stephen and John Van Reenen (2007), "Microeconometric Models of Investment and
  Employment," in "Handbook of econometrics," Elsevier, volume 6, 4417­4498.
Boyd, John H., Jian Hu, and Ravi Jagannathan (2005), "The Stock Market's Reaction to
  Unemployment News: Why Bad News Is Usually Good for Stocks," The Journal of Finance,
  60 (2), 649­672.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel (1993), "Microeconomic Adjustment Hazards
  and Aggregate Dynamics," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108 (2), 359­383.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Eduardo M. R. A. Engel, and John C. Haltiwanger (1997), "Aggregate
  Employment Dynamics: Building from Microeconomic Evidence," The American Economic
  Review, 87 (1), 115­137.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Eduardo M. R. A Engel, John C. Haltiwanger, Michael Woodford,
  and Robert E. Hall (1995), "Plant-Level Adjustment and Aggregate Investment Dynamics,"
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995 (2), 1­54.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Robert S. Pindyck (1996), "Uncertainty, Investment, and Industry
  Evolution," International Economic Review, 37 (3), 641­662.
Cameron, A. Colin and Douglas L. Miller (2010), "Robust Inference with Clustered Data," Working
  Papers 106, University of California, Davis, Department of Economics.
Campbell, John Y. (1996), "Understanding Risk and Return," Journal of Political Economy,
  104 (2), 298­345.
Chan, Louis K. C., Josef Lakonishok, and Theodore Sougiannis (2001), "The Stock Market
  Valuation of Research and Development Expenditures," The Journal of Finance, 56 (6), 2431­
  2456.
Chirinko, Robert S. (1993), "Multiple Capital Inputs, Q, and Investment Spending," Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control, 17 (5), 907­928.
Cochrane, John H. (1991), "Production-Based Asset Pricing and the Link Between Stock Returns
  and Economic Fluctuations," The Journal of Finance, 46 (1), 209­237.
-- (2001), Asset Pricing, Princeton University Press.
Cooper, Russell W. and John C. Haltiwanger (2006), "On the Nature of Capital Adjustment Costs,"
  The Review of Economic Studies, 73 (3), 611­633.
Cooper, Russell W., John C. Haltiwanger, and Laura Power (1999), "Machine Replacement and
  the Business Cycle: Lumps and Bumps," American Economic Review, 89 (4), 921­946.
Cooper, Russell W., John C. Haltiwanger, and Jonathan L. Willis (2015), "Dynamics of Labor
  Demand: Evidence from Plant-Level Observations and Aggregate Implications," Research in
  Economics, 69 (1), 37­50.
Corrado, Carol A. and Charles R. Hulten (2010), "How Do You Measure a "Technological
  Revolution"?" American Economic Review, 100 (2), 99­104.
Corrado, Carol A., Charles R. Hulten, and Daniel E. Sichel (2009), "Intangible Capital and U.S.
  Economic Growth," Review of Income and Wealth, 55 (3), 661­685.
Da, Zhi (2009), "Cash Flow, Consumption Risk, and the Cross-section of Stock Returns," The
 Journal of Finance, 64 (2), 923­956.


                                               37
Davis, Steven J. and John C. Haltiwanger (1992), "Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction,
  and Employment Reallocation," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (3), 819­863.
Dechow, Patricia M., Richard G. Sloan, and Mark T. Soliman (2004), "Implied Equity Duration:
  A New Measure of Equity Risk," Review of Accounting Studies, 9 (2), 197­228.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L. and Dimitris Papanikolaou (2013), "Organization Capital and the Cross-Section
  of Expected Returns," The Journal of Finance, 68 (4), 1365­1406.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Ay¸
                                         seg¨ul S¸ ahin (2013), "The Decline of the U.S. Labor
  Share," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2013 (1), 1­63.
Erickson, Timothy and Toni M. Whited (2000), "Measurement Error and the Relationship between
  Investment and q," Journal of Political Economy, 108 (5), 1027­1057.
Falato, Antonio, Dalida Kadyrzhanova, and Jae W. Sim (2014), "Rising Intangible Capital,
  Shrinking Debt Capacity, and the U.S. Corporate Savings Glut," Working paper, Federal Reserve
  Board of Governors.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1993), "Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks
  and Bonds," Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3­56.
-- (1995), "Size and Book-to-Market Factors in Earnings and Returns," The Journal of Finance,
  50, 131­155.
Fama, Eugene F. and G. William Schwert (1977), "Human Capital and Capital Market
  Equilibrium," Journal of Financial Economics, 4 (1), 95­125.
Gala, Vito D. (2014), "Equilibrium Value and Size Premia," Working paper.
Galeotti, Marzio and Fabio Schiantarelli (1991), "Generalized Q Models for Investment," The
 Review of Economics and Statistics, 73 (3), 383­392.
Gon¸
   calves, Andrei, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang (2017), "Aggregation, Capital Heterogeneity, and the
 Investment CAPM," Working paper, Ohio State University.
Gourio, Fran¸
            cois and Leena Rudanko (2014), "Customer Capital," The Review of Economic Studies,
 81 (3), 1102­1136.
Griliches, Zvi (1979), "Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to
  Productivity Growth," Bell Journal of Economics, 10 (1), 92­116.
Hall, Bronwyn H. (1993), "The Stock Market's Valuation of R&D Investment during the 1980's,"
  American Economic Review, 83 (2), 259­264.
Hall, Robert E. (2001), "The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation," American Economic
 Review, 91 (5), 1185­1202.
-- (2004), "Measuring Factor Adjustment Costs," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (3),
  899­927.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. (1989), "Labor Demand and the Structure of Adjustment Costs," The
  American Economic Review, 79 (4), 674­689.
-- (1995), "Labour Demand and the Source of Adjustment Costs," The Economic Journal,
  105 (430), 620­634.
-- (1996), Labor Demand, princeton University press.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Gerard A. Pfann (1996), "Adjustment Costs in Factor Demand," Journal
  of Economic Literature, 34 (3), 1264­1292.


                                               38
Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, and Nan Li (2012), "Intangible Risk," NBER Book Chapters.
Hartman-Glaser, Barney, Hanno Lustig, and Mindy Zhang Xiaolan (2017), "National Income
  Accounting when Firms Insure Workers," Working paper, Stanford University Graduate School
  of Business.
Hayashi, Fumio (1982), "Tobin's Marginal and Average q:          A Neoclassical Interpretation,"
  Econometrica, 50 (1), 213­224.
Hayashi, Fumio and Tohru Inoue (1991), "The Relation Between Firm Growth and Q with Multiple
  Capital Goods: Theory and Evidence from Panel Data on Japanese Firms," Econometrica, 59 (3),
  731­753.
Hennessy, Christopher A. and Toni M. Whited (2005), "Debt Dynamics," The Journal of Finance,
  60 (3), 1129­1165.
Jagannathan, Ravi, Keiichi Kubota, and Hitoshi Takehara (1998), "Relationship between labor-
  income risk and average return: empirical evidence from the Japanese stock market," The Journal
  of Business, 71 (3), 319­347.
Jagannathan, Ravi and Zhenyu Wang (1996), "The Conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section of
  Expected Returns," The Journal of Finance, 51 (1), 3­53.
Jermann, Urban J. (1998), "Asset Pricing in Production Economies," Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 41 (2), 257­275.
Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman (2013), "The Global Decline of the Labor Share," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129 (1), 61­103.
Kogan, Leonid (2001), "An equilibrium model of irreversible investment," Journal of Financial
 Economics, 62 (2), 201­245.
Kogan, Leonid and Dimitris Papanikolaou (2012), "Economic Activity of Firms and Asset Prices,"
 Annual Review of Financial Economics, 4 (1), 361­384.
Lev, Baruch (2001), Intangibles: Management, Measurement, and Reporting, Washington, DC:
  Brookings Institution Press.
Lev, Baruch and Suresh Radhakrishnan (2005), "The Valuation of Organization Capital," in
  "Measuring Capital in the New Economy," National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 73­
  110.
Li, Dongmei (2011), "Financial Constraints, R&D Investment, and Stock Returns," The Review of
  Financial Studies, 24 (9), 2974­3007.
Li, Erica X.N. and Laura X.L. Liu (2012), "Intangible Assets and Cross-Sectional Stock Returns:
  Evidence from Structural Estimation," Working paper, Cheung Kong School of Business.
Li, Wendy C.Y. (2012a), "Depreciation of Business R&D Capital," BEA working papers, Bureau
  of Economic Analysis.
-- (2012b), "Intangible Assets and Cross-Sectional Stock Returns: Evidence from Structural
  Estimation," Working paper, Cheung Kong School of Business.
Li, Wendy C.Y. and Bronwyn H. Hall (2016), "Depreciation of Business R&D Capital," BEA
  Working Papers 0135, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Lin, Xiaoji (2012), "Endogenous Technological Progress and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns,"
  Journal of Financial Economics, 103 (2), 411­427.


                                               39
Liu, Laura X., Toni M. Whited, and Lu Zhang (2009), "Investment-Based Expected Stock Returns,"
  Journal of Political Economy., 117 (6), 1105­1139.
Lustig, Hanno and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh (2008), "The Returns on Human Capital: Good News
  on Wall Street Is Bad News on Main Street," The Review of Financial Studies, 21 (5), 2097­2137.
Mayers, David (1972), "Nonmarketable Assets and Capital Market Equilibrium Under
 Uncertainty," in Michael Jensen (Editor), "Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets," New
 York: Praeger, volume 1, 223­48.
McGrattan, Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott (2000), "Is the Stock Market Overvalued?" Quarterly
 Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 24 (4), 20­40.
Merz, Monika and Eran Yashiv (2007), "Labor and the Market Value of the Firm," American
 Economic Review, 97 (4), 1419­1431.
Oi, Walter Y. and Todd L. Idson (1999), "Firm size and wages," Elsevier, volume 3 of Handbook
  of Labor Economics, 2165­2214.
Penman, Stephen (2010), Financial Statement Analysis and Security Valuation, McGraw-Hill Irwin.
Peters, Ryan H. and Lucian A. Taylor (2017), "Intangible Capital and the Investment-q Relation,"
  Journal of Financial Economics, 123 (2), 251­272.
Porter, Michael E. (1992), "Capital Disadvantage: America's Failing Capital Investment System,"
  Harvard Business Review, 70 (5), 62­82.
Ptok, Annette, Rupinder P. Jindal, and Werner J. Reinartz (2018), "Selling, general, and
  administrative expense (SGA)-based metrics in marketing: conceptual and measurement
  challenges," Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 46 (6), 987­1011.
Santos, Tano and Pietro Veronesi (2005), "Labor Income and Predictable Stock Returns," The
  Review of Financial Studies, 19 (1), 1­44.
Shapiro, Matthew D. (1986), "The Dynamic Demand for Capital and Labor," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 101 (3), 513­542.
Sliker, Brian K. (2007), "R&D Satellite Account Methodologies: R&D Capital Stocks and Net
   Rates of Return," Technical report, Bureau of Economic Analysis/National Science Foundation.
Sloan, Richard G. and Russell James Lundholm (2004), Equity valuation and analysis, McGraw
  Hill Custom Pub.
Summers, Lawrence H. (1981), "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-Theory Approach,"
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1981 (1), 67­140.
Tuzel, Selale (2010), "Corporate Real Estate Holdings and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns,"
  The Review of Financial Studies, 23 (6), 2268­2302.
Vitorino, Maria Ana (2014), "Understanding the Effect of Advertising on Stock Returns and Firm
  Value: Theory and Evidence from a Structural Model," Management Science, 60 (1), 227­245.
Xing, Yuhang (2008), "Interpreting the Value Effect Through the Q-Theory: An Empirical
  Investigation," The Review of Financial Studies, 21 (4), 1767­1795.
Yuskavage, Robert E. (2007), "Converting Historical Industry Time Series Data from SIC to
  NAICS," Technical report, US Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Zhang, Lu (2005), "The Value Premium," The Journal of Finance, 60 (1), 67­103.
-- (2017), "The Investment CAPM," European Financial Management, 23 (4), 545­603.


                                               40
                                         Table 1: Descriptive Statistics


Panel A reports the time-series average of the cross-sectional median, and the standard-deviation of selected
characteristics of the firm level data across all firms in the economy, and across the low- and high-skill industries.
Panel B reports the cross-correlations of the investment/hiring rates in each industry. V Rit is the firm's valuation
        P    P
ratio, Iit /Kit is the investment rate in physical capital, Hit /Lit is the investment rate in labor stock (gross hiring
        K    K                                                       B    B
rate), Iit /Ut  is the investment rate in knowledge capital, and Iit   /Ut  is the investment rate in brand capital. We
also present the descriptive statistics for the stock variables of each input (physical capital, labor, knowledge capital
and brand capital) relative to the sum of the three capital inputs (Ait , total assets as defined in Section 4.2) and
relative to annual sales (Yit ). The sample consists of firm-level annual data from 1975 to 2016.

                                 Panel A: Averages and Standard Deviations

                                          Average                                             S.D.

                          All Firms      Low Skill     High Skill         All Firms      Low Skill      High Skill

                                                             Valuation ratios
     V Rit                       1.95          1.57           2.04              4.16            2.83          4.36

                                                     Scaled capital and labor ratios
       P /A
     Kit                         0.42          0.63           0.38              0.26            0.24          0.25
            it
     (Wit-1 Lit )/Ait            0.61          0.54           0.63              1.28            1.62          1.20
       K /A
     Kit                         0.38          0.13           0.44              0.27            0.17          0.26
            it
       B /A
     Kit                         0.10          0.14           0.09              0.16            0.19          0.14
            it


                                                        Investment/hiring rates
      P /K P
     Iit                         0.23          0.15           0.26              0.73            0.48          0.77
           it
     Hit /Lit                    0.16          0.15           0.17              0.27            0.24          0.28
      K /K K
     Iit                         0.28          0.21           0.30              0.24            0.18          0.24
           it
      B /K B
     Iit                         0.25          0.24           0.26              0.24            0.19          0.25
           it


                                                  Capital and labor relative to sales
      P /Y
     Kit                         0.20          0.25           0.19              0.37            0.31          0.38
          it
     (Wit-1 Lit )/Yit            0.34          0.25           0.36              0.32            0.20          0.34
       K /Y
     Kit                         0.17          0.05           0.21              3.20            0.76          3.48
            it
       B /Y
     Kit                         0.05          0.06           0.05              0.21            0.20          0.21
           it



                                               Panel B: Correlations

                                         Low Skill                              High Skill
                             Hit /Lit     K /K K
                                         Iit           B /K B
                                                      Iit            Hit /Lit      K /K K
                                                                                  Iit           B /K B
                                                                                               Iit
                                              it           it                          it           it
                  P /K P
                Iit              0.49         0.29        0.35           0.51          0.41          0.36
                       it
                 Hit /Lit                     0.14        0.24                         0.29          0.32
                 K /K K
                Iit                                       0.35                                       0.47
                       it
                                                          41
42
                       Table 2: Firm-Value Decomposition Based on Book Values


This table reports the time-series average of the fraction of firm value (input-shares µ) that is attributed to each
input based on its book value. This decomposition is done by setting all the adjustment costs to zero. Shares are
computed at the aggregate- and average-level according to the procedure described in Subsection 5.1. XS - R2 is
the cross-sectional R2 , T S - R2 is the time-series R2 , and m.a.e./V R is the mean absolute valuation error scaled by
the absolute value of the ratio. The results are reported for the sample of all firms, and also for the sub-samples of
low-, and high-skill industries. The sample consists of firm-level annual data from 1975 to 2016.

                                                 All Firms      Low Skill     High Skill
                                                    (1)           (2)            (3)

                                                            Aggregate (in %)
                            ¯P : Physical
                            µ                       64.33        71.66       61.49
                            ¯L : Labor
                            µ                        0.00         0.00        0.00
                            ¯K : Knowledge
                            µ                       22.78        10.11       27.62
                            ¯B : Brand
                            µ                       12.89        18.23       10.89

                                                          Average (in %)
                            ¯P :
                            µ    Physical           55.97     76.97      51.64
                            ¯L : Labor
                            µ                        0.00      0.00       0.00
                            ¯K : Knowledge
                            µ                       35.69     10.88      40.58
                            ¯B : Brand
                            µ                       8.34      12.15      7.78

                                                     Model fit

                            XS - R2                 -7.21          -7.63          -7.27
                            T S - R2                -2.51          -1.78          -2.57
                            m.a.e./V R               0.76          0.69            0.77




                                                          43
                                                          Table 3: Parameter Estimates and Model Fit


     This table reports the parameter estimates and measures of fit for the baseline model specification (columns 1 to 3) and across restricted alternative model
     specifications with a sub-set of the capital/labor inputs (columns 4 to 13). The estimation uses 40 portfolios sorted based on proxies of the lagged values of
     the inputs (10 portfolios for each input). P , L , K and B are, respectively, the physical capital, labor, knowledge capital, and brand capital adjustment cost
     parameters. s.e. stands for Newey-West standard errors with three lags. XS - R2 is the cross-sectional R2 , T S - R2 is the time-series R2 , and m.a.e./V R is
     the mean absolute valuation error scaled by the absolute value of the ratio. The results are reported for the sample of all firms (baseline model only), and also
     for the sub-samples of low-, and high-skill industries (all specifications). The sample is annual data from 1975 to 2016.



                             Baseline                         KP                       L              KP + KK               KP + KB             KP + L + KK
                         All   Low High                  Low       High        Low         High      Low High              Low High             Low    High
                        Firms Skill   Skill              Skill     Skill       Skill       Skill     Skill Skill           Skill Skill          Skill  Skill
                         (1)   (2)     (3)                (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)       (8)   (9)            (10)  (11)           (12)   (13)




44
                                                                                Parameter estimates
        P                 1.50       3.77     2.18      20.55     29.44       10.67 12.79      12.31          13.31       13.59     24.83        5.09      2.68
        s.e.             [1.00]    [0.85]   [0.97]      [0.53]    [0.62]      [0.96] [1.13]    [0.70]         [0.88]      [0.71]    [1.07]      [0.89]    [0.90]
        L                11.26       7.66   10.64                             10.96 14.54                                                        9.04     10.97
        s.e.             [0.69]    [0.84]   [0.66]                            [0.97] [1.02]                                                     [0.84]    [0.67]
        K                12.47     18.80    12.28                                              28.82          14.71                             25.14     12.63
        s.e.             [0.77]    [1.62]   [0.74]                                             [2.06]         [0.82]                            [1.59]    [0.72]
        B                 3.24       9.99     2.05                                                                        18.92     15.95
        s.e.             [2.05]    [1.46]   [2.48]                                                                        [1.78]    [3.14]

                                                                                           Model fit
        XS -    R2        0.94     0.95      0.94         0.5      0.75        0.57        0.74      0.73      0.88        0.64     0.81         0.86      0.92
        T S - R2          0.61     0.38      0.60        -0.01     0.21        0.14        0.39      0.21       0.5        0.20     0.25         0.31      0.6
        m.a.e./V R        0.22     0.31      0.22         0.39     0.32        0.36        0.28      0.34      0.25        0.35     0.32         0.32      0.22
                                                   Table 4: Firm-Value Decomposition and Adjustment Costs


     This table reports the model-implied input-shares (µ) and estimated adjustment costs (CX/Y ) for the baseline model specification (columns 1 to 3) and across
     restricted alternative model specifications with a sub-set of the capital/labor inputs (columns 4 to 13), using the parameters estimates reported in Table 3 to
     calculate the model-implied input-shares and adjustment costs. Shares are computed at the aggregate- and average-level according to the procedure described
     in Subsection 5.1. CX/Y is the ratio (in percent) of the implied input adjustment costs-to-sales ratio, computed as the times series average of the cross sectional
     median of this value. The results are reported for the sample of all firms (baseline model only), and also for the sub-samples of low-, and high-skill industries
     (all specifications). The sample consists of firm-level annual data from 1975 to 2016.




                                      Baseline                           KP              KP + L             KP + KK              KP + KB            KP + L + KK
                                  All   Low High                 Low          High     Low High            Low High             Low High            Low    High
                                 Firms Skill Skill               Skill        Skill    Skill Skill         Skill Skill          Skill Skill         Skill  Skill
                                  (1)   (2)    (3)                (4)          (5)      (6)   (7)           (8)   (9)           (10) (11)           (12)   (13)

                                                                     Firm-value decomposition - Aggregate (in %)




45
       µ
       ¯P : Physical              30.36    40.16 29.91         100.00 100.00    73.62 67.83     67.72 55.48      61.03 82.86                        50.31     32.5
       µ
       ¯L : Labor                 22.53    14.33 20.85                          26.38 32.17                                                         19.64     22.08
       µ
       ¯K : Knowledge             38.28    20.34 43.23                                          32.28 44.52                                         30.05     45.41
       µ
       ¯B : Brand                  8.83    25.17 6.02                                                            38.97 17.14

                                                                      Firm-value decomposition - Average (in %)
       µ
       ¯P : Physical              21.85    42.64 20.91         100.00 100.00    68.37 52.94      67.59 44.75    71.52 85.82                         48.06     22.19
       µ
       ¯L : Labor                 26.61    18.14 24.32                          31.63 47.06                                                         22.18     25.43
       µ
       ¯K : Knowledge             46.84    22.19 51.36                                           32.41 55.25                                        29.76     52.37
       µ
       ¯B : Brand                  4.70    17.03 3.41                                                           28.48 14.18

                                                                        Realized adjustment costs (in % of annual sales)
       CP/Y    : Physical         0.90      1.22     1.50        6.64      20.23      3.45 8.79       3.98 9.14        4.39             17.06       1.65      1.84
       CL/Y    : Labor            6.46      2.61     6.77                             3.74 9.25                                                     3.09       6.98
       CK/Y     : Knowledge       10.05     2.35    13.28                                             3.60 15.91                                    3.14      13.66
       CB/Y    : Brand            0.49      1.69     0.30                                                              3.19              2.37
                            Table 5: Firm-Value Decomposition Across Decades

This table shows the average aggregate input-shares (µ) (obtained with the aggregation procedure described in
Subsection 5.1) across different decades, and using the parameter estimates reported in columns (1) to (3) in Table
3. The results are reported for the sample of all firms, and also for the sub-samples of low-, and high-skill industries.
The sample consists of firm-level annual data from 1975 to 2016.



                                                1970s     1980s     1990s       2000s   2010s

                                                             All firms (in      %)
                          ¯P
                          µ  : Physical          43.15     37.99 28.11          23.93   22.65
                          ¯L : Labor
                          µ                      23.07     18.73 23.01          24.35   24.53
                          ¯K : Knowledge
                          µ                      24.90     33.53 39.89          43.53   44.72
                          ¯B : Brand
                          µ                       8.88      9.75    8.99         8.19    8.10

                                                             Low    skill (in   %)
                          ¯P : Physical
                          µ                      48.03     47.15     37.41      34.88   35.89
                          ¯L : Labor
                          µ                      14.83     11.17     14.41      16.67   15.22
                          ¯K : Knowledge
                          µ                      17.40     18.80     19.26      23.04   21.97
                          ¯B : Brand
                          µ                      19.74     22.88     28.92      25.42   26.92

                                                             High   skill (in   %)
                          ¯P : Physical
                          µ                      43.87     37.22    27.57       23.65   21.71
                          ¯L : Labor
                          µ                      21.17     17.68    21.21       22.29   22.73
                          ¯K : Knowledge
                          µ                      28.35     38.03    45.43       48.64   50.34
                          ¯B : Brand
                          µ                       6.60      7.06     5.79        5.43    5.22




                                                           46
                                           Table 6: Firm-Value Decomposition Across Value and Growth Firms


     This table shows the model-implied aggregate input-shares (µ) (obtained with the aggregation procedure described in Subsection 5.1) and estimated adjustment
     costs (CX/Y ) for value, neutral and growth firms, classified according to the terciles of the cross-sectional lagged valuation ratio distribution. We use the
     parameters reported in columns (1) to (3) in Table 3 to calculate the model-implied input-shares and adjustment costs. CX/Y is the ratio (in percent) of the
     implied input adjustment costs-to-sales ratio, computed as the times series average of the cross sectional median of this value. The results are reported for the
     sample of all firms, and also for the sub-samples of low-, and high-skill industries. The sample consists of firm-level annual data from 1975 to 2016.

                                                         All Firms                            Low Skill                            High Skill
                                               Value     Neutral Growth             Value     Neutral Growth             Value     Neutral Growth
                                                (1)        (2)     (3)               (4)        (5)     (6)               (7)        (8)      (9)




47
                                                                                Firm value    decomposition (in %)
                    µ
                    ¯P : Physical              34.87      29.74       24.31        43.74       38.41    37.19      33.99            28.84       25.09
                    µ
                    ¯L : Labor                 18.98      22.30       29.02        12.39       14.20    18.90      17.08            21.22       26.65
                    µ
                    ¯K : Knowledge             36.44      38.75       40.36        19.08       19.66    23.66      42.24            43.87       43.81
                    µ
                    ¯B : Brand                 9.71        9.21        6.31         24.8       27.73    20.25       6.69            6.06        4.45

                                                                               Realized adjustment costs (in %)
                    CP/Y     : Physical         0.46       0.79       1.98         0.71     1.17     2.20        0.74               1.33        3.29
                    CL/Y     : Labor            4.08       5.43       10.85        2.01     2.41     3.93       4.30                5.81        11.41
                    CK/Y      : Knowledge       7.53       8.39       15.08        1.88     2.49     2.75       10.27               11.89       19.13
                    CB/Y     : Brand            0.38       0.46        0.62        1.67     1.79     1.66       0.22                0.29         0.42
Table 7: Parameter Estimates and Model Fit with an Asymmetric Adjustment Cost Specification


This table reports the parameter estimates and measures of fit for the model with adjustment costs function that
allows for asymmetric costs. The estimation uses 40 portfolios sorted based on proxies of the lagged values of the
inputs (10 portfolios for each input). P , L , K and B are, respectively, the physical capital, labor, knowledge
capital, and brand capital adjustment cost parameters. P , L , K and B are, respectively, the physical capital,
labor, knowledge capital and brand capital asymmetry adjustment cost parameters. To interpret the asymmetry
parameter note that when v > 0 its more costly to disinvest than to invest (to capture irreversibility), and vice
versa when v < 0. s.e. stands for bootstrapped standard errors. XS - R2 is the cross-sectional R2 , T S - R2 is the
time-series R2 , and m.a.e./V R is the mean absolute valuation error scaled by the absolute value of the ratio. The
results are reported for the sample of all firms, and also for the sub-samples of low-, and high-skill industries. The
sample consists of firm-level annual data from 1975 to 2016.

                                               All Firms      Low Skill     High Skill
                                                      (1)          (2)            (3)

                                                       Parameter estimates
                               Slope
                               P                      2.33           4.45          3.02
                               s.e.                 [1.32]         [2.31]        [1.42]
                               L                    15.21            9.32        13.41
                               s.e.                 [1.54]         [2.95]        [1.28]
                               K                    18.19          30.29         16.94
                               s.e.                 [1.87]         [6.58]        [1.70]
                               B                      1.42         29.17           0.45
                               s.e.                 [2.94]         [5.86]        [2.14]
                               Asymmetry
                               P                     -0.37           0.21         -0.25
                               s.e.                 [0.28]         [0.79]        [0.28]
                               L                      2.55           1.19          2.16
                               s.e.                 [0.56]         [1.29]        [0.50]
                               K                      1.73           2.31          1.47
                               s.e.                 [0.57]         [1.49]        [0.51]
                               B                     -3.57           9.32         -4.96
                               s.e.                 [2.49]         [2.15]        [2.00]

                                                              Model fit
                               XS -    R2             0.94          0.90           0.94
                               T S - R2               0.67          0.40           0.66
                               m.a.e./V R             0.20          0.31           0.20




                                                         48
Table 8: Firm Value Decomposition and Adjustment Costs for the Asymmetric Adjustment Costs
Specification


This table reports the model-implied input-shares (µ) and estimated adjustment costs (CX/Y ) for the specification
of the model with an adjustment costs function that allows for asymmetric costs, using the parameters estimates
reported in Table 7 to calculate the model-implied input-shares and adjustment costs. Shares are computed at the
aggregate-level according to the procedure described in Subsection 5.1. CX/Y is the ratio (in percent) of the implied
input adjustment costs-to-sales ratio, computed as the time series average of the cross sectional median of this value.
The results are reported for the sample of all firms, and also the sub-samples of low-, and high-skill industries. The
sample consists of firm-level annual data from 1975 to 2016.



                                                          All Firms      Low Skill     High Skill
                                                             (1)           (2)            (3)

                                                          Firm-value decomposition (in %)
                      ¯P
                      µ  : Physical capital                31.87         38.48       31.76
                      ¯L : Labor
                      µ                                    20.97         13.81       19.04
                      ¯K : Knowledge capital
                      µ                                    39.28         22.29       43.93
                      ¯B : Brand capital
                      µ                                     7.88         25.42        5.27

                                                          Realized adjustment costs (in %)
                      CP/Y    : Physical capital            1.46        1.44        2.13
                      CL/Y    : Labor                       7.58        2.98        7.58
                      CK/Y     : Knowledge capital         12.41        3.21       15.74
                      CB/Y    : Brand capital               0.31        2.56        0.11




                                                          49
                                             Table 9: Alternative Test Assets, Estimation Method, and Samples


     This table reports the parameter estimates, measures of fit, and model-implied input-shares (µ) across alternative empirical procedures. P , L , K , and B
     are, respectively, the physical capital, labor, knowledge capital, and brand capital slope adjustment cost parameters. s.e. stands for Newey-West standard
     errors with three lags. XS - R2 is the cross-sectional R2 , T S - R2 is the time-series R2 , and m.a.e./V R is the mean absolute valuation error scaled by the
     absolute value of the ratio. The firm value decomposition reports the input-shares at the aggregate-level according to the procedure described in Subsection
     5.1. Columns (1) to (3) report the estimation results using 80 (instead of 40) portfolios sorted based on proxies of the lagged values of the inputs (80 portfolios).
     Columns (4) reports the estimation results using 17 Fama-French industries as the portfolios (17 Ind.). Columns (5) to (7) report the estimation results by
     performing the estimation at the firm- (not portfolio-) level (Firm-Level). Columns (8) to (10) reports the benchmark estimation in the sample of firms with
     missing (or always zero) R&D expense data, using a model with physical capital, labor, and brand capital as the inputs (Non R&D Firms). The results are
     reported for the sample of all firms, and also for the sub-samples of low-, and high-skill industries (except for the specification 17 Ind.). The sample consists
     of firm-level annual data from 1975 to 2016.

                                                   80 Portfolios               17 Ind.              Firm-Level                  Non-R&D Firms
                                                All    Low High                  All              All Low High                 All   Low High
                                               Firms Skill      Skill           Firms          Firms Skill Skill              Firms Skill Skill
                                                (1)    (2)       (3)             (4)              (5)    (6)   (7)             (8)   (9)   (10)

                                                                                      Parameter estimates
                         P                        2.22     3.13     2.85           2.66       3.72 1.82             3.96        5.65 6.05 7.00
                         s.e.                   [0.73]   [0.48]   [0.71]         [0.75]     [0.37] [0.52]         [0.42]      [0.99] [1.56] [0.88]




50
                         L                        9.95     7.03     9.20           6.98       5.30 5.15             5.26        7.39 6.38 6.11
                         s.e.                   [0.55]   [0.52]   [0.52]         [1.03]     [0.27] [0.55]         [0.29]      [0.48] [0.73] [0.51]
                         K                      12.92    20.04    12.74          15.16        7.60 18.79            7.33
                         s.e.                   [0.61]   [1.19]   [0.58]         [1.85]     [1.57] [2.12]         [1.55]
                         B                        4.40   11.28      3.97         11.09      13.22 8.16            14.22         5.97 1.09 23.53
                         s.e.                   [1.47]   [1.05]   [1.74]         [3.33]     [1.18] [1.43]         [1.42]      [2.47] [2.35] [2.76]

                                                                                              Model fit
                         XS -    R2             0.94      0.91     0.93          0.65              -    -              -       0.94     0.92      0.89
                         T S - R2               0.58      0.32     0.56          0.34           0.15 0.19           0.14       0.72     0.55      0.66
                         m.a.e./V R             0.24      0.35     0.24          0.30           0.64 0.60           0.64       0.25     0.30      0.27


                                                                               Firm-value decomposition (in %)
                         µ
                         ¯P : Physical         31.88     38.29 31.21            30.98       38.77 40.27 37.42                 56.65     57.50 62.87
                         µ
                         ¯L : Labor            19.55     13.08 17.62            12.39       11.45 11.33 11.33                 30.48     34.20 14.52
                         µ
                         ¯K : Knowledge        38.56     21.32 43.45            39.75       27.79 23.05 32.10
                         µ
                         ¯B : Brand            10.02     27.31 7.72             16.87       21.98 25.36 19.15                 12.87     8.30     22.61
                                     Figure 1: Cross Sectional Model Fit


This figure plots the time-series average of the model-implied and realized cross sectional average valuation ratios of
each portfolio, using the parameter estimates reported in Table 3 columns (2) (low-skill industries) and (3) (high-skill
industries), to calculate the model-implied valuation ratios. The sample consists of firm-level annual data from 1975
to 2016.




                    6                                              6



                    5                                              5



                    4                                              4



                    3                                              3



                    2                                              2



                    1                                              1



                    0                                              0
                        0   1   2     3    4     5     6               0   1    2   3     4    5     6




                            Panel A: Low Skill                             Panel B: High Skill




                                                           51
                                   Figure 2: Distribution of Input Market Value Shares


This figure shows the distribution (box plot) of the estimated firm-level input input-shares (µ) in high- and low-skill
industries, using the parameter estimates reported in Table 3, columns (2) and (3), to obtain the input-shares. In
each box, the central mark is the median, the edges of the box are the 25th and 75th percentiles. The whiskers extend
to the most extreme data points the algorithm considers not to be outliers.




                                      Physical Capital                                                       Labor
                        100                                                         100


                        80                                                          80
           shares (%)




                                                                       shares (%)


                        60                                                          60


                        40                                                          40


                        20                                                          20


                         0                                                           0
                              Low Skill              High Skill                                Low Skill              High Skill



                                     Knowledge Capital                                                     Brand Capital
                        100                                                           100


                        80                                                                80
           shares (%)




                        60                                                                60
                                                                         shares
                                                                           (%)




                        40                                                                40


                        20                                                                20


                         0                                                                0
                              Low Skill              High Skill                                  Low Skill             High Skill




                                                                  52
                                                          Figure 3: Firm Value Decomposition Over Time


     This figure plots the time series of the contribution of each input for the firm's market value (input-shares) in low-skill industries (Panel A) and in high-skill
     industries (Panel B) implied by the parameter estimates reported in Table 3, columns (2) and (3), and using the aggregate share measure. µP is the share of
     physical capital, µL is the share of labor, µK is the share of knowledge capital and µB is the share of brand capital. Panel A shows the results for low-skill
     industries, Panel B shows the results for high-skill industries. The sample consists of firm-level annual data from 1975 to 2016.




              100                                                                                100

                                        P     L       K      B                                                             P      L       K      B
              90                                                                                 90

              80                                                                                 80




53
              70                                                                                 70

              60                                                                                 60




          %
                                                                                             %
              50                                                                                 50

              40                                                                                 40

              30                                                                                 30

              20                                                                                 20

              10                                                                                 10

               0                                                                                  0
               1975   1980    1985    1990   1995    2000   2005   2010    2015                   1975   1980    1985     1990   1995    2000   2005   2010   2015
                                              Year                                                                                Year

                                     Panel A: Low Skill                                                                 Panel B: High Skill
                                     Figure 4: Distribution of Realized Input Adjustment Costs


This figure shows the distribution (box plot) of the estimated firm-level adjustment costs as a fraction of firms' annual
sales (CX/Y ) in high- and low-skill industries, using the parameter estimates reported in Table 3, columns (2) and
(3), to calculate the adjustment costs. In each box, the central mark is the median, the edges of the box are the
25th and 75th percentiles. The whiskers extend to the most extreme data points the algorithm considers not to be
outliers.




                                                 Physical Capital                                                         Labor
                                15
                                                                                                      40
            Cost (% of Sales)




                                                                                  Cost (% of Sales)
                                                                                                      30
                                10


                                                                                                      20

                                5
                                                                                                      10


                                0                                                                     0
                                     Low Skill                  High Skill                                 Low Skill                   High Skill



                                            Knowledge Capital                                                          Brand Capital
                                                                                                      15
                                80
            Cost (% of Sales)




                                                                                  Cost (% of Sales)




                                60                                                                    10


                                40
                                                                                                      5
                                20


                                0                                                                     0
                                     Low Skill                  High Skill                                 Low Skill                   High Skill




                                                                             54
                                                             Figure 5: Estimated Adjustment Cost Functions


Panel A in this figure plots the estimated adjustment cost functions for each input in low- and high-skill industries,
using the parameter estimates reported in Table 3, columns (2) and (3). The adjustment costs of each input are
calculated as a proportion of the respective (average) median input stock-to-sales ratio reported in Table 1. Panel B
shows the adjustment costs-to-sales ratio evaluated at the (average) median of corresponding investment rates and
as a proportion of the respective (average) median input stock-to-sales ratio reported in Table 1.


                                                                         Panel A: Adjustment cost functions

                                                      Adjustment Cost: Physical Capital                                                Adjustment Cost: Labor


                                 2.5                                                                                       10
           Cost (% of Sales)




                                                                                                       Cost (% of Sales)
                                            2                                                                               8

                                 1.5                                                                                        6

                                            1                                                                               4

                                 0.5                                                                                        2

                                            0                                                                               0
                                                -20       -10        0          10        20                                     -20   -10        0          10        20
                                                                Inv. rate (%)                                                                Inv. rate (%)

                                                           Adjustment Cost: R&D                                                        Adjustment Cost: Brand
                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                  Low Skill
                                                                                                                                                                  High Skill
                                                                                                                           1.5
                        Cost (% of Sales)




                                                                                                    Cost (% of Sales)




                                            6


                                                                                                                            1
                                            4


                                            2                                                                              0.5



                                            0                                                                               0
                                                -20       -10        0          10        20                                     -20   -10        0          10        20
                                                                Inv. rate (%)                                                                Inv. rate (%)




Panel B: Adjustment cost functions evaluated at (average) median investment/hiring rates (in %)

                                                                                                Low Skill                          High Skill
                                                                 CP/Y       : Physical            1.06                                1.40
                                                                 CL/Y       : Labor               2.16                                5.54
                                                                 CK/Y        : Knowledge          2.07                               11.61
                                                                 CB/Y       : Brand               1.73                                0.35




                                                                                               55
                            Figure 6: Asymmetric Adjustment Costs Function
                                                                                            I      I
This figure shows the asymmetric adjustment costs function specification C = v    exp -v K     + vK  - 1 K , using a
slope adjustment cost parameter  = 1, a capital stock of K = 1, with curvatures of  = -5 (solid) and  = 5
(dashed). When v > 0 it is more costly to desinvest than to invest (to capture irreversibility), and vice versa when
v < 0.



                                                                  >0           <0
                                   4.5

                                    4

                                   3.5

                                    3
                            Cost




                                   2.5

                                    2

                                   1.5

                                    1

                                   0.5

                                    0
                                    -25   -20   -15   -10   -5         0   5        10   15   20   25
                                                             Inv. rate (%)




                                                                 56
Appendix
A    Derivation of the Firm-Value Decomposition
                                            P , KP , H , L
The first order conditions with respect to Iit                    K     K       B     B
                                                 it+1 it  it+1 , Iit , Kit+1 , Iit , Kit+1 , and Bit+1 ,
from maximizing the cum-dividend market value of equity are:

         P                     Cit
        qit   = 1 + (1 - t )    P
                                                                                                      (A.1)
                               Iit

         P                                  it+1   Cit+1               P                P      P
        qit   = Et Mt+1 (1 - t+1 )          P
                                                 -   P
                                                                     + it +1 t+1 + (1 - it+1 )qit+1   (A.2)
                                           Kit+1 Kit  +1

         L                Cit
        qit = (1 - t )                                                                                (A.3)
                          Hit
         L                                  it+1 Cit+1                              L       L
        qit = Et Mt+1 (1 - t+1 )                 -       - Wit+1             + (1 - it +1 )qit+1      (A.4)
                                           Lit+1   Lit+1
         K                      Cit
        qit   = (1 - t ) 1 +     K
                                                                                                      (A.5)
                                Iit

         K                                  it+1   Cit+1                    K       K
        qit   = Et Mt+1 (1 - t+1 )          K
                                                 -   K
                                                                     + (1 - it +1 )qit+1              (A.6)
                                           Kit+1 Kit  +1

         B                      Cit
        qit = (1 - t ) 1 +       B
                                                                                                      (A.7)
                                Iit

         B                                  it+1   Cit+1                    B       B
        qit = Et Mt+1 (1 - t+1 )            B
                                                 -   B
                                                                     + (1 - it +1 )qit+1              (A.8)
                                           Kit+1 Kit  +1
                      B         B                                       Ba
         1 = Et Mt+1 rit +1 - (rit+1 - 1)t+1                 = Et Mt+1 rit +1 .                       (A.9)
                                                             Ba  r B        B
In the last equation we define the after-tax bond return as rit +1 it+1 - (rit+1 - 1)t+1 .
    Using the FOCs A.2, A.4, A.6, and A.8 we can write:
     P P         L           K K         B B
    qit Kit+1 + qit Lit+1 + qit Kit+1 + qit Kit+1
                              it+1 P        it+1          it+1 K        it+1 B
 = Et Mt+1 (1 - t+1 )         P
                                   Kit+1 +       Lit+1 +  K
                                                               Kit+1 +  B
                                                                              Kit+1
                             Kit+1         Lit+1         Kit+1         Kit +1

                    Cit+1 P       Cit+1         Cit+1 K       Cit+1 B
    - (1 - t+1 )      P
                          Kit+1 +       Lit+1 +   K
                                                      Kit+1 +   B
                                                                     Kit+1
                    Kit+1         Lit+1         Kit+1         Kit +1
           P       P     P           L      L                 K      K     K           B      B     B
    + (1 - it +1 )qit+1 Kit+1 + (1 - it+1 )qit+1 Lit+1 + (1 - it+1 )qit+1 Kit+1 + (1 - it+1 )qit+1 Kit+1
     P          P
    +it +1 t+1 Kit+1 - (1 - t+1 )Wit+1 Lit+1        .

Given the homogeneity of degree one of the operating profit function and the adjustment costs




                                                        57
function, we have:
     P P         L           K K         B B
    qit Kit+1 + qit Lit+1 + qit Kit+1 + qit Kit+1
                                            K       B                       P      P         P
= Et Mt+1 (1 - t+1 )(it+1 - Cit+1 - Iit       +1 - Iit+1 - Wit+1 Nit+1 ) - Iit+1 + it+1 t+1 Kit+1
                Cit+1 P         P                  Cit+1                       Cit+1 K
  + (1 - t+1 ) P Iit    +1 + Iit+1 + (1 - t+1 )             Hit+1 + (1 - t+1 ) K Iit
                Iit+1                              H   it+1                    Iit+1 +1
     K                  Cit+1 B         B
  + Iit +1 + (1 - t+1 )  B
                               Iit+1 + Iit +1
                        Iit +1
           P       P     P           L      L                 K      K     K
    + (1 - it +1 )qit+1 Kit+1 + (1 - it+1 )qit+1 Lit+1 + (1 - it+1 )qit+1 Kit+1
           B       B     B
    + (1 - it +1 )qit+1 Kit+1 ]]
                                     K        B                       P      P         P               B
= Et Mt+1 (1 - t+1 )(it+1 - Cit+1 - Iit +1 - Iit+1 - Wit+1 Nit+1 ) - Iit+1 + it+1 t+1 Kit+1 + Bit+2 - rit+1 Bit+1
       P      P       L             K     K       B     B                          B
    + qit +1 Kit+2 + qit+1 Lit+2 + qit+1 Kit+2 + qit+1 Kit+2 - Bit+2 ]] + Et Mt+1 rit+1 Bit+1 .

Rearranging the above equation,

                                                                                        Dit+1 + qitP KP
 P P        L          K K        B B                                                               +1 it+2
qit Kit+1 +qit Lit+1 +qit Kit+1 +qit Kit+1 -Bit+1 = Et Mt+1                 L L           K     K       B     B                              .
                                                                          +qit +1 it+2 + qit+1 Kit+2 + qit+1 Kit+2 - Bit+2

Recursively applying the above the equation to future periods,
     P P         L           K K         B B
    qit Kit+1 + qit Lit+1 + qit Kit+1 + qit Kit+1 - Bit+1
                                     P      P       L             K     K       B     B
= Et Mt+1 Dit+1 + Mt+2 Dit+2 + Mt+2 qit +2 Kit+3 + qit+2 Lit+3 + qit+2 Kit+3 + qit+2 Kit+3 - Bit+3
= ...
     
                                              P         P          L                     K         K          B         B
=             Mt+   t Dit+ t   + lim Et Mt+1 qit +   t Kit+ t   + qit +    t Lit+ t   + qit +   t Kit+ t   + qit +   t Kit+ t   - Bit+   t       .
                                  t
        t=1

Assuming that the transversality condition holds then,
                 P P         L           K K         B B
                qit Kit+1 + qit Lit+1 + qit Kit+1 + qit Kit+1 = Vit - Dit + Bit+1 = Pit + Bit+1 .




                                                       58
