                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




MEASURING THE IMPACT OF OWN AND OTHERS' EXPERIENCE ON PROJECT COSTS
                IN THE U.S. WIND GENERATION INDUSTRY

                                     John W. Anderson
                                     Gordon W. Leslie
                                      Frank A. Wolak

                                     Working Paper 26114
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26114


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019




Anderson acknowledges financial support from the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy
Research (SIEPR) and the Kapnick Foundation. Leslie acknowledges dissertation support
received during this research project from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Pre-doctoral
Fellowship on Energy Economics (awarded by the NBER), the Gale and Steve Kohlhagen
Fellowship in Economics (awarded by SIEPR) The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by John W. Anderson, Gordon W. Leslie, and Frank A. Wolak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring the Impact of Own and Others' Experience on Project Costs in the U.S. Wind Generation
Industry
John W. Anderson, Gordon W. Leslie, and Frank A. Wolak
NBER Working Paper No. 26114
July 2019
JEL No. L94,O31,O33

                                         ABSTRACT

We investigate the relationship between accumulated experience completing wind power projects
and the cost of installing wind projects in the U.S. from 2001-2015. Our modeling framework
disentangles accumulated experience from input price changes, scale economies, and exogenous
technical change; and accounts for both firm-specific and industry-wide accumulated experience.
We find evidence consistent with cost-reducing benefits from firm-specific experience for that
firm's cost of future wind power projects, but no evidence of industry-wide learning from the
experience of other participants in the industry. Further, our experience measure rapidly
depreciates across time and distance, suggesting a stable industry trajectory would lower project
costs.

John W. Anderson                                Frank A. Wolak
OhmConnect, Inc.                                Department of Economics
350 Townsend Street, #210                       Stanford University
San Francisco, CA 94107                         Stanford, CA 94305-6072
john@ohmconnect.com                             and NBER
                                                wolak@zia.stanford.edu
Gordon W. Leslie
Department of Economics
Monash University
900 Dandenong Road
Caulfield East, VIC 3145
Australia
gordon.leslie@monash.edu
    Measuring the Impact of Own and Others' Experience on
        Project Costs in the U.S. Wind Generation Industry

                                             John W. Anderson
                                              Gordon W. Leslie
                                              Frank A. Wolak


                                                July 21, 2019



                                                    Abstract

          We investigate the relationship between accumulated experience completing wind power
      projects and the cost of installing wind projects in the U.S. from 2001-2015. Our modeling
      framework disentangles accumulated experience from input price changes, scale economies, and
      exogenous technical change; and accounts for both firm-specific and industry-wide accumulated
      experience. We find evidence consistent with cost-reducing benefits from firm-specific experience
      for that firm's cost of future wind power projects, but no evidence of industry-wide learning from
      the experience of other participants in the industry. Further, our experience measure rapidly
      depreciates across time and distance, suggesting a stable industry trajectory would lower project
      costs.




1     Introduction

Productivity growth due to accumulated experience with a production process or technology--the
phenomenon now known as learning-by-doing --has long been of interest to academics, managers,
and policymakers.1 In recent years, amid growing concern about climate change and energy security,
there has emerged a literature investigating whether learning-by-doing is characteristic of renewable
energy technologies in general, and wind power in particular. The argument is that learning-by-doing
on the part of wind power developers--the firms that design and build wind power projects--is in
    Anderson: OhmConnect john@ohmconnect.com. Leslie, Department of Economics, Monash University, gor-

don.leslie@monash.edu. Wolak: Department of Economics and PESD, Stanford University, wolak@zia.stanford.edu.
Anderson acknowledges financial support from the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR) and the
Kapnick Foundation. Leslie acknowledges dissertation support received during this research project from the Alfred
P. Sloan Foundation Pre-doctoral Fellowship on Energy Economics (awarded by the NBER), the Gale and Steve
Kohlhagen Fellowship in Economics (awarded by SIEPR).
   1 Alchian (1963), Hirsch (1956), and Wright (1936) were among the first to empirically investigate this type of

productivity change, while Arrow (1962) was first to propose a comprehensive theoretical framework. The Boston
Consulting Group (1968) later encouraged its clients to leverage such productivity change for competitive advantage.


                                                         1
part responsible for the dramatic fall in average wind power project costs in the United States
from the early 1980s to the early 2000s.2 Indeed, this logic has been used to rationalize a number
of policies to promote wind and other renewables in the United States, including production and
investment tax credits at the federal level and renewable portfolio standards at the state level.

Advocates of such learning-based policy interventions, however, often fail to appreciate the impor-
tance of establishing precisely whose experience affects whose costs.3 If, for instance, one firm's
efforts to design and construct wind power projects yield cost-reducing knowledge that spills over
to competitors, then the firm has a disincentive to invest in these activities. In this case, policies
that subsidize investment can compensate the firm for the positive externality it bestows on its com-
petitors. If, on the other hand, the cost-reducing knowledge that results from a wind development
firm's activities remains entirely within the firm, then there is no market failure and subsidies are
not justified by the existence of positive externality. Existing empirical research in the U.S. wind
industry has done little to distinguish between these two types of learning (across-firm knowledge
spillovers versus firm-specific learning-by-doing). Moreover, as shown in 1, during much of the 2000s,
average dollar per installed kilowatt (KW) wind power project costs in the United States actually
increased, despite unprecedented investments in new wind generating capacity facilitated by federal
and state incentives.

The purpose of this paper is to investigate the extent to which there is empirical evidence of across-
firm learning-by-doing and within-firm learning-by-doing in the design and construction of U.S. wind
power projects after controlling all other potential sources of wind project cost differences over time.
The existence of the former learning-by-doing implies a positive externality that warrants policy
interventions in the renewable energy marketplace, whereas the existence of the latter form does
not.

Econometric estimation of learning-by-doing in this or any other setting is challenging for two major
reasons. First, it is necessary to define experience and explain how and to whom it accumulates. Most
existing research defines experience in terms of firms' cumulative past output, and we consider two
alternative measures of output for U.S. wind power developers: cumulative megawatts of installed
capacity and cumulative number of installed projects. Because the U.S. wind energy industry consists
of many competing developers, and because we have assembled a detailed project-level dataset,
we quantify separately the accumulated experience of each individual developer. This approach,
made popular by Irwin and Klenow (1994), makes it possible to distinguish between inter-firm
knowledge spillovers and firm-specific learning-by-doing (i.e. learning that does and does not entail
externalities). Because the U.S. wind energy industry has witnessed significant technological change
and has endured several boom-bust cycles, we allow for the possibility that output from the distant
past counts less towards experience than does output from the recent past -- i.e. we allow for
the possibility that experience depreciates, as is the case in Argote et al. (1990), Benkard (2000),
   2 According to Wiser and Bolinger (2010), average U.S. wind power project costs declined in real terms from about

$4,800/kW in 1984 to about $1,300/kW in 2001.
   3 In his August 12, 2008 column, Thomas L. Friedman of the New York Times writes: "Tax credits [...] stimulate

investments by many players in solar and wind so these technologies can quickly move down the learning curve and
become competitive with coal and oil." In a February, 2012 interview, Minh Le of the U.S. Department of Energy
states: "Renewable portfolio standards help drive down the learning curve and reduce solar energy cost in the long
run."



                                                         2
Kellogg (2011), Nemet (2012), and Thompson (2007).4 Further, because there is a history of joint
ventures and acquisitions in the U.S. wind development business, we allow for the possibilities that
developers can share experience with and purchase experience from one another. Finally, because
past experience from nearby projects may be more applicable than distant projects, we allow the
value of past experience to differ by distance to the current project.

The second challenge arises because accumulated experience is but one of many possible factors
that determine costs. For instance, the increase in average U.S. wind power project costs during
the 2000s is in large part attributable to higher prices for primary inputs like steel as well as
technological changes like the advent of larger wind turbines (Bolinger and Wiser, 2011). Indeed,
failure to account for other likely determinants of cost besides accumulated experience is a major
shortcoming of much existing empirical work on learning-by-doing in wind and other renewable
energy technologies (Nordhaus, 2014; Pillai, 2015). It is therefore necessary to have a sufficiently
rich econometric modeling framework that can disentangle learning from other contemporaneous
determinants of cost. In this paper, we estimate cost functions for installed wind generating capacity
derived from an economic model of firm behavior in the U.S. wind energy industry. This approach
allows us to estimate firm-specific learning-by-doing, across-firm knowledge spillovers, the rate at
which experience depreciates, and the degrees to which experience is shareable and transferable
while controlling for the effects on wind project costs of scale economies, changing input prices, and
technical progress exogenous to the cumulative experience of wind project developers.

Using our estimated model, we find evidence consistent with internal firm-specific learning, but
not inter-firm spillovers. This firm-specific learning is found in a variety of model specifications,
with a doubling of a firm's own experience base estimated to decrease its cost to install a megawatt
(MW) of wind generating capacity by 1.3-1.6 percent, all other things being equal. Altogether, these
findings suggest that the cost-reducing benefits of experience in wind power project development are
fully captured by the entity that undertakes the projects, rather than by other industry participants.
These results suggest that the industry has matured beyond the point where firms receive cost-saving
knowledge following the completion of projects by others in the industry.

Beyond separating experience stocks into own- and other-firm experience, we find that it may also
be economically meaningful to allow for measures of experience stocks to depreciate, to weight local
projects higher than more distant projects, and to accommodate joint ventures. These findings
could in part explain why the largest U.S. wind power developers undertake new projects at fairly
regular intervals: they may seek to prevent or at least slow the erosion of competitive advantages
stemming from their comparatively large experience bases. At the same time, however, observing
a large number of fringe developers could be due to rapid depreciation of incumbents' experience
across time and space.

Finally, evidence regarding the degrees to which firm-specific experience can be shared and trans-
ferred is inconclusive but nonetheless informative. For example, the data cannot reject the hypothesis
   4 Baloff (1970) and Hirsch (1952) discuss how interruptions to production might adversely affect future productivity;

Barradale (2010) discusses how unpredictability concerning the federal renewable electricity production tax credit
(PTC) -- the single most important government incentive available to U.S. wind power projects--has caused such
interruptions in the U.S. wind energy industry.



                                                           3
that experience resulting from projects undertaken as joint ventures is equally as valuable as ex-
perience resulting from equivalent projects undertaken by just one firm. Likewise, the data cannot
reject the hypothesis that acquired experience--experience gained from a merger or acquisition--is
a perfect substitute for organic experience--a result borne out by the fact that most acquisitions
in the U.S. wind development business involve the purchase of an experienced incumbent by an
inexperienced entrant.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 discusses anecdotal evidence of learning-
by-doing in the design and construction of U.S. wind power projects, the growth of the U.S. wind
energy industry, and the policies in place to support wind and other renewables. Section 3 introduces
notation and discusses the unique dataset assembled for this paper. In section 4, we derive minimum
cost functions for installed wind generating capacity from an optimizing model of firm behavior in
the U.S. wind energy industry. In section 5, we discuss the estimation strategy and estimation
results. Section 6 concludes.



2     Learning mechanisms and policy in wind power installations

Figure 1 shows that average wind power project costs fell substantially in the United States from
the early 1980s to the early 2000s, and there is much anecdotal evidence that this was due in
part to learning-by-doing by wind power developers. As they accumulated design and construction
experience, developers became adept at identifying sites well-suited for wind power projects--not just
in terms of wind resource quality, but also proximity to transmission lines and other infrastructure.5
Likewise, developers learned to navigate the myriad federal, state, and local regulations that govern
the siting and construction of wind power projects.6 Developers learned to optimize the logistics of
transporting literally thousands of oversized cargo loads to remote project sites and the logistics of
managing complex construction operations: for instance, how best to build foundations in different
types of terrain, how to optimize large networks of access roads and electrical wiring, and even
how best to move equipment around a project site. Developers' experience designing and building
wind power projects also facilitated cost-reducing innovations upstream in the manufacturing of
wind turbines: one example is the advent of modular tower sections, which are not only cheaper to
manufacture but also to transport and install. Further anecdotal evidence of learning-by-doing in
the design and construction of U.S. wind power projects is provided in Appendix A1.

Such anecdotal evidence, however, is silent as to precisely whose accumulated design and construction
experience causes whose project completion costs to decrease. In other words, anecdotal evidence of
learning-by-doing in the wind development business does not specify whether learning occurs solely
within individual firms or whether learning spills over across rival firms. The cost reductions evident
in figure 1 are consistent with either type of learning; in spite of this ambiguity--which empirical
research has yet to resolve--the federal and state governments have enacted policies to promote wind
  5 Construction of new transmission infrastructure is an extremely time-consuming undertaking, especially for wind

power projects, which are often located in environmentally sensitive areas far from major electricity demand centers.
  6 At just the federal level, a developer may need to secure project permits from each of the Environmental Protection

Agency, Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission, Fish & Wildlife Service, and Army
Corps of Engineers.


                                                          4
                             Figure 1: Average U.S. wind power project costs




                                           Source: Wiser and Bolinger (2016).


and other renewables that are economically justifiable only in the case of learning-related positive
externalities.7

To further complicate matters, Figure 1 shows that for much of the 2000s average wind power project
costs actually increased in the United States. This is despite unprecedented investment in new wind
generating capacity--and hence potential for cost reductions due to learning-by-doing--facilitated
by federal and state incentives (see Figure 2).

The federal renewable electricity production tax credit (PTC) awards a tax credit for electricity
generated from eligible renewable resources. The PTC has been extended 10 times since 1999 (with
lapses in 2001, 2003, 2013 and 2014 retroactively applied to projects). The most recent extension set
the PTC at $24 per megawatt-hour of electrical energy generated by projects that were commenced
in 2016, with a 20, 40, 60 and 100% phase out scheduled for the next 4 years, estimated by the Joint
Committee on Taxation to cost $14.5 billion from 2016-2025.8 In addition to the PTC, renewables
portfolio standards (RPSs), state-level laws that require retailers of electricity to procure a certain
percentage of their annual electricity sales to final consumers from qualified renewable resources, also
effectively guarantee wind generators higher-than-market prices for their energy.9,10 Accordingly,
the primary goal of the present research is to investigate whether there is econometric evidence of
learning-related externalities in the post-2000 time period that might substantiate learning-by-doing
   7 To be sure: there are rationales for policies that support wind and other renewables in the United States be-

sides learning-by-doing (e.g. environmental externalities). However, this paper is concerned exclusively with whether
learning-by-doing ought to be one basis for such policies.
   8 See Sherlock (2017), which also contains a more detailed history of the PTC, including a discussion on the

exclusions when claiming other tax credits such as the Investment Tax Credit (ITC) or the Section 1603 grant, part
of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) passed in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis.
   9 In practice, for the PTC and RPSs, "eligible renewable resources" more often than not means wind, which has

accounted for the vast majority of additions to U.S. renewable generating capacity in each of year in our sample. See
Sherlock (2017) for a breakdown renewable energy additions by technology.
  10 Strictly speaking, the PTC and RPSs incentivize production of wind-generated electricity; however, there is

generally no excess wind generating capacity in the United States from which to squeeze additional output, so these
policies strongly incentivize investment in new wind generating capacity.



                                                         5
              Figure 2: Annual and cumulative growth in U.S. wind generating capacity




                                            Source: Wiser and Bolinger (2016).


as a basis for public support of investments in wind capacity in the United States, despite the overall
upward trend in the dollar per installed KW cost of U.S. wind power projects during this time period.



3     Data

According to the American Wind Energy Association (AWEA), 866 wind power projects had been
completed in the United States by the end of the year 2015. For the purpose of this analysis, each
project is classified by the following characteristics: the project's nameplate generating capacity, q ;
the state, s, city/region r, and coordinates l in which the project is situated; the developer(s), d, that
designed and built the project; and the year, T , in which the project was completed.11 Approximately
ten percent of the projects completed through 2015 were undertaken as joint ventures between two
or more developers, such that d, strictly speaking, is a set. For example, d = {BP,Clipper} for the
60 MW Silver Star wind farm in Texas, whereas d = {Iberdrola} for the 160 MW Barton wind farm
in Iowa. The U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) Form EIA-860 database identifies the
year-quarter, t, in which each project was completed (e.g. t = 2008:Q3 for Silver Star), and verifies
the accuracy of the AWEA data.

Project cost estimates were identified for 408 of the 717 projects completed between 2002 and
2015,12 and are from a variety of sources: Bloomberg New Energy Finance, business publications (in
particular, Project Finance, Power Finance & Risk, and Global Power Report), state public utilities
commissions' filings and testimony, corporate press releases, national and regional newspapers, and
personal correspondence with wind power developers. A project's total completion cost, C , is the
sum of its development, equipment purchase, and construction costs. Development costs include the
  11 All characteristics are made available by the AWEA with the exception of r . r is the geographically closest

reference city in the RSMeans building construction cost data to a project within the same state.
  12 717 of the 866 projects were cross-validated in the EIA-860 database. Few project costs were found prior to 2002.




                                                          6
                         Table 1: Project-level data variables and definitions

                           Variable                Definition
                              q       Nameplate generating capacity (MW)
                              s       State
                              r       City/region
                              l       Latitude/longitude
                              d       Developer(s)
                              T       Year of completion
                              t       Quarter of completion
                              C       Total completion cost ($M)


costs of measuring and assessing the wind resource at a candidate project site, acquiring land usage
rights, and completing environmental impact assessments. Equipment purchase costs are the costs
of procuring the materials necessary to construct the wind power project, such as turbines, towers,
and wires. Construction costs are the costs of erecting the wind turbines and connecting them and
their attendant equipment to the electrical grid.

Table 1 summarizes the key project-level variables used throughout this paper. Appendix A2 presents
annual summary statistics, while appendix A3 examines heterogeneity across developers in terms of
number of projects completed, frequency with which projects are undertaken, market shares, and
costs. Because reliable cost estimates could not be identified for all 717 projects completed from 2002
to 2015, appendix A4 makes a case that instances of missing cost data is unrelated to observable
characteristics of the project.



4    Model

Econometric estimation of learning-by-doing is challenging for two main reasons: first, it is necessary
to define experience and explain how and to whom it accumulates, and second, it is necessary to
account for other determinants of cost besides accumulated experience. Section 4.1 develops a frame-
work for quantifying experience in the U.S. wind development business that: (i) allows for alternative
definitions of experience; (ii) differentiates between experience internal and external to firms; (iii)
allows experience to depreciate over time; (iv) allows projects contributed nearer a planned site to
contribute greater experience than projects completed further away; and (v) allows experience to
accumulate through joint ventures and acquisitions. Section 4.2 derives a minimum cost function for
installed wind generating capacity that integrates the experience measures into a coherent economet-
ric model. This model estimates firm-specific learning-by-doing, inter-firm knowledge spillovers, the
rate at which experience depreciates, a multiplier for the experience value of geographically distant
projects, and the degrees to which experience is shareable and transferable while controlling for the
effects on costs of scale economies, changing input prices, and exogenous technical progress.




                                                  7
4.1     Quantifying experience

This section constructs variables Qli ,di ,ti and Qli ,-di ,ti that quantify two distinct stocks of accumu-
lated experience available to the developer(s) of wind power project i at the time of the project's
undertaking. The former quantifies experience internal to firm(s) di , i.e. experience useful to di that
is the result of di 's own design and construction activity. This measure will be used to estimate
firm-specific learning-by-doing. The latter quantifies experience external to di , i.e. experience useful
to di that is the result of di 's competitors' design and construction activity, and will be used to
estimate inter-firm knowledge spillovers.13 Experience is typically measured in terms of cumulative
past output, and here we consider two different measures of output for U.S. wind power developers:
megawatts of installed wind generating capacity and number of installed wind power projects. If
learning is thought to be proportional to project size, then megawatts of installed capacity is ar-
guably the better measure of output: a 100 MW project counts twice as much as a 50 MW project.
On the other hand, if learning is thought to be invariant to project size, then number of installed
projects is arguably the better measure of output: two 50 MW projects count twice as much as
one 100 MW project. The remainder of this section assumes megawatts of installed capacity is the
measure of output; the exposition is analogous, however, for the case where number of installed
projects is the measure of output (each occurrence of q is replaced with 1).

As a first step, define firm d's organic experience at time t relating to project i as:

                            QO
                             li ,d,t =         qj · |dj | · Mi,j · 1 {d  dj } · 1 {tj < t}                    (1)
                                         j J


where J is the set of all U.S. wind power projects completed through 2015, |dj | is the cardinality of
the set dj (i.e. the number of firms that developed project j --in most cases just one) and Mi,j is
a multiplier that depreciates the experience gained from project j depending on its applicability to
project i. The indicator functions ensure experience is only counted for projects completed before
the current project and that included firm d. Mi,j takes the form:

                                                  tj -1
                        Mli ,d,t = (1 - own )             · (1 - own · 1{dist(li , lj ) > 100})               (2)

where dist(li , lj ) the distance between project i and j . own measures the quarterly rate of de-
preciation of experience, such that all other things being equal, capacity installed in the distant
past counts less towards experience than does capacity installed in the recent past. Modeling this
feature is in keeping with recent work on organizational forgetting--the hypothesis that production
experience depreciates over time--in settings as diverse as aircraft manufacturing (Benkard, 2000),
oil drilling (Kellogg, 2011), shipbuilding (Argote et al., 1990; Thompson, 2007), and wind power
production (Nemet, 2012). That experience accumulated by U.S. wind power developers should
depreciate seems plausible for at least two reasons. First, wind turbine technology has evolved con-
siderably (see figures A4 and A5) and experience with antiquated technology may not be as useful
as experience with state-of-the-art technology. Second, the U.S. wind energy industry has endured
  13 This approach to identifying and estimating jointly firm-specific learning-by-doing and inter-firm knowledge

spillovers (i.e. by quantifying separately the accumulated experience of each individual firm) was made popular by
Irwin and Klenow (1994) and has since been employed by Kellogg (2011) and Nemet (2012), among others.



                                                              8
several boom-bust cycles on account of the pattern of repeated expiration and short-term renewal
of the PTC (Barradale, 2010).

Periods of actual or anticipated unavailability of the PTC tend to result in significant labor force
turnover--one of the most recognized explanations in the literature for organizational forgetting.14
Related to the depreciation over time, own captures a depreciation of experience over distance,
equaling the discounted value of experience obtained from a project greater than 100 miles away
from i's location. This feature is intended to capture any extra relevance prior work in a local
area may have toward a particular project, such as a connection to local contractors or a better
understanding of the local physical and business environment.

Approximately ten percent of all wind power projects completed in the United States through
2015 were undertaken as joint ventures between two or more firms; accordingly, the  parameters
in equation (1) allow a project's relative contribution to developer d's organic experience base to
depend on the number of co-developers. No project in the sample has more than three co-developers,
i.e. |dj |  {1, 2, 3} for all j  J . 1 is normalized to = 1 such that capacity completed by a single
firm is the numeraire against measuring the capacity completed by joint ventures between two or
three firms. This specification allows testing hypotheses about the manner in which firms share
experience. For instance, if 2 = 3 = 1, each partner in a joint venture is credited with having
installed the total capacity of the project; alternatively, if 2 = 1/2 and 3 = 1/3, each partner is
credited with having installed an equal proportion of the project's total capacity.

In addition to growing their experience bases organically as described by equation (1), it seems
plausible that firms can accumulate experience by purchasing competitors. Table 2 reports eleven
major acquisitions in the U.S. wind development business through 2015; notably, nine of these
acquisitions involved the purchase of an experienced incumbent by an inexperienced entrant.15 We
might therefore define firm d's acquired experience at time t relevant to project i as follows:

                                             QA
                                              li ,d,t = µ ·     QO
                                                                 li ,d ,t                                         (3)
                                                         d a(d,t)


where a (d, t) is the set of all firms acquired by d as of time t. Organic experience transfers from d
to d--that is, from first to second owner--at rate µ. If µ = 1, for instance, then acquired experience
is a perfect substitute for a firm's own organic experience. Table 2, however, shows two instances
in which an acquiring firm later found itself the target of an acquisition (Enron in 2002 and PPM
in 2007). Accordingly, equation (3) is generalized to allow for the possibility that experience can
change owners twice:                                                              

                                 QA
                                  li ,d,t = µ ·
                                                     QO
                                                      li ,d ,t + µ ·        QO
                                                                             li ,d ,t
                                                                                                                  (4)
                                            d a(d,t)                d a(d ,t)

  14 Leading up to the scheduled expiration of the PTC on Dec. 31, 2012, the New York Times ran headlines such

as "An Expiring Tax Credit Threatens the Wind Power Industry" (Sept. 13, 2012), and "Tax Credit in Doubt, Wind
Power Industry Is Withering" (Sept. 20, 2012). The PTC was ultimately extended, however, as part of the Jan. 1,
2013 federal legislation to avert the so-called "fiscal cliff".
  15 According to a Nov. 1, 2008 article in Windpower Monthly magazine, new entrants to the U.S. wind development

business may need six or more months to get their bearings; acquiring an incumbent could be a means of short-
circuiting this process. Indeed, an executive at one of the acquiring firms listed in table 2 explained to us that the
target firm's experience in the U.S. wind development business was an important motivation behind the acquisition.


                                                          9
                    Table 2: Major acquisitions in the U.S. wind development business

                                                                                         Acquisition
                      Date             Acquired Firm         Acquiring Firm
                                                                                         Marks Entry
                    1997:Q1                Zond                  Enron                      Yes
                    2002:Q2                Enron                  GE                        Yes
                    2003:Q1               Navitas               Gamesa                       No
                    2005:Q1               Atlantic               PPM                         No
                    2005:Q1               SeaWest                 AES                       Yes
                    2006:Q1              PacifiCorp           MidAmerican                   Yes
                    2006:Q3               Padoma                 NRG                        Yes
                    2006:Q4                Orion                  BP                        Yes
                    2007:Q2                PPM                 Iberdrola                    Yes
                    2008:Q3              Catamount               Duke                       Yes
                    2014:Q4              SunEdison               First                      Yes


In equation (4), organic experience transfers from d to d--that is, from first to third owner--at
rate µ2 .

Firm d's total accumulated experience at time t relevant to project i is just the sum of its organic
experience and its acquired experience:

                                                Qli ,d,t = QO          A
                                                            li ,d,t + Qli ,d,t                               (5)

Then, for a given wind power project i, an adjustment for the amount of developers on the project
is required. The stock of accumulated experience that is internal to developer(s) di at the time of
the project's undertaking, ti , is:

                                Qli ,di ,ti (own , own , 2 , 3 , µ) = |di | ·          Qli ,d,ti             (6)
                                                                                 ddi


where Qli ,di ,ti is dependent on the parameters own , own , 2 , 3 , and µ. Notice that if project i has
just one developer (i.e. |di | = 1) then (6) reduces to (5). If, on the other hand, project i is a joint
venture between two or three developers (i.e. |di | > 1) then the interpretation of (6) hinges on the
 parameters. If |di | = 1 then Qdi ,ti is the sum of the joint venture partners' individual experience
bases, as given by (5); alternatively, if |di | = 1/|di | then Qdi ,ti is the mean of the partners' individual
experience bases.

Finally, for a given project i, the stock of accumulated experience that is external to developer(s)
di at time ti is:

                                            
  Qli ,-di ,ti (oth , oth ) =         qj · Mi,j · 1 {dj  di = } · 1 {tj < ti } · 1 {dj  a (d, ti ) =  d  di } (7)
                                j J

            
where Mi,j is a multiplier that depreciates the experience gained from project j depending on
its applicability to project i. The indicator functions ensure experience is only counted for projects
completed before the current project and that did not include any firm in di (or a firm later acquired



                                                             10
                      
by these firms). Mi,j takes the form:

                                                     t- t j - 1
                         Mi,j =         (1 - oth )                · (1 - oth .1{dist(li , lj ) > 100})             (8)
                                  j J


Via this multiplier, Qli ,-di ,ti is dependent on the parameters oth and oth that depreciate experience
over time and distance.

For concreteness, appendix A5 presents simple numerical examples of the computation of variables
Qli ,di ,ti and Qli ,-di ,ti for cases that include joint ventures and acquisitions.



4.2     Technology and behavior

The production function for installed wind generating capacity is assumed to be Cobb-Douglas:

                                                                                     NZ
                                                                                            h
                                        qi = f (z, Ali ,di ,ti ) = Ali ,di ,ti             zh                      (9)
                                                                                     h=1


where z contains factor inputs Ki , Li , Ei , and Mi which are, the quantities of capital, labor, energy,
and materials used in installing project i, and Ali ,di ,ti is total factor productivity of the developer(s)
of project i at the time of the project's undertaking. Given the Cobb-Douglas functional form,
        NZ
 =      h=1 h measures returns to scale in the design and construction of wind power projects.
Further, assume the following functional form for total factor productivity:16

                    Ali ,di ,ti =[Qli ,di ,ti (own , own , 2 , 3 , µ)] [Qli ,-di ,ti (oth , oth )] .
                                                                      1
                                exp T
                                    Ti
                                      FP   TFP
                                         + S   +                                    T
                                                                                    d
                                                                                      FP   TFP
                                                                                         + m   + T
                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                   FP
                                                                                                                  (10)
                                             i
                                                                    | di |                   i
                                                                             d di


In equation (10), the parameter  measures the extent to which productivity is enhanced by the
stock of accumulated experience that is internal to developer(s) di (i.e. learning-by-doing), whereas
the parameter  measures the extent to which productivity is enhanced by the stock of accumulated
experience that is external to di (i.e. knowledge spillovers). A fixed effect for the year in which
project i was completed provides a means of controlling for technological advancements that, while
exogenous to U.S. wind power developers, might nonetheless affect the costs of designing and building
wind power projects. Likewise, a fixed effect for the state in which project i is situated provides
a means of controlling for different policy environments that, all other things being equal, make
the designing and building of wind power projects more costly in some states than in others.17
Fixed effects for the developers constructing project i (weighted by the number of developers on the
          1            TFP
project) |d i|  d  d i d   controls for any permanent, firm-level cost advantages in the designing and
  16 Equation (10) is based on Irwin and Klenow (1994), who use a similar specification in their study of learning-by-
doing and knowledge spillovers in the semiconductor industry. The key differences are: (i) the experience variables in
equation (10) are functions of unknown parameters ( , , 2 , 3 , and µ); and (ii) equation (10) includes deterministic
terms (year, state, firm and manufacturer fixed effects) in addition to a stochastic term.
  17 Wiser and Bolinger (2012) present evidence that average wind power project costs in the United States vary by

region. In particular, states in the interior of the country--the so-called "Wind Belt"--tend to have the lowest costs,
whereas states in New England tend to have the highest costs.


                                                                   11
                Table 3: Assumed temporal and geographical variation in input prices


      Input                 Price                                             Description

    Capital      pK i =  K
                         Ti + pC,Ti ,ri           Completion-year FE, crane rental prices

    Labor        pLi = pL,ti ,si                  Average construction wage in quarter ti in state si

    Energy       pEi = pE,ti ,si                  Average refined gasoline price in quarter ti in state si

    Materials    pM i =  M      M     M
                         T i +  s i + m i         Completion-year, state and manufacturer FE


                                                                    TFP
building of wind power projects. Turbine manufacturer fixed effects m i
                                                                        allow for the design aspects
of different turbine brands to allow for differential productivity multipliers. Finally, total factor
productivity depends on a mean-zero, project-specific productivity shock, T
                                                                          i
                                                                            FP
                                                                               , the realization of
which is observed by developer(s) di once work on project i is underway, but unobserved by the
econometrician.

Our model assumes profit-maximizing wind power developers that minimize the total cost of com-
pleting wind power projects of predetermined capacities given prevailing input prices. Virtually all
of the firms in the U.S. wind development business are publicly traded and, as such, have fiduciary
obligations to maximize returns to their shareholders. Because virtually all projects are financed
through power purchase agreements (PPAs) that set the project's future revenue stream independent
of its construction cost, this logic implies a profit-maximizing developer would like to minimize the
cost of building the project.18 It also seems probable that other firms in the business will have to
minimize costs in order to compete with the publicly-traded firms.

In the United States, developers generally build wind power projects to the specifications of other
entities, typically the ultimate owner or operator of the project. Consequently, the sizes of U.S.
wind power projects can be thought of as predetermined to the developers that build them. Finally,
the prices of the inputs to the production function (9) are set in large markets in which wind power
developers are relatively small actors. As such, these prices can be taken as exogenous to the input
choice decisions of individual developers. Altogether, these assumptions lead to the following cost
minimization problem for each wind power project i:




                                   min z.pi s.t qi  f (z, Ali ,di ,ti )
                                     z
                                                                                            1
                                                                              NZ            
                                                                    qi
                             C (qi , Adi ,ti ,Si ) = ()                             p h
                                                                                     h,ri                (11)
                                                                Adi ,ti ,Si
                                                                              h=1



                NZ
Where  =        h=1   h .
  18 Renewable PPAs typically pay a fixed price per KWh of energy produced by the project over the life of the

agreement.




                                                          12
Table 3 summarizes the assumptions made about temporal and geographical variation in input prices
for purposes of solving the cost minimization problem (11). The prices of capital are assumed to
vary only over time. This variation is captured with regional crane rental prices and completion-
year fixed effects, sourced from the annual volumes of RSMeans building construction cost data.19
Variation in materials prices across projects are captured in completion-year and state fixed effects.
Labor and energy prices are assumed to vary by year and by state, with construction wage data
sourced from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and refined gasoline spot price data sourced
from the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA).

Under the stated assumptions concerning variation in input prices, the solution to (11) yields the
following econometric model:

                            C                  L                  E
                  logCi =     logpC,Ti ,ri +       logpL,ti ,si +   logpE,ti ,si
                                                                  
                              1                                          
                            + qi - Qdi ,ti (own , own , 2 , 3 , µ) - Q-di ,ti (oth , oth )
                                                                         
                                              1
                            +  T i + Si +               d + m i +  i                                               (12)
                                            | di |
                                                   d di



The fixed effects Ti , si and mi in equation (12) now reflect both variation in input prices and
(exogenous) variation in total factor productivity. Consequently, it is not possible to separately
identify the effects on project costs of certain input prices, exogenous technical progress, and time-
invariant state characteristics. More importantly for purposes of this paper, it is possible to identify
from equation (12) firm-specific learning-by-doing, inter-firm knowledge spillovers, the rate at which
experience depreciates, the transmission of experience over geographic distance and the degrees to
which experience is shareable and transferable while controlling for the effects on cost of changing
input prices, project scale, and technical progress exogenous to wind power developers. The goal of
the next section is to estimate the parameters of equation (12).



5     Estimation

5.1     Estimation strategy

The assumption that capacity qi is predetermined when developer(s) di undertakes project i means
qi and i are uncorrelated in the cost function (12), such that the parameters in (12) are consistently
estimated by a least squares estimation procedure. This assumption is in keeping with the manner
in which most wind power projects are completed in the United States. Before construction of a
wind power project begins, the project's owner (an IPP, for instance) typically negotiates a long-
term, fixed-price power purchase agreement (PPA) with an electricity retailer; the revenue stream
guaranteed by this PPA allows the owner to secure financing for the project from a commercial
  19 Each project is matched to a city in the RSMeans construction cost data. The Monthly tower crane rental static

tower 130' high 106' jib 6300 pound capacity cost is multiplied by the city's multiplier for the year before the project
was completed.


                                                          13
or investment bank.20 The owner then hires a wind power developer to design and construct the
project with sufficient generating capacity for the owner to meet its contractual obligations to the
retailer. In preparation for construction of the project, orders are placed for the necessary wind
turbines and their attendant equipment. The revelation at this point that the project will be either
more or less costly to complete than anticipated has no bearing on the quantity of capacity the
developer must install: the owner still requires the previously decided-upon quantity of capacity to
fulfill its PPA obligations, and it may be costly to the developer to cancel or alter an outstanding
order for wind turbines. So, the productivity shock i affects the completion costs of project i, and
hence the profits of developer(s) di , but does not affect the capacity qi of project i, i.e. qi and i are
uncorrelated in equation (12).

The explicit mechanism by which a given wind power project i is "assigned" to developer(s) di is not
modeled, rather, it is implicitly assumed that the set di is determined exogenously. One could argue,
therefore, that it is not the case that a firm has low costs because it has accumulated experience--the
relationship posited by the cost function (12)--but instead that a firm has accumulated experience
precisely because it has low costs (for reasons that the econometrician does not observe). However,
as outlined in appendix A3 (as part of a broader investigation of heterogeneity among U.S. wind
power developers), the evidence is not indicative of any low-cost firm or firms capturing more and
more of the U.S. wind development business over time.

In the following section, a nonlinear least squares (NLS) procedure is used to estimate the parameters
of the cost function (12). Write equation (12) compactly as follows:


                                             log Ci = h (xi ,  ) + i                                          (13)
                                                                                      
where  = C , L , G , , , , own , oth , own , oth , 2 , 3 , µ,  ,   ,  ,                  is the vector of param-
eters -- including 13 year, 30 state, 130 firm and 18 turbine manufacturer fixed effects -- to be
jointly estimated and xi is the data used to construct the ith observation.  is the value of  that
minimizes the sum of the squared residuals:


                                                   N
                                                                                2
                                      SSR ( ) =         [log Ci - h (xi ,  )]                                 (14)
                                                  i=1

Given that the gradient  SSR ( )/   can be computed analytically, a quasi-Newton algorithm is
used to search for a solution to the above minimization problem, subject to fixed bounds on the
parameters.21

Let X be the matrix with ith row h xi ,  /   . A heteroskedasticity-consistent estimate of the
covariance matrix of  is used in inference and is defined as:22
                                                         -1                     -1
                                   Var  = X X                 X  X X X                                        (15)
  20 Barradale (2010), for instance, shows that long-term PPAs were the dominant offtake arrangement for U.S. wind

power projects completed in the 2000s.
  21 Economically sensible restrictions are put on the parameters, such as depreciation rates being bounded between

zero and one.
  22 See, for instance, chapter 16 of Davidson and MacKinnon (1993).




                                                         14
where
                                               = diag (1 , . . . , N )                                             (16)

and
                                               N                              2
                                        i =        log Ci - h xi ,                                                 (17)
                                              N -k
N is the number of observations on equation (13), and k is the number of parameters estimated (i.e.
k = dim ( )).



5.2     Estimation results

Table 4 presents the results of NLS estimation of the cost function (12) for the case where megawatts
of installed wind generating capacity is the measure of cumulative output (measure 1); table 5 does
likewise for the case where number of installed wind power projects is the measure of cumulative
output (measure 2). For each of experience measure 1 and 2, six models are estimated. We report
these 12 specifications to examine if under any parameter restrictions we can identify evidence
consistent with learning-based spillovers. The first three model variants do not allow depreciation
rates for own-firm and other-firm projects to differ (own = oth ). Model I further restricts the
parameters by not allowing project distances to enter the model ( = 0), model II does not allow
distance multipliers to differ for own- and other- firm projects (own = oth ), whereas model III does
not impose this restriction. Models IV-VI follow models I-III, with the restriction that (own = oth )
relaxed. Model VI is the unconstrained model detailed in section 4. The price and scale estimates
will be discussed briefly before a more in depth discussion of the experience function and multiplier
results.



5.2.1    Price and scale estimates


Point estimates of the scale parameter  range from 0.991 to 0.996, suggesting there are small
diseconomies of scale in the construction of wind generating capacity in the United States. For
all model variants, however, the hypothesis  = 1, constant returns to scale, cannot be rejected.
Similarly, Wiser and Bolinger (2012) present evidence of weak returns to scale among small U.S.
wind power projects (i.e. less than 20 MW) and constant returns to scale among larger projects.

Estimates for the input price coefficients , i.e. the parameters in the Cobb-Douglas production
function (9) associated with those inputs whose prices are explicitly modeled in (12), are not detected
to enter the model.23 Although we expect project costs to vary with these input prices, it may be
that the model has difficulty identifying such relationships due to the inclusion of the year, state,
firm and turbine manufacturer fixed effects. Joint tests under the null that each set of fixed effects
do not enter each model are rejected at a 5% level of significance.
  23 In the canonical Cobb-Douglas production function f =           i
                                                                 i xi , the fraction i / j j has the interpretation of
the share of total production costs that are attributable to input xi . This interpretation does not hold in the present
setting because of the use of fixed effects in equation (12) to model variation in the prices of certain inputs.




                                                          15
Table 4: NLS estimation results for cost function (12) (output measure 1: megawatts of installed
capacity)

                                                I         II       III       IV         V        VI
 Crane rental price                 C         0.045     0.042     0.039    -0.002    -0.005     0.000
                                            (0.089)   (0.091)   (0.090)   (0.084)   (0.085)   (0.084)
 Labor price                        L         0.050     0.072     0.069     0.087     0.074     0.076
                                            (0.172)   (0.182)   (0.181)   (0.175)   (0.178)   (0.177)
 Gasoline price                     G        -0.019    -0.008    -0.011    -0.030    -0.012    -0.032
                                            (0.080)   (0.080)   (0.080)   (0.078)   (0.079)   (0.078)
 Scale                                        0.993     0.992     0.992     0.995     0.991     0.993
                                            (0.019)   (0.019)   (0.019)   (0.019)   (0.018)   (0.019)
 Own experience multiplier                    0.021     0.024     0.023     0.019     0.024     0.019
                                            (0.009)   (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.009)   (0.010)   (0.009)
 Other experience multiplier                  0.088     0.117     0.111     0.030     0.028     0.033
                                            (0.074)   (0.104)   (0.096)   (0.018)   (0.017)   (0.018)
 Depreciation                                 0.418     0.318     0.339
                                            (0.211)   (0.190)   (0.196)
 Depreciation (own exp.)            own                                    0.470     0.162     0.458
                                                                          (0.263)   (0.214)   (0.262)
 Depreciation (other exp.)          oth                                    1.000     1.000     1.000
                                                                            (.)       (.)       (.)
 Distance multiplier                                   0.684                         0.925
                                                       (0.29)                       (0.092)
 Distance multiplier (own exp.)     own                          0.488                         0.000
                                                                (1.106)                         (.)
 Distance multiplier (other exp.)   oth                          0.707                         0.839
                                                                (0.311)                       (0.283)
 2-firm multiplier                  2        0.500     0.500     0.500     0.500     0.500     0.500
 3-firm multiplier                  3        0.333     0.333     0.333     0.333     0.333     0.333
 Merger multiplier                  µ        1.000     1.000     1.000     1.000     1.000     1.000
Each model contains year, state, firm and manufacturer fixed effects. Each model has 408 projects
used in estimation. Models I and IV fix  = 0. When standard errors are not reported, a corner so-
lution was obtained, and the standard errors for the remaining coefficients are constructed assuming
that the corner solution coefficient is a fixed constant. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors
are reported in parentheses.




                                                 16
Table 5: NLS estimation results for cost function (12) (output measure 2: number of installed
projects)

                                                I         II       III       IV         V        VI
 Crane rental price                 C         0.099     0.100     0.103     0.087     0.104     0.116
                                            (0.104)   (0.105)   (0.103)   (0.105)   (0.107)   (0.103)
 Labor price                        L        -0.077    -0.132    -0.104    -0.096    -0.138    -0.157
                                            (0.196)   (0.207)   (0.202)   (0.205)   (0.209)   (0.203)
 Gasoline price                     G        -0.057    -0.066    -0.058    -0.074    -0.063    -0.079
                                            (0.083)   (0.081)   (0.082)   (0.081)   (0.082)   (0.081)
 Scale                                        0.995     0.993     0.994     0.996     0.995     0.996
                                            (0.019)   (0.019)   (0.019)   (0.019)   (0.019)   (0.019)
 Own experience multiplier                    0.062     0.035     0.058     0.062     0.076     0.063
                                            (0.040)   (0.069)   (0.040)   (0.038)   (0.053)   (0.039)
 Other experience multiplier                  0.177     0.115     0.209     0.091     0.125     0.136
                                            (0.133)   (0.063)   (0.135)   (0.052)   (0.066)   (0.071)
 Depreciation                                 0.432     0.876     0.433
                                            (0.196)   (0.339)   (0.206)
 Depreciation (own exp.)            own                                    0.250     0.130     0.234
                                                                          (0.240)   (0.196)   (0.230)
 Depreciation (other exp.)          oth                                    0.941     0.856     0.821
                                                                          (0.321)   (0.341)   (0.342)
 Distance multiplier                                   0.649                         0.656
                                                      (0.336)                       (0.253)
 Distance multiplier (own exp.)     own                          0.000                         0.000
                                                                  (.)                           (.)
 Distance multiplier (other exp.)   oth                          0.707                         0.699
                                                                (0.221)                       (0.250)
 2-firm multiplier                  2        0.500     0.500     0.500     0.500     0.500     0.500
 3-firm multiplier                  3        0.333     0.333     0.333     0.333     0.333     0.333
 Merger multiplier                  µ        1.000     1.000     1.000     1.000     1.000     1.000
Each model contains year, state, firm and manufacturer fixed effects. Each model has 408 projects
used in estimation. Models I and IV fix  = 0. When standard errors are not reported, a corner so-
lution was obtained, and the standard errors for the remaining coefficients are constructed assuming
that the corner solution coefficient is a fixed constant. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors
are reported in parentheses.




                                                 17
5.2.2     Internal and external experience multiplier estimates


No solution to the model could be identified when allowing the joint-venture and acquisition parame-
ters (2 , 3 , µ) to be freely estimated. An earlier version of this paper using data up to 2009 failed to
                                  1 1
reject tests that (2 , 3 , µ) = ( 2 , 3 , 1), implying that there are no scale benefits from joint ventures
or mergers.24 Therefore, each model is estimated with this restriction. Lagrange multiplier tests of
the models estimated with these restrictions fail to reject the assertion that (2 , 3 , µ) = ( 1   1
                                                                                               2 , 3 , 1).
                                                                                                          25

Therefore, there is no statistical evidence against the null hypothesis that experience is averaged
over the firms in a joint venture.

Point estimates of  (relating to a firm's internal experience) are positive and precisely estimated
for the model using the cumulative MW measure of experience. Point estimates of  (relating
to external experience), on the other hand, are imprecisely estimated and it can not be rejected
that  = 0 for tests at a 5% level of significance for any model or experience measure. Thus, the
evidence is consistent with firm-specific learning-by-doing, but we find no evidence to support the
presence of inter-firm knowledge spillovers.26 Note that from equation (12) that the elasticity of
cost with respect to firm-specific experience is -/ . Estimates of this elasticity range from -0.019
to -0.024 in the case of the cumulative MW experience. All other things equal, then, doubling a
firm's experience base decreases its per-megawatt costs of installed wind generating capacity by
1.3-1.6 percent.27 The most optimistic point estimate for knowledge spillovers is in table 4 model
II, where doubling the experience stock of other firms is predicted to lower its per-megawatt costs of
installed wind generating capacity by 8.5 percent. However, in practice, given the much larger stock
of other firm experience relative to own firm experience, the predicted cost multiplier reductions
from adding an additional project are mostly localized to the firm undergoing the project. Using
the estimates from model II, figure 3 displays the change in the cost multiplier from adding 50MW
of depreciated experience to either the own- or other- firm experience measures, Qdi ,ti (, , 2 , 3 , µ)
and Q-di ,ti (, ) for every project used in the analysis. Here we see that for firms with limited
within-firm experience, an additional 50MW of within-firm experience is predicted to drop their
project costs by up to 9 percent. However, the impact of adding the same 50MW of experience to
the stock of other-firm experience does not reduce costs by any economically meaningful amount,
particularly post-2006.

Our estimation method has attempted to address the critique of many prior attempts to estimate in-
dustry cost reductions from accumulated experience that experience is correlated with time and com-
mon measures of industry experience can confound other time varying trends. The inclusion of input
cost drivers and year-of-sample effects means that the measure of external experience (Qli ,-di ,ti ) is
  24 See Anderson (2013). The model estimated in that paper did not include firm and manufacturer fixed effects and

did not allow for parameters in the experience function to vary between own- and other-firm experience.
  25 In the notation from the previous section, the moment conditions for the full model (VI) are evaluated at the

restricted model estimates to form L = X ~~. N.L .V -1 .L  2                                           1 1
                                                                3 under the null that (2 , 3 , µ) = ( 2 , 3 , 1). Estimating
V as either the variance of the moments (S ), the numerical derivative of the moments (H , the Hessian of the objective
function) or HS -1 H returns score statistics of 0.09, 0.2 and 1.8, less than the 5% critical value of 7.82.
  26 This adds to the mixed evidence found in other studies of knowledge spillovers in electricity generation technologies:

Joskow and Rose (1985) and Pillai (2015) do not find evidence of spillovers in the construction of coal power plants
or solar panels, while Nemet (2012) and Zimmerman (1982) do find evidence of spillovers in the operation of wind
power plants and the construction of nuclear power plants, respectively.
  27 The percentage change in per-megawatt cost from doubling a firm's experience base is 100 × 2-/ - 1 .




                                                            18
                  Figure 3: Cost function multiplier from adding 50MW of experience




                                            (a) Projects completed 2002-2006




                                            (b) Projects completed 2007-2015

Figures plot the predicted cost multiplier from of adding 50MW of experience to either own- or other firm experience.
                                                 (Qd ,t (,,2 ,3 ,µ)+50)
                                                    i i
The scatter plot for own firm experience plots     Qd ,t (,,2 ,3 ,µ)
                                                                          against Qdi ,ti (, , 2 , 3 , µ). The scatter plot
                                                      i   i
                                   (Q-d ,t (,)+50)
                                       i i
for other firm experience plots      Q-d ,t (,)
                                                     against Q-di ,ti (, ). All values calculated at parameter estimates
                                        i   i
reported in model II in table 4.



unlikely to be confounded with changes in input costs or Hicks neutral technical change. However,
a practical consequence of controlling for these important cost drivers is the identifying variation
of other firm experience stocks will diminish. In our case, variation in the measure of other firm
experience that can identify knowledge spillovers must come from changes in the stock within a


                                                              19
year (experience measures are re-calculated quarterly), across firms (more experienced firms have
lower levels of other firm experience), and across locations (projects in locations close to where prior
projects occurred will have greater other firm experience stocks than more isolated projects).

Figure 4 displays the estimated values of own- and other- experience stocks for every project in the
sample. We see a large amount of variation in firm experience for all years of the sample due to
the many firms that are observed to participate in the market. However, for other firm experience
we also see substantial variation across projects, with the time path increasing from 2005-2009, and
then the slowdown of completed projects in 2010 and the estimated depreciation rates of experience
resulting in this stock flattening from 2010-2015.

               Figure 4: Experience stocks for all projects included in sample, 2002-2015




        (a) Own firm(s) experience on project                      (b) Other firms' experience on project

 Own firm experience plots the value of log (Qdi ,ti (, , 2 , 3 , µ)) for each project i in the sample, and other firm
experience plots the value of log (Q-di ,ti (, )) using the parameter estimates of model II in table 4.




5.2.3    Time and distance depreciation experience multipliers


Point estimates for the rate of depreciation of experience are in general quite large, and less pre-
cise for the models with less parameter restrictions. In model I of the MW experience measure,
fixing distance multipliers to zero and imposing that depreciation factors for own- and other- firm
experience equal detects a non-zero discount rate with a point estimate of 0.418. This translates to
just 11 percent of a firm's accumulated experience persisting after one full year of inactivity. For
comparison, estimates elsewhere in the literature of the percentage of experience that persists after
one year include: 51-61 percent in aircraft manufacturing (Benkard, 2000), 40 percent in oil drilling
(Kellogg, 2011), 5-65 percent in shipbuilding (Argote et al., 1990; Thompson, 2007), and 3 percent
in wind power production (Nemet, 2012). When allowing the separation of depreciation rates for
own- and other- firm experience, the model does not identify an interior solution for other- firm
experience, estimating full depreciation after one quarter. This further highlights that even if ex-
ternal knowledge spillovers occurred, they are not found to persist. The apparent speed with which
wind power developers' experience depreciates is perhaps surprising; it is understandable, however,
if one appreciates how disruptive the unpredictability of the PTC has been to the U.S. wind energy


                                                         20
industry. Although employment data are not readily available, there is little disagreement among
industry observers that actual or anticipated unavailability of the PTC renders many wind power
projects unprofitable and leads to labor force downsizing at all levels of the industry -- project
development included.28 Wind power developers employ engineers, lawyers, scientists, logisticians,
and transportation and construction supervisors, all of whom develop knowledge over time that is
specialized (to some extent or another) to the wind power industry (Hamilton and Liming, 2010).
Consequently, if developers cannot make long-term commitments to their workers (e.g. because of
PTC uncertainty), then specialized knowledge will be lost during industry downturns and replaced
only slowly during industry upturns.29

Point estimates of , the discount applied to the experience gained from distant projects, is detected
to be non-zero under some specifications of the experience function. In model II of the MW expe-
rience model, previous projects built more than 100 miles away from a site are estimated to have
68.4 percent less experience value than an equivalent project within 100 miles of the site. However,
when allowing this multiplier to differ for own- and other- firm projects, distance is found to have no
impact on experience from internal projects but to reduce experience from external projects. There-
fore, the estimates are consistent with firms gaining equal experience for all projects regardless of
location, but that only local projects from competitor firms could possibly enter their experience
stock, and even then the cost multiplier might not be affected given the values of  estimated in the
model. Ultimately, the time and depreciation results reinforces that any cost-reducing knowledge
arising from the design and construction of wind power projects, slight as it may be, appear to
remain entirely within the firm.

The depreciation and distance multiplier findings could in part explain why the largest U.S. wind
power developers undertake new projects at fairly regular intervals. Table A2 in appendix A3 shows
that from the 2005 to 2009 industry growth period where the model detects a large increase in the
stock of industry experience, the average spell of inactivity among large developers lasted just two
quarters; it is possible these developers seek to prevent or at least slow the erosion of competitive
advantages stemming from their comparatively large experience bases. At the same time, however,
the finding that experience depreciates rather quickly and over distance could explain why fringe
developers are able to compete for business. See, for instance, the market share figures A9 and A10
in appendix A3.



6     Conclusion

If knowledge spillovers occur during the installation or operation of renewable generating capacity,
then profit-maximizing firms will engage in these activities less than is socially desirable; public
  28 According to Wiser and Bolinger (2012), annual average wind power PPA prices ranged from about $35/MWh

to $70/MWh over the 2001- 2009 period, which at the approximate PTC rate of $22/MWh in 2009 suggests that
the PTC accounted for about 24-39 percent of the average wind generator's total revenues ($22/($35 + $22) = 0.39;
$22/($70 + $22) = 0.24).
  29 On this point that organizational forgetting in U.S. wind is reversed only slowly: an executive at a large wind

power developer explained to us how difficult it has become for the industry to attract and retain talented workers.
Evidently, potential workers regard their career prospects in this industry as uncertain because the fate of the PTC
remains uncertain.


                                                        21
subsidies can overcome this market failure by compensating firms for the positive externalities their
activities generate. For the particular case of the U.S. wind energy industry, however, we have found
no empirical evidence of inter-firm knowledge spillovers in the design and construction of wind power
projects. We have only found evidence of firm-specific learning-by-doing, which entails no externality.
Thus, while federal and state policies like tax credits and renewable portfolio standards might
accelerate reductions in wind power project costs, the empirical evidence presented in this paper
suggests that cost reductions will occur even in the absence of government financial interventions.

We have presented evidence that experience accumulated by U.S. wind power developers depreciates
over time and distance. This suggests that the boom/bust cycles in project development seen
over the previous decade could result in higher incurred project costs than if a steady order book
was maintained. Although our analysis does not speak to the exact mechanism behind experience
depreciation, it could be that a stable industry trajectory decreases project costs insofar as it reduces
labor force turnover and helps with retention of relevant institutional knowledge and experience. The
empirical evidence presented here also suggests learning-related cost reductions might be achieved
through greater consolidation in the U.S. wind development business. Such consolidation could
be either temporary, as in the case of joint ventures, or permanent, as in the case of acquisitions.
In the former, firms reap the full experience benefits of undertaking large or numerous projects
without having to bear the full costs. In the latter, not only is existing experience consolidated in
a single firm, but socially-wasteful, duplicative learning is potentially avoided in the future. Owing
to the number of firms active in the U.S. wind development business, it seems unlikely that greater
consolidation poses any significant threat to competition.

Finally, we have argued that the assumptions that give rise to our econometric model of firm be-
havior in the U.S. wind energy industry are consistent with the manners in which this industry is
organized and operates. Importantly, the key empirical results in this paper are qualitatively, if
not always quantitatively, robust to minor changes in these assumptions. Alternative assumptions
concerning functional forms and the nature of uncertainty in the model are potential areas for future
research. Likewise, it would be interesting to see if similar models can be derived (if the assumptions
are plausible) and estimated (if data are available) for other technologies and countries. A better
empirical understanding of the extent to which learning-by-doing is characteristic of renewable elec-
tricity generation technologies can help to ensure efficient use of public funds to support renewable
energy.




                                                   22
References
Alchian, Armen, "Reliability of Progress Curves in Airframe Production," Econometrica, 1963, 31
  (4), 679­693.

Anderson, John W., "Essays in Energy Resource Economics." PhD dissertation, Stanford Univer-
  sity 2013.

Argote, Linda, Sara L. Beckman, and Dennis Epple, "The Persistence and Transfer of Learn-
  ing in Industrial Settings," Management Science, 1990, 36 (2), 140­154.

Arrow, Kenneth J., "The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing," Review of Economic
 Studies, 1962, 29 (3), 155­173.

Baloff, Nicholas, "Startup Management," IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 1970,
 17, 132­141.

Barradale, Merrill J., "Impact of public policy uncertainty on renewable energy investment: Wind
 power and the production tax credit," Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 7698­7709.

Benkard, C. Lanier, "Learning and Forgetting: The Dynamics of Aircraft Production," The Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 2000, 90 (4), 1034­1054.

Bolinger, Mark and Ryan Wiser, Understanding Trends in Wind Turbine Prices Over the Past
  Decade, United States Department of Energy, October 2011.

Boston Consulting Group, Perspectives on Experience, Boston: The Boston Consulting Group,
  Inc., 1968.

Cabral, Luis M.B. and Michael H. Riordan, "The Learning Curve, Market Dominance, and
  Predatory Pricing," Econometrica, 1994, 62 (5), 1115­1140.

Davidson, Russell and James G. MacKinnon, Estimation and Inference in Econometrics, New
  York: Oxford University Press, 1993.

Hamilton, James and Drew Liming, Careers in Wind Energy, United States Bureau of Labor
  Statistics, September 2010.

Heckman, James J., "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample Selec-
  tion and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for Such Models," The Annals of
  Economic and Social Measurement, 1976, 5, 475­492.

  , "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error," Econometrica, 1979, 47 (1), 153­161.

Hirsch, Werner Z., "Manufacturing Progress Functions," The Review of Economics and Statistics,
 1952, 34 (2), 143­155.

  , "Firm Progress Ratios," Econometrica, 1956, 24 (2), 136­143.

International Renewable Energy Agency, Renewable Energy Technologies: Cost Analysis Se-
  ries: Wind Power, Bonn, Germany: International Renewable Energy Agency, June 2012.


                                                23
Irwin, Douglas A. and Peter J. Klenow, "Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the Semiconductor
  Industry," Journal of Political Economy, 1994, 102 (6), 1200­1227.

Joskow, Paul L. and Nancy L. Rose, "The Effects of Technological Change, Experience, and
  Environmental Regulation on the Construction Cost of Coal-Burning Generating Units," The
  RAND Journal of Economics, 1985, 16 (1), 1­27.

Kellogg, Ryan, "Learning by Drilling: Interfirm Learning and Relationship Persistence in the Texas
  Oilpatch," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (4), 1961­2004.

Nemet, Gregory F., "Subsidies for New Technologies and Knowledge Spillovers from Learning by
  Doing," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2012, 31 (3), 601­622.

Nordhaus, William D., "The Perils of the Learning Model for Modeling Endogenous Technological
  Change," The Energy Journal, 2014, 35 (1), 1­13.

Pillai, Unni, "Drivers of cost reduction in solar photovoltaics," Energy Economics, 2015, 50, 286­
  293.

Sherlock, Molly F., "The Renewable Electricity Production Tax Credit: In Brief," Technical
  Report R43453, Congressional Research Service July 2017.

Spence, A. Michael, "The learning curve and competition," The Bell Journal of Economics, 1981,
  12 (1), 49­70.

Thompson, Peter, "How Much Did the Liberty Shipbuilders Forget?," Management Science, 2007,
 53 (6), 908­918.

Wiser, Ryan and Mark Bolinger, 2009 Wind Technologies Market Report, United States De-
 partment of Energy, August 2010.

   and    , 2011 Wind Technologies Market Report, United States Department of Energy, August
  2012.

   and    , 2016 Wind Technologies Market Report, United States Department of Energy, August
  2016.

Wright, Theodore P., "Factors Affecting the Cost of Airplanes," Journal of Aeronautical Sciences,
  1936, 3 (4), 122­128.

Zimmerman, Martin B., "Learning Effects and the Commercialization of New Energy Technolo-
  gies: The Case of Nuclear Power," The Bell Journal of Economics, 1982, 13 (2), 297­310.




                                               24
Appendix

A1     Further anecdotal evidence of learning-by-doing in U.S. wind

This appendix elaborates on the anecdotal evidence of learning-by-doing in the design and construc-
tion of U.S. wind power projects presented in section 2 with regard to: (i) transportation logistics;
(ii) construction logistics; and (iii) induced wind turbine innovations.

The developers with whom we have spoken have all made clear that experience plays an important
role in keeping transportation costs down. Completion of a wind power project can entail hundreds
or even thousands of cargo loads delivered to the project site. Delivery of just a single wind turbine,
for instance, can require up to eight oversize loads: one for the nacelle, three for the blades, and
four for the tower sections. Developers have learned to schedule and route deliveries to make best
use of existing roads without unduly disrupting local traffic patterns (due to road or bridge closures,
for example). Moreover, they have learned to anticipate obstacles en route to a project site that
could force the unloading and reloading of equipment or the complete rerouting of entire convoys
of trucks. Consider the left-hand panel of figure A1: it was not left to chance that trucks hauling
tower sections would ultimately fit across the bridge. Where unloading and reloading of equipment
are unavoidable, however, as in the right-hand panel of figure A1, developers have learned how to
do so quite effectively.

There is also anecdotal evidence that developer experience has lowered the construction costs of
wind power projects. Wind turbine foundations, for instance, can require 20-40 tons of rebar and
250-450 cubic yards of concrete. See the left-hand panel of figure A2. Foundations can account
for up to 16 percent of a project's capital costs (International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA),
2012). Experienced developers have learned to adapt foundations to different turbine types and
different ground and wind conditions so as to complete each foundation at low cost while (hopefully)
avoiding the fate depicted in the right-hand panel of figure A2. Likewise, developers have learned
how best to maneuver heavy equipment around a project site. For example, according to a contractor
experienced in wind farm construction, the disassembling, transporting, and reassembling of a large
crawler crane (e.g. the red cranes in figure A3) can take up to five days and cost as much as $70,000.
Experienced developers therefore carefully sequence their construction activities so as to prevent or
at least minimize such costly delays.

Finally, developers' experience designing and building wind power projects has also facilitated cost-
reducing innovations upstream in the manufacturing of wind turbines. One example is the advent of
modular tower sections, which as discussed in section 2 are cheaper not only to manufacture but also
to transport and install. (According to IRENA (2012), towers make up about 17 percent of a wind
power project's capital costs.) The left-hand panel of figure A1 shows a tower section in transit,
while the left-hand panel of figure A3 shows tower sections being installed. A second example is
rotors that can be assembled at ground level (left-hand panel of figure A3) and then lifted and
installed in one piece (right-hand panel of figure A3).




                                                  25
        Figure A1: Wind turbine transportation logistics




Figure A2: Wind turbine foundations (done right and done wrong)




Figure A3: Modular tower sections and ground-level rotor assembly




                               26
                  Figure A4: Antiquated vs. state-of-the-art wind turbine technology




A2        Annual summary statistics

For the subset of 408 U.S. wind power projects completed from 2002 to 2015 and for which cost
estimates are available, table A1 reports annual summary statistics for average cost of installed
capacity (measured in millions of current-year dollars per megawatt) and nameplate generating
capacity (measured in megawatts). As discussed elsewhere in this paper, average wind power project
costs approximately doubled during the 2000s despite the completion of more and larger wind power
projects than had ever previously been the case (i.e. despite potential for cost reductions due to
learning-by-doing and economies of scale). Higher prices for primary inputs and the advent of larger
wind turbines are two often-cited explanations for this period of rising costs (e.g. Bolinger and Wiser
(2011)). Regarding the former, figure A6 plots four price indices for inputs important to the U.S.
wind energy industry together with a GDP deflator; notably, all four price series increased at rates
greater than the rate of overall inflation during the 2000s.30 Regarding the latter, the hub height,
rotor diameter, and capacity rating of the average wind turbine installed in the U.S. all increased
significantly during the 2000s (see figures A4 and A5); larger turbines are generally more costly
because they require disproportionately more materials to support their greater weight and withstand
severe wind forces. Table A1 is also indicative of the importance of government intervention to the
growth of the U.S. wind energy industry: fewer and smaller projects were completed in 2002 and 2004
when the PTC was unavailable to new projects, whereas more and larger projects were completed
during the later years of the sample when the PTC was consistently available and many more states
adopted RPSs.31,32
 30 The  U.S. dollar-euro exchange rate is included because many wind turbine components are imported from Europe.
 31 Of  the wind power projects completed in 2002 and 2004, some were ineligible for the PTC (e.g. those owned by
rural electric cooperatives or municipal utilities), while others received the credit retroactively.
  32 According to the Database of State Incentives for Renewables and Efficiency (DSIRE), the total number of states

to have adopted mandatory RPSs was 5 in 2001, 11 in 2005, and 26 in 2009.




                                                        27
Figure A5: Average U.S. wind turbine hub height, rotor diameter, and capacity rating


                    100                                                                   2.0
                              Hub height (m)
                     90      Rotor diameter (m)                                          1.8
                              Capacity rating (MW)
                     80                                                                   1.6




                                                                                                  Megawatts (MW)
      Meters (m)




                     70                                                                   1.4

                     60                                                                   1.2

                     50                                                                   1.0

                     40                                                                   0.8

                     30                                                                   0.6
                           2000-01 2002-03 2004-05   2006   2007    2008     2009

                                            Source: Wiser and Bolinger (2010).




        Table A1: Summary statistics, U.S. wind power project data, 2001-2009

                                      Average   cost ($M/MW)                    Capacity (MW)
  Year                Projects       Min         Med      Max            Min         Med      Max
  2002                   9           3.2         63.5      175           3.8        40.92     160.5
  2003                  19           2.9           55      210           2.6         50.4      204
  2004                   4           12.6          28      82           11.55       23.73      60
  2005                  15            10          120      220          10.5         114       213
  2006                  16            10         168.4     379            9         100.5      231
  2007                  30            20          191      700          14.7        113.03    400.5
  2008                  54            8         199.35     640           4.5          99      300.3
  2009                  59           3.87         212      612            2         100.5     400.3
  2010                  35           1.85         165      635            1           70       300
  2011                  50            3           105      600           1.5        49.95      304
  2012                  64            5           155     1900           1.5         89.5      845
  2013                   9           2.6           9       600            .9           4     265.44
  2014                  19           1.8          110      900            .6          75       400
  2015                  35           4.8          200     820.2          1.1         110     502.04




                                                        28
                    Figure A6: Selected U.S. price indices of relevance to wind energy industry


                                3.0
                                         Construction labor              Steel products
                                         Gasoline (off-highway)          USD-EUR ex. rate
                                         GDP deflator
                                2.5
           Index (2001 = 1.0)

                                2.0


                                1.5


                                1.0



                                0.5
                                  2001      2002      2003        2004       2005     2006   2007   2008   2009
                                                                  Sources: BEA; BLS; EIA.


A3     Developer heterogeneity

68 different wind development firms completed at least one wind power project in the United States
between 2001 and 2009. Figure A7 shows the distribution of these firms by total number of projects
completed from 2001 to 2009. Evidently, there are a number of large, experienced actors in this
business; however, there are also many fringe competitors. Figure A8 plots average costs of in-
stalled capacity by year for eight of the largest developers in the sample. These firm-specific cost
figures show the same upward trend over time as the industrywide figures presented in table A1.
Admittedly, figure A8 disregards potentially important heterogeneity across projects (in terms of
size and location, for instance) that might explain within-year variance in average costs across firms.
Nevertheless, it is telling that the firms' per-megawatt cost rankings change from year to year. No
firm is lowest-cost for a significant span of the 2001-2009 period. Perhaps for this reason, no firm
has seen its market share grow to the significant detriment of other large competitors (figures A9
and A10). Thus, while the literature in industrial organization (e.g. Cabral and Riordan (1994) and
Spence (1981)) recognizes that learning-by-doing can increase industry concentration through the
emergence of a low-cost dominant firm, the evidence suggests this is not a concern in the present
setting. Finally, it is noteworthy that among large developers, spells of inactivity are of relatively
short duration. Table A2 shows that for the 2005-2009 period, rarely did more than two consecutive
quarters pass without a large developer completing a new wind power project.




                                                                           29
Figure A7: Distribution of wind developers by number of projects completed 2001-2009


                                           25
                                                  23


                                           20

       Number of firms
                                           15

                                                           10                           10
                                           10                                  9                   9


                                            5                       4
                                                                                                                 3


                                            0
                                                  1        2       3         4       5-10    11-20        >20
                                                             Number of projects completed, 2001-2009




      Figure A8: Average costs of installed capacity by year, selected developers


                                           2.5
       Millions of dollars per megawatt




                                           2.0

                                                                                                          Cielo
                                           1.5                                                           enXco
                                                                                                          Horizon
                                                                                                          Infigen
                                           1.0                                                           Invenergy
                                                                                                          NextEra
                                                                                                          PPM-Iberdrola
                                           0.5                                                           RES



                                           0.0
                                             2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009




                                                                           30
   Figure A9: Market shares by year, selected developers (percent of installed MW)


                       0.9

                       0.8

                       0.7

       Market share   0.6                                                           Cielo
                                                                                      enXco
                       0.5                                                           Horizon
                                                                                      Infigen
                       0.4
                                                                                      Invenergy
                       0.3                                                           NextEra
                                                                                      PPM-Iberdrola
                       0.2                                                           RES

                       0.1

                         0
                              2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009




Figure A10: Market shares by year, selected developers (percent of completed projects)


                       0.8

                       0.7

                       0.6
                                                                                      Cielo
       Market share




                       0.5                                                           enXco
                                                                                      Horizon
                       0.4                                                           Infigen
                                                                                      Invenergy
                       0.3                                                           NextEra
                                                                                      PPM-Iberdrola
                       0.2
                                                                                      RES

                       0.1

                         0
                              2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009




                                                           31
             Table A2: Duration of spells of inactivity, selected developers, 2005-2009


                                            N            Duration (quarters)
                         Developer
                                          spells   Mean      SD     Min     Max
                            Cielo           5      3.2       2.3     1         7
                           enXco            7      1.7       0.8     1         3
                           Horizon          5      1.8       0.8     1         3
                           Infigen          6      2.2       1.0     1         3
                          Invenergy         5      1.6       0.9     1         3
                          NextEra           4      1.3       0.5     1         2
                       PPM-Iberdrola        4      1.5       0.6     1         2
                            RES             4      3.0       2.2     1         6



A4     Randomness of missing cost data

Here, we consider the econometric problems that could arise on account of my having cost data for
only 408 of the 717 U.S. wind power projects completed between 2002 and 2015. It is well established
in the economics literature that estimation based on nonrandomly selected samples can result in
biased estimates of parameters of economic interest. Although Heckman (1976, 1979) proposed a
two-step estimation procedure to overcome this selection bias, implementing his procedure requires
additional modeling assumptions (a second equation explaining entrance into the sample) and data
(to estimate the second equation). Because neither requirement is necessarily straightforward, it
behooves the researcher to weigh the evidence for and against the randomness of his sample before
abandoning least squares in favor of a more complicated estimation procedure.

Table A3 compares the subsample of 408 U.S. wind power projects for which cost data is non-missing
to the subsample of 309 projects for which cost data is missing. If the proportion of projects sharing
a particular attribute within each subsample does not differ significantly across the two subsamples,
then there is evidence that the 114 instances of missing cost data occur at random. From the table,
it is apparent that the biggest difference between the two subsamples concern geography. First,
no relationship between missing data and project size is identified. Second, among projects with
non-missing cost data, greater proportions are located in the NPCC and RFC reliability regions, and
smaller proportions are located in the TRE regions, than is the case among projects with missing
cost data. (Figure A11 presents a map of NERC reliability regions in the U.S.) This could reflect
attitudes or policies towards the disclosure of project information that differ across states or regions.

With respect to the remaining attributes in table A3, the differences between the two subsamples
of wind power projects are less pronounced. The proportion of projects completed in a given year
or quarter does not appear to vary significantly across the two subsamples. Moreover, projects
completed by multiple or foreign developers, and projects owned by independent power producers
(IPPs), make up only slightly greater proportions of the subsample of projects with missing cost
data than the subsample of projects with non-missing cost data -- possibly because such projects are


                                                   32
           Table A3: Attributes of wind power projects with and without cost data

                                 Non-missing cost data        Missing cost data
      Attribute                   Count        Percent       Count       Percent    p-value*
Capacity (MW)
   q  (0,10]                        59          13.6%          55         18.3%     -1.7228
   q  (10,50]                       99          22.8%          63         20.9%       .6049
   q  (50,100]                      87           20%           69         22.9%      -.9382
   q  (100,200]                     136         31.3%          85         28.2%       .9005
   q > 200                          53          12.2%          29          9.6%      1.0914
Completion year
   2002                              9          2.1%            1           .3%      2.0041
   2003                             19          4.4%            4          1.3%      2.3347
   2004                              4           .9%            4          1.3%      -.5233
   2005                             15          3.5%            7          2.3%       .8846
   2006                             16          3.7%           14          4.7%      -.6499
   2007                             30          6.9%           19          6.3%       .3208
   2008                             54          12.4%          31         10.3%       .8935
   2009                             59          13.6%          36          12%        .6495
   2010                             35          8.1%           22          7.3%       .3766
   2011                             50          11.5%          40         13.3%      -.7192
   2012                             64          14.7%          61         20.3%     -1.9585
   2013                              9          2.1%            5          1.7%       .4024
   2014                             19          4.4%           23          7.6%     -1.8743
   2015                             35          8.1%           26          8.6%      -.2771
Completion quarter
   Q1                               83          19.1%          45          15%       1.4674
   Q2                               59          13.6%          50         16.6%     -1.1317
   Q3                               57          13.1%          54         17.9%     -1.7896
   Q4                               235         54.1%         152         50.5%      .9744
NERC region
   ASCC                              3           .7%            0            0%      1.4454
   HICC                              3           .7%            4          1.3%      -.8753
   MRO                              81          18.7%          64         21.3%      -.8707
   NPCC                             33          7.6%           10          3.3%      2.4321
   RFC                              58          13.4%          21            7%      2.7493
   SERC                             10          2.3%            3            1%      1.3224
   SPP                              35          8.1%           30          10%       -.8932
   TRE                              39            9%           42          14%      -2.1148
   WECC                             108         24.9%          70         23.3%       .5069
Industry sector
   Electric Utility (not IPP)       66          15.2%          32         10.6%     1.7947
Multiple developers
   Yes                              45          10.4%          20          6.6%     1.7487
* z-statistic reported from a comparison of proportion equality test.
Some characteristics not available for each observation.




                                              33
    Figure A11: North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) U.S. region map




 Table A4: Mean capacity and turbine rating of projects with and without cost data, by year

                    Capacity (MW)                            Turbine rating (MW)
       Non-missing Missing cost                   Non-missing Missing cost
Year                                   p-value*                                p-value*
         cost data          data                   cost data        data
2003        72.7            49.5         .7283       1.41           1.44         -.1618
2004        29.8            59.7        -.8035       1.28           1.45          -.556
2005        102             65.5        1.4349        1.5           1.29         1.5642
2006       100.9            83.5         .6057       1.69           1.53           .925
2007       126.3             86         1.6854       1.78           1.89         -.8334
2008       105.4            88.1        1.1284       1.82           1.78          .4423
2009       108.3            86.4        1.6234       1.84           1.86         -.1478
2010        77.7            75.6          .109       1.72           1.94        -2.0077
2011        78.9             69          .5589       1.86           1.97        -1.1685
2012       109.4            110.2       -.0383       1.89           2.03         -1.587
2013        67.9            65.6         .0422       1.76           1.38         1.1697
2014        115             91.8         .7068       1.75           1.84         -.6977
2015       134.4            154.1       -.7277       2.06           1.92         1.0242
* Pairwise t-test of equality of means. 2002 excluded because only one missing cost data exists.




                                              34
                 Table A5: A hypothetical history of wind power project completions

               Installed capacity (MW)
 Project       Period Firm 1 Firm 2                 Firm 3          Dist(l3 , lj )   Dist(l4 , lj )            Notes
    1            1         60       0                  0                50              120
    2            2         0        40                 0               2000             2070
    3            2         0        0                 80               1000             1070
    4            3        100      100                 0                 .               70           JV between Firms 1 and 2
    5            4        120       0                  0                 .                .           Firm 3 acquired by Firm 1


subject to less onerous disclosure requirements. No joint or pairwise test rejects the null hypothesis
of within-subsample proportions that are equal across the two subsamples. Table A4 presents an
additional comparison of project sizes across the two subsamples. Consistent with table A3, mean
project capacity and turbine rating is not detected to differ among the missing and non-missing
data. On balance, the evidence does not reject an assertion that cost data is missing at random;
which helps support our decision to use a least squares estimation procedure in section 5 rather than
a more complicated two-step procedure.



A5     Computation of experience variables: numerical examples

The purpose of this appendix is to demonstrate through numerical examples how to compute, for
each wind power project i in the 2002-2015 sample, the accumulated experience variables Qli ,di ,ti
and Qli ,-di ,ti defined in section 4.1 as functions of data and parameters. Table A5 displays a simple
and purely hypothetical history of wind power project completions for the case where there are three
firms that install wind generating capacity over the course of four periods. Assume, without loss
of generality, that the MW entries in table A5 constitute single wind power projects (rather than
multiple projects whose capacities sum to these per-period totals). Furthermore, assume that Firms
1 and 2 completed the 100 MW project in period 3 as a joint venture, and that Firm 1 acquired
Firm 3 at the start of period 4.

First, let i = 4 denote the 100 MW wind power project completed jointly by Firms 1 and 2 during
period 3, such that di = {1, 2}, ti = 3, a (di , ti ) = , and -di = {3}. Then, by the definitions of
section 4.1:


                     Qli ,di ,ti   =    2 · [ Q 4 , 1 ,3 + Q 4 ,2 ,3 ]                   by equation (6)
                                   =   2 ·   QO
                                              4 ,1 , 3   +   QO
                                                              4 ,2 ,3                    by equation (5)
                                   =   2 · [(own · 60) + ((1 - own ) · 40)]              by equation (1)


                   Qli ,-di ,ti    =   (1 - oth ) · 80                                   by equation (7)


Next, let i = 5 denote instead the 120 MW project completed by Firm 1 during period 4, such that
di = {1}, ti = 4, a (di , ti ) = {3}, and -di = {2}. Then, using the definitions of section 4.1:



                                                                 35
  Qli ,di ,ti   =   QO            A
                     5 ,1 , 4 + Q 5 ,1 ,4                                            by equations (5) and (6)
                =   QO                O
                     5 ,1 , 4 + µ · Q 5 ,3 ,4                                        by equation (3)
                               2
                =    2 · 100 + own · (1 - own ) · 60 + µ · (own · (1 - own ) · 80)   by equation (1)


 Qli ,-di ,ti   =   oth · (1 - oth ) · 40                                            by equation (7)

In the first example, accumulated experience that is "internal" to the consortium of Firms 1 and 2 is
a linear combination of 1 and 2's organic experience bases, whereas Firm 3's organic experience base
is "external" to the consortium. Projects 2 and 3 receive a distance multiplier for being greater than
100 miles from project 4. In the second example (i.e. after Firm 1's acquisition of Firm 3), Firm 3's
organic experience base has become "internal" to Firm 1, whereas Firm 2's organic experience base,
with the exception of the 100 MW that Firm 2 completed jointly with Firm 1, is now "external" to
Firm 1. Now, projects 1,2 and 3 receive a distance multiplier for being more than 100 miles from
project 5.




                                                      36
