                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      UNINSURED BY CHOICE? A CHOICE EXPERIMENT ON LONG TERM CARE
                               INSURANCE

                                          Faical Akaichi
                                         Joan Costa-Font
                                          Richard Frank

                                       Working Paper 26118
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26118


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Faical Akaichi, Joan Costa-Font, and Richard Frank. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Uninsured by Choice? A Choice Experiment on Long Term Care Insurance
Faical Akaichi, Joan Costa-Font, and Richard Frank
NBER Working Paper No. 26118
July 2019
JEL No. I13,I18,I31

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine evidence from two unique discrete choice experiments (DCE) on long term care
insurance and several of its relevant attributes, and more specifically, choices made by 15,298
individuals in the United States with and without insurance. We study the valuation of the
following insurance attributes, namely daily insurance benefit, insurance coverage, the
compulsory and voluntary nature of the insurance policy design, alongside the costs (insurance
premium) and health requirements. This paper investigates respondents' preferences and
willingness to pay (WTP) for these care insurance's attributes using a random parameter logit
model, and assess the heterogeneity of choice responses using demographic, socioeconomic and
attitudinal motivations to segment response to insurance choices. We find that an increase in the
insurance premium by an additional $100 would reduce insurance uptake by 1pp. Insurance
policy uptake is higher when it provides benefits for the lifetime (the monthly marginal WTP
being $178.64), and voluntary (the monthly marginal WTP increases by an extra $74.71) as
opposed to universal, and when it forgoes health checks (the monthly marginal WTP increases by
an extra 28US$).

Faical Akaichi                                  Richard Frank
Land Economy, Environment & Society             Department of Health Care Policy
Scotland's Rural College (SRUC)                 Harvard Medical School
Peter Wilson Building                           180 Longwood Avenue
Kings Buildings                                 Boston, MA 02115
West Mains Road                                 and NBER
Edinburgh EH9 3JG                               frank@hcp.med.harvard.edu
United Kingdom
Faical.Akaichi@sruc.ac.uk

Joan Costa-Font
Department of Health Policy
London School of Economics
and Political Science (LSE)
United Kingdom
j.costa-font@lse.ac.uk
   1. Introduction

       The market for long term care insurance (LTCI), an insurance that compensates individuals

in the event of needing long-term services and supports (LTSS), has shown a slow development

since its inception four decades ago in the United States. Part of the explanation may lie with

demand-side factors; however, revealed preferences for insurance purchase approaches may hide

the underlying individual's take up intentions to insure long term care, and especially how such

choice intentions depend on the insurance design features (e.g., premium, size of the deductible and

the duration of benefit etc) . In addition, observed purchases may also obscure the heterogeneity of

such intentions are across individuals. The cost of LTSS is one the largest financial risks that older

adults face in most high-income nations. The average pay price of a private room in a nursing home

in 2017 was between $85,800 and $97,500 a year and Medicare only covered post-acute care but

not LTSS (Genworth, 2017). About half of adults that reach the age of 65 can expect to use some

long-term services and supports before they die (Favreault and Dey, 2015). Among those that will

use LTSS, the expected present discounted value of the services that they would use was estimated

at $133,700 in 2015 dollars. Roughly 5% of men and 12% of women age 65 and over will incur

costs for LTSS of over $250,000 in present discounted 2015 dollars before they die (Favreault and

Dey, 2015). At first glance these figures suggest that LTSS appears to be a textbook example of an

insurable risk. Nevertheless, the market for LTCI in the U.S. seems to be failing (Bergquist et al.

2018, Brown and Finkelstein 2007, 2008). It has not grown over the last four decades, and in fact it

has declined slightly in the last few years due to several product design failures (e.g., insurance

underwriting and inefficient pricing). Significant behavioral factors can explain such insurance

choices such as risk misperception, "denial", present bias in addition to limited affordability (Brown

et al, 2012). This paper aims to contribute to the understanding of the limited the demand for LTCI,

focusing on behavioral dimensions influencing such decisions.


                                                   3
       Decision-making regarding LTCI is unique in a number of ways. First, insurance decisions

are largely state dependent and emotional (due to the loss of independence in the event of disability

and the role of family in care of older adults) (Loewnstein et al. 2013). Second, individuals are not

always well equipped to assess their risk of disability, let alone its duration (Kunreuther et al, 2002),

and face limited experience in making similar insurance choices unless they were involved in a

family member's arrangements (Coe et al, 2015). Third, although family norms with regard to

intergenerational caregiving obligations might have changed over time, individual behavior might

still be grounded on traditional default social norms, and hence their LTCI decisions may be

affected by a type of cultural inertia. Finally, insurance products are often complex and thus hard to

understand, and they entail large immediate premium costs to protect against risks that are primarily

30 to 40 years off. Such choices are vulnerable to present bias and prone to procrastination as they

are fewer pressing decisions relative to other demands. However, we know little about what

dimensions of the insurance design influence such decisions. Here we explore questions such as

whether a long elimination period (deductible) and a lower premium make policies more attractive?

And, is medical underwriting an important deterrent to purchase of LTCI?


       There is evidence that the current LTCI purchasers represent only a small share of those

who may be interested in purchase of LTCI. For example, industry reports suggest that insurance

brokers divert many potential consumers due to their assessment of the potential buyer's ability to

pay or their health status. Even when individuals buy LTCI, they often lack understanding of key

features of their coverage and choose dominated options (Lowenstein, 2013). Gabaix and Laibson

(2006) show that a significant group of consumers make systematic errors in choosing between

insurance products as they are overwhelmed by choice. Gottlieb and Mitchell (2015) find that

framing also matters in explaining insurance take up, and McGarry et al (2017) find that greater

cognitive capacity increased purchase decisions. One implication of this is that observed purchases

in the market offer only a limited ability to make inferences about demand behaviour. These



                                                   4
observations also suggest that if insurance products are made more user friendly that can promote

uptake of insurance.



       This paper approaches the task of understanding the demand for LTCI by studying

consumer choices outside of a real market setting, using data from a large discrete choice

experiment (DCE), the 2014 Survey of Long-Term Care Awareness and Planning. The DCE was

designed to identify factors that influence the demand for LTCI, which in turn allows for the

estimation of the willingness to pay for specific features of LTCI. It also permits an assessment of

the rates at which individuals' trade-off different policy "attributes" that are salient in the purchase

decision (e.g., duration of coverage, benefit amount). We do not interpret the resulting demand as

normative nor is it fully reflective of actual market behaviour (Louviere et al, 2011). Instead,

respondents compare a series of paired hypothetical LTCI policies, described by specific attributes,

and select their preferred alternative, including a third option of "neither". An important advantage

of conducting this experiment in the US, is that long term care insurance has been long available,

and hence individuals may be more likely to have been exposed to LTCI than in most other

countries. Other studies carried out in European settings where there is no insurance are likely to be

more affected by a hypothetical nature of the DCE. It is worth noting that estimates based on

models of hypothetical health insurance choices have been shown in some cases to provide similar

elasticities to observational data from actual insurance markets (Royalty and Hagens, 2005).



       A strength of DCE compared to other stated preference survey methods is that preferences

are measured through a series of "comparison shopping" exercises. Individuals are assumed to

compare the different insurance options and select the alternative containing the most preferred

combination of attributes. This technique is widely used in health and environmental decisions and

offers a decision-making scenario similar to what people actually face real insurance decisions.




                                                    5
Furthermore, the ratio between the willingness to pay (WTP) of two alternatives allows one to

compute the marginal rate of substitution between them.



       Some prior studies have employed DCE in similar insurance contexts. Allaire et al (2016)

found that take up of LTCI is limited to individuals whose wealth exceeds $100,000 and declines

with the presence of a child living nearby. In contrast, we provide a complete analysis of the choice

experiments that enables us to predict a decision maker's choice of one discrete alternative from a

choice set, and inform policy analysis on what insurance characteristics, which are mutually

exclusive and exhaustive, are most likely to attract enrollees to LTCI. In a health insurance setting,

Krueger and Kuziemko (2013) conducted a survey experiment to elicit the willingness to pay for

hypothetical plan offerings in a large sample of uninsured Americans. They elicited self-reported

willingness-to-pay for health insurance by uninsured Americans. However, the study did not use a

discrete choice format.

       Referring more strictly to long-term care insurance, there are only a small number of studies

in European countries where there is no market for LTCI. Relatedly, Costa-Font (2017) employed a

survey experiment to elicit individuals' willingness to pay to avoid institutionalization. Costa-Font

and Rovira (2008) draw on a contingent valuation survey to elicit demand for LTCI using a

referendum in Spain and found that only one fifth of the population was willing to pay a premium

for such insurance. Brau and Lipi Bruni (2008) carried out a choice experiment on long term care

coverage in a setting without insurance (EmiliaRomagna, Italy). They explored some important

insurance attributes such as the cost of the policy, cost-sharing and the `voluntary vs. compulsory'

nature of the policy. Other studies have used DCE to study the demand for long-term care itself and

term life insurance. These include the study of Nieboer et al (2010) estimating the preferences for

long term care using a discrete choice format to a sample of over a thousand individuals in the

Netherlands. They presented study participants with four scenarios and found that those without a

partner and with dementia exhibited a higher demand for long-term care services. Finally, Braun et


                                                   6
al (2016) show, using a DCE in Germany, the influence of premium, brand and critical illness

dimension in explaining insurance choices.



         Our results suggest that the average willingness to pay for lifetime insurance policy is well

below existing market rates (that are typically under-written), and we attribute this to both

traditional and behavioral market failures. This is reflected by the fact that in the United States such

policies have nearly disappeared from the market place (AHIP, 2017). Our results broadly suggest

that subsidizing the purchase of insurance plans could significantly reduce the population without

private LTCI and may be welfare increasing. We also identify the value consumers place on a

number of important LTCI attributes. We rely on a latent class type of discrete choice model to

explain some of the relevant sources of heterogeneity. In addition to the information about

respondents' choice behavior, we rely on the respondents' socio-demographic characteristics and

attitudes to classify them.



         The remainder of the paper is organized in the following way. The next section describes the

choice experiment and its magnitude. The third section describes the empirical strategy employed

and the models used to analyze the discrete choice experiments (DCE) including the latent class

model employed. Section four provides the results and a final section offers some concluding

remarks.


    2. A Choice Experiment

         The DCE we examine was part of a larger Long-Term Care Awareness and Planning Survey

commissioned by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to examine consumer

preferences for specific features of individual LTCI policies (e.g., benefit levels, duration of

coverage, sponsorship) 1. The sample is made up of 24,878 noninstitutionalized adults 40­70 years



1The authors did not participate neither in the design nor in the implementation of the survey. We are just users of the
data.

                                                            7
of age and a total of 15,298 persons responded to the survey, yielding a 61.5% response rate. The

data were collected in August-September 2014 through a survey that made use of an established

internet panel run by KP, GfK. The company assigns no more than one survey per week to

members. The recruitment was based on residential addresses that cover approximately 97% of U.S.

households and households that do not have an Internet connection received a free computer and

Internet service if they joined the panel. Survey respondents received e-mail notifications and

reminders to fill out the survey and were rewarded for their participation with 10,000 KP "points"

(equivalent to about $10) that can be exchanged for merchandise and other prizes. Only 13.2 % of

the households interviewed responded that they currently had LTCI. This is a figure that is in line

with the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) data from that period.

       The survey contains a long list of question on attitudes towards long-term care that we have

examined in detail alongside the DCE. That information allows us to identify the different views

that underpin the potential demand for LTCI. The use of the DCE is important because other survey

experiments have shown that individuals are likely to anchor their estimates on the first options

presented to them (Krueger and Kuziemko, 2013). Respondents completed two related sets of DCE

questions, which we refer to below as "DCE1" and "DCE2". They involved questions about plans

involving six attributes: daily benefit amount, benefit period, elimination period (deductible), health

requirements, type of insurer, and monthly premium. DCE2 included all attributes from DCE1 plus

an attribute of whether participation was voluntary or mandatory in the LTCI plan. This allows us to

identify the value of a "voluntary" insurance scheme. Since DCE2 is more complete, the analysis

reported here was carried using the data from DCE2. The baseline estimation model is a random

parameter logit model. This is the most appropriate model to capture heterogeneity across

individuals, since it does not impose any restriction on the number of respondent classes (i.e., the

number of classes are equal to the number of respondents). Because 19% of respondents chose the

opt-out alternative in all the choice sets in DCE2, their responses were excluded from the data to

avoid that they distort the responses of the other respondents.


                                                   8
   3. Empirical Strategy

   3.1 Experimental design

The DCE survey consisted of a choice section and a questionnaire. In the choice section, participants

were successively provided with 8 different choice sets and were repeatedly asked to choose between

two different LTCI policies and an opt-out alternative. Each LTCI policy displayed five choice sets

(DCE1) described in terms of the six attributes. The LTCI policies shown to respondents in the last

three choice sets (DCE2) are described in terms of seven choice sets: the six aforementioned attributes

plus the attribute "type of enrollment". A description of the seven attributes as well as their

corresponding levels is displayed in Table 1.



[Insert Table 1 about here]


The first dimension of benefit design studied, in addition to the premium, is the so-called `daily

benefit'. Data from 2015 suggests the average the daily benefit was below $159/ nursing home day

and $152 per home care day, and the premium is linked typically to the benefit of the policy (AHIP,

2017). The typical policy would offer a deductible (or elimination) period of 93 days (in 2015). The

mean duration of coverage for nursing home care was 3.8 years, while approximately one third of

existing policies would extend the benefit to a lifetime and they are largely not being sold anymore

(American Association for Long-Term Care Insurance, 2015). Furthermore, nearly all policies are

subject to medical underwriting that limits the offer of coverage to relatively healthy individuals

(Cohen, Kaur, & Darnell, 2013). Finally, other important dimensions are the type of insurer

(public/private) and the type of enrollment (voluntary/compulsory).



Given all the attribute levels included in the design of the first and second DCE, we draw upon a

full factorial design of 1024 LTCI policies (and 2048 the second). The DCE presented followed best

practices in generating an efficient design that enabled the estimation of the parameters (i.e.,

                                                   9
marginal utilities for the aforementioned insurance attributes) with relatively small standard errors 2.

The final design consisted of 500 choice sets that were in 100 blocks of 5 choice sets each initially

for the first DCE (DCE1). This process was then repeated for the second DCE with an additional

choice (DCE2). An efficient design of 300 unique choice sets was obtained. The 300 choice sets

were broken into 100 blocks of 3 choice-sets each. Thus, each respondent was first asked to

complete only 5 choice sets. Then, she was given information about the seventh attribute ("type of

enrolment") and asked to answer three more choice questions.



In each choice set, respondents were asked to mark the alternative they prefer most (i.e., Policy A,

Policy B or No insurance) 3, and within each block, the choice sets were randomly ordered.

Furthermore, the A/B policies were randomly ordered between left and right sides of the screen too.

An illustration of two choice sets used in DCE1 and DCE2 are, respectively, displayed in both

Figure 1 and Figure 2.



[Insert Figure 1 and 2 about here]


In addition to responding to the eight choice questions, respondents were also asked to answer several

debriefing questions. The debriefing questions were asked to collect information on the following

issues: "Risk of Needing Long-term care", "Psychological Characteristics, Knowledge, Skills, and

Experience", "Beliefs and Concerns About Long-Term Care", Retirement and Long-Term Care

Planning", "Information Gathering and Decision Making About Insurance", "Core Demographic and

Socioeconomic Information", and "Comparing Insurance Policies with a Combination of Features"




2
  An alternative design with a full set of choices would be time consuming and cognitively
challenging given such large number of policies.
3
  Since it is not realistic to force respondents to choose one of the two insurance policies described
in each choice set, an opt-out alternative (no insurance) was included in each choice set.
                                                   10
    3.2 DCE Modelling


Following Lancaster`s (1966) view of products as bundles of attributes, the benefits that individuals

derive from the consumption of a product is assumed to be equal to the sum of their benefits for each

of the attributes that constitute the product of interest. Consequently, individual i's value function

( ) that is specific for each jth alternative at the tth choice occasion takes the form:

                                                 =  +                                                          (1)


 captures the deterministic component and  the random component.  is assumed to be

independent and identically distributed. Assuming that the deterministic component is linear-in-

parameter, equation (1) can be written as:



                                                =  +                                                           (2)


Where  denotes the vector of unknown utility parameters that are associated with the product

attributes  4.


The variables corresponding to the attributes "Daily Benefit", "Deductible Period" and "Monthly

Premium Cost" were coded as continuous variables using their original values. For each of the rest

of the attributes (L-1) dummy variables were generated, where L is the number of levels of the

attribute. The Lth level of each attribute was omitted during the estimation of the econometric model

to avoid the problem of multicollinearity. Furthermore, the omitted levels "1 year", "Healthy and not

Disabled", "Federal Government", and "Universal Plan" corresponding to the attributes "Benefit

Period", "Health Requirements", "Type of Insurer", "Type of Enrollment", respectively, were set as




4In this study,  represent the following level of attributes "Daily Benefit" (DB), "Benefit Period-Lifetime" (BPL),
"Benefit Period-5years" (BP5), "Benefit Period-3years" (BP3), "Deductible Period" (DP), "Health Requirement" (HR),
"Type of Insurer" (TI), "Type of Enrolment" (TE), and "Monthly Premium Cost" (COST). A tenth variable "None"
(NONE) was also considered to estimate respondents' preferences for the opt-out option.

                                                        11
the baseline levels. Thus, the estimated parameters represent respondents' demand response to the

included levels with respect to the baseline level.


The conditional logit (CL) model (McFadden 1974) is the workhorse model for analyzing discrete

choice data. However, its assumptions (i.e., homogeneity of respondents' preferences and the

alternatives included in any choice set are treated by respondents as independent) were viewed as

unrealistic and found to generally not hold (Hensher et al., 2015). Train (1998) proposed a less

restrictive model (Random Parameter Logit (RPL)) that allows individuals' preferences to be

heterogeneous and the assumption of the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives to be relaxed. In

the RPL, at least some of the parameters are specified as random. In other words, each individual is

considered to have a unique set of preferences, reflected in the individual parameters  5. In the RPL,

the conditional choice probability that individual i choose an alternative j at a choice occasion t is

specified as:


                                                                   
                                                                           exp(  )
                                                (| , ) =                                                                (3)
                                                                   =1
                                                                               
                                                                        =1 exp(  )




The unconditional choice probability is the expected value of the logit probability integrated over all

possible values of  and weighted by the density of  :



                                                (| ,  ) =  (| ,  )  ( |)                                                (4)
                                                                   



Since the expression in (4) does not have a closed form solution, it is therefore approximated through

simulation methods. In particular, R draws of  are taken from the distribution ( |). For each



5   We estimated both the conditional logit and the RPL model. We found that the RPL model fits better the data. Most
    importantly, the results from the RPL model showed that the estimated standard deviations of 7 out of 10 random
    parameters considered in the analysis were found to be statistically significant, indicating that respondents preferences
    for the attributes "Daily benefits", "Benefit Period-Lifetime", "Health Requirement", "Type of Insurer", "Type of
    Enrolment" and "Cost" are heterogeneous. Thus, we concluded that the RPL model is the choice model that we should
    use to assess respondents' preferences and willingness to pay for LTCI attributes.

                                                              12
draw, the choice probability is calculated. Then the resulting probabilities from the R draws are

averaged. The simulated log-likelihood (SLL) for all respondents is estimated via maximum

likelihood procedures and is calculated as:


                                                       
                                          1    exp(  )
                                  =                                                               (5)
                                                  exp (     )
                                    =1 =1   =1 =1




In this study, all the parameter estimates were assumed to follow a normal distribution.




The results from the estimation of RPL model showed that respondents' attitudes are highly

heterogeneous. While the RPL model controls and accounts for heterogeneity, it does not explain the

source of heterogeneity. In fact, only knowing that the preferences for the considered attributes vary

across respondents is of limited practical use.



To gain more information on the likely position of each respondent in the sample distribution, we

computed the individual-specific distributions using the approach of conditional distributions that

was pioneered by Train (2003). The idea was that once individual preferences are obtained, individual

WTP would be computed and used for posterior analyses such as the identification of different

segments of respondents with similar preferences. For example, based on the computed individual-

specific WTP, the average WTP for voluntary LTCI provided by a private company is $122 and $12,

respectively. Their respective confidence intervals are [-87265.82, 87573.77] and [-157673.20,

221288.50]. After establishing that using the conditional distributions approach to assess the

heterogeneity of respondents' preferences and WTP is inappropriate, we turned our focus to the use

of a different alternative termed latent class model (LCM) for discrete choice analysis (Greene and

Hensher, 2003).




                                                  13
The LCM for discrete choice analysis is less flexible than the random parameter logit (i.e., it assumes

that the distribution of respondents' attitudes is discrete and not continuous) but it helps one to

understand the sources of the heterogeneity in individual preferences. The LCM groups respondents

in a finite number of classes, where membership in a specific class is based on respondents'

preferences for the attributes of the LTC insurance and their characteristics (e.g.,socio-demographic

factors). The LCM assumes that respondents' preferences are homogeneous within each class but are

heterogeneous across classes. Grouping respondents with homogeneous preferences in a finite

number of classes is relevant for decision-makers because it helps them to understand the

heterogeneity of individual preferences (hence, the distribution of welfare impact) and, most

importantly, to tailor, e.g., their marketing campaigns and their outreach strategies to meet the needs

of specific consumers segments. This will, in turn, make those campaign and strategies more cost-

effective.



In the LCM for discrete choice analysis, the log likelihood for all respondents is:



                                                    

                           ln =      | ()                                                          (3)
                                   =1       =1      =1




Where  denotes the prior probability for class q for individual i. For this study, the form of the

prior probability is a multinomial logit:



                                               exp  
                                    =                      ,  = 1, ... ,  ,  = 0                   (4)
                                               
                                            =1   


Where  denotes a set of observable characteristics (e.g., socio-demographics such as age, income

and gender) that enter the model for class membership.




                                                  14
| is the choice probability that individual i, conditional to belonging to class q (q = 1, ..., Q),

chooses alternative j from a particular set J, comprised of j alternatives, in a particular

choice occasion t, and is represented as:



                                                        exp,  
                                        | () =                                                      (5)
                                                      
                                                   =1 ,  



 ,  are the parameters to be estimated. With the parameters  ,  in hand, we used Bayes'

theorem to obtain respondent-specific (posterior) estimates of the class probability | , conditioned

on their estimated choice probabilities:


                                                  | 
                                                    
                                            | =
                                            
                                                   | 
                                                    =1




The computed respondent-specific (posterior) estimates of the class probability are then used in the

beta regression analysis to profile the members of each class. The beta regression analysis is described

at the end of this section.


To determine the number of classes, the Consistent Akaike Information Criterion (CAIC), and the

Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) were used. Their computation and values corresponding to

LCM with 2 to 6 classes are displayed in Table 2. In what follows we report the results from the

estimation of LCM with 5 classes because is the model resulted in the lowest CAIC and BIC values

(Table 2). The results from the estimation of the RPL and the LCM models are presented in Table 3


[Insert Table 2 about here]


In addition to the estimation of respondents' preferences, choice data is often used to calculate WTP.

WTP is commonly expressed as the negative ratio of the non-price attribute coefficient to the price

coefficient:


                                                   15
                                                             
                            -  = -                                                                     (6)
                                                                 




The calculated value represents respondents' marginal WTP. For the attributes coded as continuous

(e.g., DB), the calculated value represents respondents' WTP for a one unit ($1) increase of the

continuous attribute. In the case of categorical attributes, the calculated value represents respondents'

WTP for the attribute's level of interest (e.g., benefit period of a lifetime) with respect to the baseline

level (e.g., benefit Period of 1 year). The computed WTP values are displayed in Table 4.

After classifying respondents in 5 classes, we characterized each class using, among others,

information on respondents' attitudes and socio-demographic characteristics. The explanatory

variables used in the classes' characterization are described in Table 5. Those variables were

regressed against respondent-specific (posterior) estimates of the class probability | . Since the

dependent variable is in form of probability, we estimated a Beta regression model for each segment.

The results are displayed in Table 6.



3.3 Limitations

       Our analysis is not without limitations including the fact that individuals exhibit cognitive

limitations that might limit the ability to carry out the comparisons that underpin purchase

decisions, and hence the small market size for LTCI may be due to those limitations. Individuals

may also suffer from some level of choice overload, or fatigue which limits them in making optimal

insurance choices.



3   Results



The RPL models were estimated using Modified Latin Hypercube Sampling draws with 1200

simulations, considering repeated choice situations. All the estimation was conducted using the Stata



                                                    16
software. The results displayed in Table 2 show that the RPL model as well as the LCM with 5 classes

fit the data better than the conditional logit based on the CAIC and BIC values.



The results from the RPL models show that the coefficients corresponding to the main effects are

significant and with the expected sign. That is, we find a negative sign for the premium coefficient

and positive signs for all the rest. The negative sign of the coefficient "None" suggests that

respondents tended to prefer to buy an insurance as opposed to the opt-out alternative. It is important

to recall that we have excluded respondents who chose "None" for all choices presented. Most of the

standard deviation parameters, which indicate how the valuation of the entire sample spreads around

the estimated means, are significant, indicating that the preferences are heterogeneous among the

sampled consumers. The estimated cost coefficient is negative and statistically significant, indicating

that respondents will tend to choose lower cost LTCI, other attributes constant.



[Insert 3 about here]



4.1 Daily benefit



The results from the RPL model, displayed in Table 3, show that respondents are more likely to

choose an insurance policy that offers a higher daily payment toward buyer's long-term care costs

holding premiums constant. Not surprisingly respondents value more coverage to less. Results

displayed in Table 4 show that respondents' WTP for the policy increases by $0.22 for each $1

increase in the daily benefit payment of the policy. For example, respondents estimated WTP

increases by $55 (0.22 x 250) when the daily benefit payment increases from $50 to $300.

Nonetheless, responses display some significant heterogeneity. Table 4 shows that among all

respondents, we find some heterogeneity across classes. Class 1 respondents (18% of respondents)




                                                  17
were found to be willing to pay the highest price premium ($1.45), while the members of Class 2 are

willing to pay a premium as low as $0.17 for each $1 increase in the daily benefit payment.



4.2 Benefit Period



We find that respondents are more likely to buy insurance that provide benefits that last for their

lifetimes compared to insurance that provides finite benefits for only one year (also respondents have

higher preferences for lifetime policy than policy that offer benefits for 5 years or 3 years etc.). In

terms of WTP, respondents are willing to pay an incremental premium to the total of $157.15 per

month for a policy that offers lifetime benefits over a policy that offers a 1-year benefit. According

to the American Association for Long-Term Care Insurance (2015), the average cost in 2013 of an

LTC insurance policy for a couple aged 55 with $162,000 each in benefits and 3 percent annual

inflation protection was $3,725 a year or $310.42 per month (or $155.21 per person). Note the typical

policy had a duration of coverage of under four years.



Nonetheless, the results from the latent class analysis (Table 4) show that the members of Class 1 are

willing to pay an annual premium of $11,196, which is significantly higher than the average annual

premium. As in other attributes, Class 2 respondents were found to be only willing to pay a low

premium ($95.61 per month or $1147 per year) for a policy that offers lifetime benefits compared to

a policy that offers a 1-year benefit. The results displayed in Table 4 also show that the members of

the remaining classes are willing to pay premiums that are close to average respondent's premium

($157.15). Similar patterns were also found in the case of insurance policies that offer 5 and 3-year

benefits. Again, the average premium was well below the actuarially fair premium for a lifetime

policy.

          Furthermore, the estimates for the duration of the benefit period (Table 4) show a larger value

placed on insurance policies of longer duration but the incremental value is less than proportional.


                                                    18
The WTP estimates (Table 4) show a valuation of $86.27 per month for a policy that offers 5 years

benefits compared to one that offers a 1-year benefit. The valuation for a policy covering three years

compared to 1-year coverage was estimated to be $73.10 per month. Thus, the three-year policy is

valued at 85% of the 5-year policy more than the difference in expected benefit. Similar patterns were

observed in the case of the estimates from the latent class analysis (Table 4). For instance, members

of Class 1, Class 2, Class 3, Class 4 and Class 5 value the 3-year policy at 61%, 78%, 110%, 88%

and 70%, respectively, of the 5-year policy more than the difference in expected benefit. Notice that

the standard deviations are significant, which implies that consumers' preferences are heterogeneous.



4.3 Deductible Period and Health Requirements



We find that the length of the elimination (or deductible) period influences the value of the insurance

policy. Results displayed in Table 4 show that the average WTP increases by $7.79 for a one-month

reduction of the deductible period. The results also show that respondents' WTP per month reduction

in the elimination period varies considerable across classes, being positive and significantly higher

average respondent's WTP in Class 1 ($327.27), Class 3 ($121.06) and Class 4 ($45.04). In difference

with Class1, 3 and 4, respondents in Class 2 and Class 5 were found to discount the reduction of the

deductible period ($-20.38 and $64.32, respectively), which indicate that the members of these two

classes prefer a larger deductible period. However, this evidence is at odds a general preference for

smaller deductibles (Bhargava et al, 2017).



Respondents' insurance policy valuation is sensitive to the existence of "health requirements". That

is, they show that LTCI products that are not medically under-written are more likely to be chosen

than LTCI that requires an examination holding price constant. The results displayed in Table 4 show

that respondents are willing to pay $25.48 more for an insurance policy that does not require a medical

examination and a doctor's signature for purchase. The differential premium costs estimated by


                                                  19
actuaries is considerably larger than our WTP to forego medical underwriting. As shown in Table 4,

respondents' WTP for the attribute `health requirement' exhibits heterogeneity. Members of Class 1

and Class 4 are willing to pay a premium ($176.29 and $15.35, respectively) for LTCI that does not

require an examination. Nonetheless, the results show respondents in Class 2 and Class 3 are

indifferent between an LTCI product that requires a medical exam and a doctor's signature for

purchase and policy insurance that does not necessitate these requirements. Interestingly, members

of Class 5 were found to prefer policy insurance that requires a medical exam and a doctor's signature

and are willing to pay pray a premium for it of $93.31.



4.4 Type of Insurer and Enrollment



The results in Table 3 reveal that respondents are more likely to purchase insurance that is provided

by a private company than an insurance provided by the federal government. Regarding their WTP,

the results show that respondents are willing to pay a price premium of $13.90 for LTCI provided by

a private company than LTCI provided by the federal government. The results from the latent class

analysis (Table 4) show that the preference for LTCI provided by a private company is not shared by

all respondents. In fact, the results show that members of Class 3 and Class 5 are willing to pay a

price premium ($105.11 and $507.16, respectively) for LTCI provided by a private company, while

members of Class 2 were found to be indifferent between LTCI provided by a private sources or

government. Interestingly members of Class 1, who were found to be willing to pay the highest

premiums for the attributes daily benefit and benefit period as well as for a policy insurance that

provide lifetime benefits and shorter deductible period and does not involve medical underwriting.

Class 4 prefer policy insurance provided by the federal government and are willing to pay a premium

of $78.65 and $23.75, respectively. This result is consistent with the fact that some consumers value

being offered a choice of insurer. Surprisingly this is in the context of an industry where there have

been many companies that have withdrawn from the market


                                                 20
                                    [Insert Table 4 about here]


Our results show that respondents' value LTCI that is voluntary and not mandatory. The results

displayed in Table 4 show that respondents are willing to pay $74.71 more for voluntary plan than

for universal plan. This valuation is inconsistent with what has been learned about the functioning of

LTCI markets and the market failures produced by adverse selection. The estimated standard

deviation for the attribute type of enrollment (Table 3) is statistically significant, indicating that

respondents' preferences are heterogeneous and, hence, a group of them are willing pay more for

universal plan than for voluntary plan. As a matter of fact, the results displayed in Table 4 show that

while the majority of respondents (Class 3, 4 and 5) are willing to pay a premium for voluntary plan,

being largely higher in Class 3 ($628.85) and Class 5 ($557.50) than average respondent's premium

($81.97), 18% of respondents (Class 1) are willing to pay a premium equal to $119.24 for universal

plan. Members of Class 2 were found to be indifferent between voluntary and universal policy

insurance.


4.5 Heterogeneity

In the previous sections we describde how respondent preferences for insurance policy attributes

vary across respondent groups. Below, we highlight the features that characterize the preferences of

the members of each the five classes (which we then label according to its characteristics) as well as

profiling them using the results from the Beta regression that are displayed in Table 6. This can be

of some help in designing policy insurances that are tailored to the needs of the members of each

segment and target them more efficiently. Notice that information that will be presented in the next

few paragraphs is based on the results displayed in Tables 6 and 7., specifically we provide a title

description of each class of choice respondent as below:

                [Insert Tables 6 and 7 about here]




                                                  21
Insurance universalists (Class 1): this class includes 18% of respondents. It is the class whose

members are willing to pay the highest premium for policy for insurance that offers higher daily

benefit, a longer benefit period, a shorter deductible period and does not involve medical under-

writing. Interestingly, their premium for insurance that provides benefits for lifetimes ($932.98) is

almost six times the sample average WTP ($157.15) and three times the average market price for all

LTCI ($310.42). Class 1 is the unique class whose members prefer universal over voluntary policy

insurance and have the highest chance to buy LTC insurance provided by the government. The

results presented in Table 6 show that compared with the members of the other classes, members of

Class 1 are more likely to have private long-term care insurance policy. They are also more likely

be female and overweight or obese. Nonetheless, they are less likely to be white person and have

children.

Rational insurance purchasers (Class 2): the members of this segment (15% of respondents) are

characterized by respondents with the lowest willingness to pay a premium for insurance that offers

higher daily benefit, longer benefit period, shorter deductible period and that does not require

medical exam and a doctor's signature. Interestingly, for the member of this class, the attributes

health requirement, type of insurer and type of enrolment are not important for their choice

decision. This implies that they are likely to only look value the attributes daily benefits, benefit

period and the length of the deductible period and ignore the other attributes when deciding to by

LTC insurance. Compared with the other classes, the results presented in Table 6 show that the

member of Class 2 are more likely to have a high income but less likely to be obese and do not

agree with the idea that it is the government's responsibility to help pay for the long-term care

needs of all Americans.

Insurance consumerists (Class 3): This class (10% of respondents) stands out by being the class

whose members are willing to pay the highest premium for a voluntary plan over universal plan. It

is noteworthy that they are also respondents with higher premium for insurance provided by a

private company and do not consider under-writing as an important factor when purchasing and


                                                   22
LTC insurance. Therefore, the unique policy that the members of Class 3 are likely to purchase

should offer higher daily benefit, benefits for lifetime and shorter deductive period. The policy

should be provided by a private company and most importantly should be voluntary. According to

the results displayed in Table 6, the members of Class 3 are more likely to have a household income

that ranges from $15,000 to $39,999. They are also more likely to support the idea that it is not

their responsibility to provide unpaid care for elderly or disabled family members, but it is the

government's or relatives' responsibility. Furthermore, they are less likely to be overweight or

obese people.

Default purchasers (Class 4): This is the largest class, including 44% of sampled respondents. Our

results showed most of these respondents prefer a LTC insurance policy delivered by the federal

government in addition of offering higher daily benefit, benefits for lifetime and shorter deductive

period, requiring prior medical exam and being voluntary. The Beta regression analysis (Table 6)

showed that, in comparison with the other classes, the members of Class 4 are more likely to be

males and support the argument that if the elderly or disabled family members can no longer pay for

the nursing home or home care they need, relatives should help to pay for their long-term care.

Furthermore, they tend to have lower incomes.

Private Purchasers (C5): is the class whose members are willing to pay the highest premium

($507.16) for an LTC insurance provided by a private company. It is also the only class whose

members are willing to pay a premium for an LTC insurance that is under-written. They also stand

out by being the respondents with the highest premium for longer deductible period. Their

preferences for the remaining attributes of an LTC insurance policy are in line with the preferences

of the rest of respondents. The members of Class 5 are supporter of the argument that it is the

government's responsibility to help pay for the long-term care needs of all Americans but not

relatives' responsibility. They are more likely to be white, elder people and own the primary place

where they live and less likely to have children.




                                                    23
4.6 Valuation

Using our WTP estimates, it is possible to estimate the average marginal WTP by type of consumer.

Our estimates suggest that the LTCI premium is on average the most important factor to potential

insurer purchasers. Relative to the premium, respondents are less concerned about medical

underwriting and whether the policy is offered by private insurers or the government. These

estimates should be interpreted as `simple approximations' of private valuations of WTP for LTCI.

They do not account for various social benefits such as the positive externalities on family

caregivers from having LTCI, and potential Medicaid savings that stem from individuals purchasing

LTCI. Hence, our estimates are lower bound estimates which are overall suggestive of the need of a

subsidy for some respondents. The probability of a policy uptake declines when the policy is

compulsory other factors equal. However, it is well established that by making LTCI compulsory

premiums are reduced dramatically and the need to under-write largely goes away. Both latter

attributes are valued by consumers.




One way to illustrate the relative value of different policy options is to compare the marginal WTP

of extreme insurance policy alternatives in terms of how generous the policy is to the consumer

(daily benefit, low deductible, high benefit). Table 8 illustrates the comparison of between two

options that differ in all the attributes. On average, the marginal WTP for the most a `generous'

(Policy B) compared to the least generous (Policy A)' in terms of valued market attributes amount

to $342 However, the estimates are subject to significant heterogeneity. While the insurance

universalist (Class1) group's marginal WTP is $1,909 and the so-called insurance consumerists

(Class 3) and private purchasers (Class 5) are willing to pay $1392 and $1115 respectively. At the

other end, so-called rational insurers (Class2) and default consumers (Class4) are only willing to

pay $68 and $379 respectively at the margin.




                                                 24
5   Conclusion

       We have employed a discrete choice experiment (DCE) to study the choice of LTCI in the

United States. This is important given that the market for LTCI in the US is the world largest but

has exhibited a very sluggish growth over time. DCE estimates are best thought of as estimates of

potential private demand and may represent a high upper bound on the policies people would

purchase, or whether they would purchase any policy at all. We have undertaken two alternative

strategies. On a first instance, we examined respondents' preferences and WTP for LTCI attribute

using the random parameter logit. Next, we have employed a latent class model approach to

investigate the heterogeneity of respondents' preferences and WTP.



       Our results make evident that bulk of respondents would at least consider the purchase of

LTCI, as only 19% of respondents chose the opt-out alternative in all the choice sets. Our DCE

examine the choices and its valuation of the remaining individuals. We find that on average

individuals are highly sensitive to LTCI costs, and that the average WTP for a lifetime LTCI policy

is significantly heterogeneous across individuals. In fact, we find that although the WTP difference

between the most generous policy amounts to $342, it varies between $1909 for some segment of

the market to $68 for another. This suggests that part of the observed limited LTCI uptake is, in

part, due to a low valuation of LTCI that is inconsistent with the market's ability to offer such

prices that are attractive to most consumers. Although the social value of this insurance may

exceed the private value, behavioral phenomenon may cause an under valuing of the private

benefits which give rise to an efficiency case for some subsidization. Some policies in U.S. states

have offered tax-based subsidies for the purchase of LTCI. However the value of those subsidies

was very small and accrued primarily to high income households as a results they met with little

success (Goda 2011). Our findings suggest that there might be scope for insurance redesign to

address some of the behavioral constraints to insurance take up.




                                                  25
       Another important finding is that a voluntary insurance contract is more highly valued than a

compulsory one. This is consistent with a preference for choice. The value put on voluntary policy

is important in the context of the US, and consistent with the idea that when individual's

heterogeneity is large, then options that offer a choice are preferred as they preserve `consumer

sovereignty' (Becker and Zweifel, 2004). As a market design matter, it is also highly incompatible

with what has been learned about the ability to address the adverse selection problem.




                                                 26
References


AHIP (2017), https://www.ahip.org/who-buys-long-term-care-insurance

Allaire, B. T., Brown, D. S., & Wiener, J. M. (2016). Who Wants Long-Term Care Insurance? A
        Stated Preference Survey of Attitudes, Beliefs, and Characteristics. INQUIRY: The Journal
        of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing, 53, 0046958016663728.

American Association for Long-Term Care Insurance. (2015). Long-Term Care Insurance Fact--
      Statistics. Westlake Village, CA. Available at http://www.aaltci.org/long-term-
      careinsurance/learning-center/fast-facts.php.

Bhargava, S., Loewenstein, G., & Sydnor, J. (2017). Choose to lose: Health plan choices from a
      menu with dominated option. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3), 1319-1372.

Becker, K., & Zweifel, P. (2008). Age and choice in health insurance. The Patient: Patient-
       Centered Outcomes Research, 1(1), 27-40.

Bergquist, S and Costa-Font, J and Swartz, K(2018) Long-term care partnerships: are they fit for
      purpose? Journal of the Economics of Ageing, 12. 151-158

Brau, R., & Lippi Bruni, M. (2008). Eliciting the demand for longterm care coverage: a discrete
       choice modelling analysis. Health Economics, 17(3), 411-433.

Braun, A., Schmeiser, H., & Schreiber, F. (2016). On consumer preferences and the willingness to
       pay for term life insurance. European Journal of Operational Research, 253(3), 761-776.

Brown, J. R., Goda, G. S., & McGarry, K. (2012). Long-term care insurance demand limited by
      beliefs about needs, concerns about insurers, and care available from family. Health
      Affairs, 31(6), 1294-1302.

Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein (2007). "Why is the market for long-term care insurance so
      small?" Journal of Public Economics 91, no. 10 (2007): 1967-1991.

Brown, J. R., & Finkelstein, A. (2008). The interaction of public and private insurance: Medicaid
      and the long-term care insurance market. American Economic Review, 98(3), 1083-1102.

Coe, N. B., Skira, M. M., & Van Houtven, C. H. (2015). Long-term care insurance: Does
       experience matter? Journal of Health Economics, 40, 122-131.

Cohen, M.A., Kaur, R., & Darnell, B. (2013). Exiting the Market: Understanding the Factors
       Behind Carriers' Decision to Leave the Long-Term Care Insurance Market. Waltham, MA:
       LifePlans, Inc. for the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation/U.S.
       Department of Health and Human Services. Available at
       https://aspe.hhs.gov/report/exitingmarket-understanding-factors-behind-carriers-decision-
       leave-long-term-care-insurancemarket.

Costa-Font, J., & Rovira-Forns, J. (2008). Who is willing to pay for long-term care insurance in
       Catalonia? Health Policy, 86(1), 72-84.



                                                 27
Costa-Font, J. (2017). "Institutionalization aversion" and the willingness to pay for home health
       care. Journal of Housing Economics, 38, 62-69.

Favreault, M. M., Gleckman, H., & Johnson, R. W. (2015). Financing long-term services and
       supports: Options reflect trade-offs for older Americans and federal spending. Health
       Affairs, 34(12), 2181-2191.

Gabaix, X., & Laibson, D. (2006). Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and information
      suppression in competitive markets. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 505-540.

Genworth Financial, Inc. Compare long term care costs across the United States [Internet], 2017.
     Available from https://www.genworth.com/about-us/industry-expertise/cost-of-care.html.
     Accessed 4 December 2017

Goda, G. S. (2011). The impact of state tax subsidies for private long-term care insurance on
      coverage and Medicaid expenditures. Journal of Public Economics, 95(7-8), 744-757.

Gottlieb, D., & Mitchell, O. S. (2015). Narrow framing and long-term care insurance (No.
       w21048). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Greene, W. H., & Hensher, D. A. (2003). A latent class model for discrete choice analysis: contrasts
      with mixed logit. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 37(8), 681-698.

Hensher, D. A., Ho, C., & Mulley, C. (2015). Identifying preferences for public transport
      investments under a constrained budget. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
      Practice, 72, 27-46.

Krueger, A B. & Kuziemko, I, (2013). The demand for health insurance among uninsured
      Americans: Results of a survey experiment and implications for policy, Journal of
      Health Economics, Elsevier, vol. 32(5), pages 780-793

Kunreuther, H., and Slovic, P. (1978), `Economics, Psychology and Protective Behavior,'
      American Economic Review, vol. 68, pp. 64­69.

Loewenstein, G., Friedman, J. Y., McGill, B., Ahmad, S., Linck, S., Sinkula, S. & Madrian, B. C.
      (2013). Consumers' misunderstanding of health insurance. Journal of Health
      Economics, 32(5): 850-862.

Louviere, J. J., Pihlens, D., & Carson, R. (2011). Design of discrete choice experiments: a
       discussion of issues that matter in future applied research. Journal of Choice Modelling,
       4(1), 1-8

McFadden, D. (1974). The measurement of urban travel demand. Journal of Public Economics,
     3(4), 303-328.

McGarry, B. E., Tempkin-Greener, H., Grabowski, D. C., Chapman, B. P., & Li, Y. (2017).
     Consumer Decision-Making Abilities and Long-Term Care Insurance Purchase. The
     Journals of Gerontology: Series B.

Nieboer, A. P., X. Koolman, and E. A. Stolk. "Preferences for long-term care services: Willingness
      to pay estimates derived from a discrete choice experiment." Social Science & Medicine 70,
      no. 9 (2010): 1317-1325.

                                                 28
Royalty, A. B., & Hagens, J. (2005). The effect of premiums on the decision to participate in health
       insurance and other fringe benefits offered by the employer: evidence from a real-world
       experiment. Journal of Health Economics, 24(1), 95-112.

Wiener JM, Anderson W, Khatutsky G, Kaganova Y, O'Keeffe J (2013). Medicaid Spend Down:
      New Estimates and Implications for Long-term Services and Supports. Financing Reform.
      Washington, DC: RTI International; 2013




                                                 29
Table 1: Long-Term Care Insurance Attributes Included in the Discrete Choice Experiment

 Attribute                             Description                    Levels

 Daily Benefit          How much the policy pays per day toward       $300, $175, $100, $50 per day
                        your long-term care costs
                                                                      Lifetime, 5 years, 3 years, 1 year
 Benefit Period
                        How long the policy provides benefits for
                                                                      None, 1 month, 3 months, 6
                        When you first become disabled, how long
 Deductible Period                                                    months
                        before the insurance company will pay for
                        services
                                                                      None; Healthy and not disabled
 Health Requirements    Whether the plan requires a medical exam
                        and a doctor's signature for purchase
                                                                      Private company; federal
 Type of Insurer
                        The sponsor or seller of the insurance plan   government
                                                                      $30, $100, $225, $400 per month
 Monthly Premium Cost   The amount you pay each month to
                        maintain coverage
                                                                      Voluntary: no one must buy
 Type of Enrolment      Whether purchase of the insurance plan
                                                                      insurance;
                        shown was required by law
                                                                      Universal plan: everyone must
                                                                      buy this policy




                                                     30
Table 2: Information on the converged latent segment models and a random parameters logit
model

                     Log likelihood            Number                 Number
    Number
                    at convergence          of parameters         of observations         CAIC            BIC
   of Classes
                           (LL)                   (P)                    (N)

        2                     -33408.3             41                  11833             67244.19       67203.19
        3                     -33103.5             73                  11833             66968.57       66895.57
        4                     -32924.4            105                  11833             66944.14       66839.14
        5                     -32713.9            137                  11833             66856.82       66719.82
        6                     -32632.6            169                  11833             67028.13       66859.13

  RPL model                 -34430.58              20                  12476             69069.79       69049.79
Note: CAIC (Consistent Akaike Information Criterion) is calculated using: -2 * LL + (ln(N) + 1) * PBIC (Bayesian
Information Criterion) is calculated using: -2 * LL + ln(N) * P
RPL stands for Random parameter logit




                                                         31
Table 3: Estimated consumers' preferences

                            Random parameter
 Variables                   logit model (RPL)                                                  5 class model

                                             Std.
                              Mean                                Class 1            Class 2           Class 3           Class 4          Class 5
                                           deviation
 None                                                            -2.559     ***          -   ***      -13.268    ***     0.499   ***      0.757   ***
                            -0.857   ***   -1.141   ***                              5.862
 Daily Benefit                                                   0.002      ***      0.003   ***       0.003     **      0.002   ***      0.002   ***
                             0.002   ***   0.002    ***
 Benefit Period-Lifetime                                         1.243      ***      1.590   ***       1.072     ***     1.647   ***      0.600   ***
                             1.333   ***   -0.738   ***
 Benefit Period-5years                                           0.711      ***      1.138   ***       0.746     **      0.914   ***      0.311   **
                             0.732   ***   0.140
 Benefit Period-3years                                           0.436      ***      0.887   ***       0.818     ***     0.805   ***      0.217
                             0.620   ***   -0.035
 Deductible Period                                               0.314      ***          -   ***       0.664     ***     0.450   ***          -   **
                             0.066   ***   -0.029                                    0.339                                                0.207
 Health Requirement                                              0.235      ***          -             0.422             0.154   ***          -   ***
                             0.216   ***   -0.597   ***                              0.175                                                0.300
 Type of Insurer                                                 -0.105     **           -             0.577     ***         -   ***      1.632   ***
                             0.096   ***   0.665    ***                              0.168                               0.238
 Type of Enrolment                                               -0.159     **       0.082             3.451     ***     0.474   ***      1.794   ***
                             0.695   ***   0.997    ***
 Cost                       -0.008   ***   -0.006   ***          -0.001     ***          -   ***       -0.005    ***         -   ***          -   ***
                                                                                     0.017                               0.010            0.003

 Class share                    1                                0.18                0.15               0.10             0.44             0.13

(***) (**) and (*) denote statistical significance at (1%), (5%) and (10%) level, respectively




Table 4: Consumers' marginal willingness to pay (MWTP)

 Variables                   RPL                                                    5 class model

                                                           Class 1          Class 2           Class 3            Class 4          Class 5
 Daily Benefit               0.22    ***                  1.45   ***         0.17    ***       0.50    *          0.20    ***      0.75     ***
 Benefit Period-Lifetime
                           157.15    ***             932.98      ***        95.61    ***     195.24    ***      164.65    ***    186.65     ***
 Benefit Period-5years
                            86.27    ***             533.88      ***        68.46    ***     135.92    ***       91.45    ***     96.73     **
 Benefit Period-3years
                            73.10    ***             327.27      ***        53.34    ***     149.04    ***       80.49    ***     67.51     *
 Deductible Period                                                              -
                             7.79    ***             236.00      **         20.38    ***     121.06    ***       45.04    ***    -64.32     *
 Health Requirement
                            25.48    ***             176.29      **          0.00              0.00              15.35    ***    -93.31     **
 Type of Insurer
                            11.29    ***             -78.65      *           0.00            105.11    ***      -23.75    ***    507.16     ***
 Type of Enrolment          81.97    ***            -119.24      **          0.00            628.85    ***       47.36    ***    557.50     ***


 Class share                   1                      0.18                  0.15              0.10               0.44             0.13

(***) (**) and (*) denote statistical significance at (1%), (5%) and (10%) level, respectively




                                                                       32
 Table 5: Description of the segment membership variables


Variables                                             Description

Risk                 Willingness to take risks. The variable is measured on a on the scale of 0 to
                     10 where 0 represents "not at all willing" to take risks and 10 represents "very
                     willing" to take risks.

Ownership            Whether the respondent owns the primary place where he/she lives (coded as
                     1) or not (coded as 0)

Resp_own             This variable is coded as 1 if the respondent agrees with the statement that "It
                     is this/her responsibility to provide unpaid care for elderly or disabled family
                     members", otherwise the variable is coded as 0.

Resp_family          This variable is coded as 1 if the respondent agrees with the statement that "It
                     is the responsibility of children or other family members to provide unpaid
                     care for elderly or disabled family members", otherwise the variable is coded
                     as 0.

Resp_relatives       This variable is coded as 1 if the respondent agrees with the statement that "If
                     elderly or disabled family members can no longer pay for the nursing home
                     or home care they need, relatives should help pay for their long-term care.",
                     otherwise the variable is coded as 0.

Resp_governement     This variable is coded as 1 if the respondent agrees with the statement that "It
                     is the government's responsibility to help pay for the long-term care needs of
                     all Americans.", otherwise the variable is coded as 0.

Long_term            This variable is coded as 1 if respondent has a private long-term care
                     insurance policy separate from your regular health or disability insurance and
                     is coded as 0 if he/she doesn't have it.

Have_children        This variable is coded as 1 if respondent has children and 0 if he/she doesn't
                     have children.

Education_LHS        This variable is coded as 1 if respondent revealed to have less than a high
                     school diploma and 0 otherwise.

Education_HS         This variable is coded as 1 if respondent revealed to have a high school
                     diploma or equivalent and 0 otherwise.

Education_SC         This variable is coded as 1 if respondent revealed to have some college studies
                     but not a degree and 0 otherwise.

Age                  This variable is continuous and represents respondent's age in years.




                                                33
Table 5: Description of the segment membership variables (continued)

 Variables                                           Description

 White               Respondent describes himself/herself as white, otherwise the variable is
                     coded as 0

 Income2             Respondent revealed that his household's income is between $15,000 to
                     $39,999, otherwise the variable is coded as 0

 Income3             Respondent revealed that his household's income is between $40,000 to
                     $84,999, otherwise the variable is coded as 0

 Income4             Respondent revealed that his household's income is $85,000 or more,
                     otherwise the variable is coded as 0

 BMI_underweight     Respondent's body mass index (BMI) is less than 18.5, otherwise the variable
                     is coded as 0

 BMI_overwieight     Respondent's body mass index (BMI) is between 25 to 29.9, otherwise the
                     variable is coded as 0

 BMI_obese           Respondent's body mass index (BMI) is between 30 or higher, otherwise the
                     variable is coded as 0

 Gender              Respondent is male and 0 if she is female.




                                               34
Table 6: Results from the Beta regression ­ estimated marginal effects (% change)

                                 Class1            Class2            Class3            Class4        Class5
 Risk                              0.15     *        0.25     ***      0.29     ***      0.26    ***  -0.14 *
 Ownership                       -16.34     ***      7.72     ***      7.30     ***     -9.08    *** 58.64 ***
 Resp_own                         -0.80     ***     -0.74     ***     -1.09     ***     -0.33    ***   0.76 ***
 Resp_family                      -0.05              0.08              0.03              0.13    *     0.11
 Resp_relatives                   -6.97     ***     -5.77     ***      7.37     ***     13.14    *** -35.53 ***
 Resp_governement                -25.94     ***    -40.64     ***     39.88     ***    -31.86    *** 135.50 ***
 Long_term                        35.91     ***    -15.86     ***    -15.72     ***    -18.83    *** 35.66 ***
 Have_children                   -29.06     ***     13.06     ***     17.16     ***     -1.23    *** 19.56 ***
 Age                              -0.01     **       0.00              0.00             -0.01    *     0.02 ***
 Education_LHS                     0.39             -0.01             -0.07              0.21          0.12
 Education_HS                      0.40     ***      0.08              0.27     **       0.04         -0.38 ***
 Education_SC                      0.27     ***     -0.05              0.05             -0.14    *    -0.13
 White                           -36.20     ***    -14.11     ***     23.25     ***      3.21    *** 55.39 ***
 Income2                         -28.37     ***     22.52     ***     28.82     ***     -0.88    *** 13.42 ***
 Income3                         -41.73     ***     61.10     ***     20.98     ***    -12.65    *** 38.25 ***
 Income4                         -13.58     ***     68.86     ***     -4.84     ***    -18.26    *** 27.99 ***
 BMI_underwieight                  0.85     *        0.46              0.47              0.36         -0.28
 BMI_overwieight                  15.80     ***     -4.44     ***    -11.33     ***     -5.68    *** 12.44 ***
 BMI_obese                        12.11     ***    -19.78     ***     -4.56     ***      1.92    ***   4.36 ***
 Gender                           38.26     ***     16.11     ***     16.29     ***    -23.80    ***  -7.38 ***

 Log pseudolikelihood                40891             42654             47014             32815       47550
 Number of observations             11,833            11,833            11,833            11,833       11,833
 Wald chi square                    676761            432508            321261            654252      3620000
 Prob > chi square                  0.0000            0.0000            0.0000            0.0000       0.0000

(***) (**) and (*) denote statistical significance at (1%), (5%) and (10%) level, respectively




                                                            35
Table 7 Characteristics of the most preferred LTC insurance for the member of each class

   Attributes         Class 1           Class 2               Class 3           Class 4            Class 5

 Daily Benefit     The higher the   The higher the         The higher the   The higher the      The higher the
                       better           better                 better           better              better
                    ($1.45/day)        ($0.17/day)          ($0.50/day)        ($0.20/day)       ($0.75/day)

                     Lifetime           Lifetime             Lifetime           Lifetime          Lifetime
 Benefit Period
                     ($932.98)          ($95.61)             ($195.24)          ($164.65)         ($186.65)

 Deductible           Shorter            Longer               Shorter           Shorter            Longer
 Period
                     ($236.00)          ($-20.38)            ($121.06)          ($45.04)          ($-64.32)

 Health             No medical        Not important        Not important       No medical       Medical exam
 requirement          exam                                                       exam
                                         ($0.00)              ($0.00)                             ($-64.32)
                     ($176.29)                                                  ($15.35)

 Type of Insurer      Federal         Not important           Private            Federal           Private
                    government                               company           government         company
                                         ($0.00)
                     ($-78.65)                               ($105.11)          ($-23.75)         ($507.16)

 Type of             Universal        Not important          Voluntary         Voluntary          Voluntary
 Enrolment
                    ($-119.24)           ($0.00)             ($628.85)          ($47.36)          ($557.50)




Table 8. Marginal WTP of Policy B compared to the baseline (Policy A)

 Attributes               Baseline   New policy (B)                  Based on                Price premium
                          policy (A)                                 estimates from:         for B with
                                                                                             respect to A
 Daily Benefit            $50            $250                        RPL                     $343.26
 Benefit Period           1-year         Lifetime                    Class 1                 $1909.38
 Deductible Period        3              0                           Class 2                 $68.47
 Health Requirement       Yes            None                        Class 3                 $1392.38
 Type of Insurer          Federal        Private company             Class 4                 $378.73
 Type of Enrolment        Universal      Voluntary                   Class 5                 $1115.04




                                                      36
Figure 1: Example of a choice set presented in the set of the first five choice sets (DCE1)




Source: Long-Term Care Awareness and Planning Survey, 2014.
                                               37
Figure 2: Example of a choice set presented in the set of the last three choice sets (DCE2)




                                                 38
Source: Long-Term Care Awareness and Planning Survey, 2014.




                                            39
