                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               VENTURE CAPITAL CONTRACTS

                                          Michael Ewens
                                       Alexander S. Gorbenko
                                          Arthur Korteweg

                                        Working Paper 26115
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26115


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                              July 2019
We are grateful to Ilona Babenko (discussant), Tania Babina (discussant), Vincent Glode (discussant),
Will Gornall (discussant), Igor Makarov (discussant), Joshua Mollner (discussant), Pavel Zryumov
(discussant), Steven Kaplan, Tim McQuade, Christian Opp, Gordon Phillips, and seminar participants
at Berkeley University (Haas), Boston College, Brigham Young University, California Institute of
Technology, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Erasmus University, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Imperial College London, Maastricht University, Northwestern University (Kellogg),
Stockholm School of Economics, Tilburg University, Tulane University, University College London,
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, University of Maryland, University of North Carolina, Univestity
of Southern California and University of Texas Austin, and participants at the 2019 American Finance
Association meetings, the 2019 Midwest Finance Association meetings, the 2019 Financial Intermediation
Research Society meetings, the 2019 UBC Summer Finance Conference. Jun Chen provided valuable
research assistance. We thank the Linde Institute of Economic and Management Sciences for funding.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26115.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Michael Ewens, Alexander S. Gorbenko, and Arthur Korteweg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Venture Capital Contracts
Michael Ewens, Alexander S. Gorbenko, and Arthur Korteweg
NBER Working Paper No. 26115
July 2019
JEL No. C78,D86,G24

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate the impact of venture capital (VC) contract terms on startup outcomes and the split of
value between the entrepreneur and investor, accounting for endogenous selection via a novel dynamic
search and matching model. The estimation uses a new, large data set of first financing rounds of startup
companies. Consistent with efficient contracting theories, there is an optimal equity split between agents,
which maximizes the probability of success. However, VCs use their bargaining power to receive
more investor-friendly terms compared to the contract that maximizes startup values. Better VCs still
benefit the startup and the entrepreneur, due to their positive value creation. Counterfactuals show
that reducing search frictions shifts the bargaining power to VCs and benefits them at the expense
of entrepreneurs. The results show that selection of agents into deals is a first-order factor to take into
account in studies of contracting.


Michael Ewens                                        Arthur Korteweg
California Institute of Technology                   Marshall School of Business
MC 228-77                                            University of Southern California
1200 East California Avenue                          3670 Trousdale Parkway
Pasadena, CA 91125                                   Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER                                             korteweg@marshall.usc.edu
mewens@caltech.edu

Alexander S. Gorbenko
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Pkwy
Los Angeles, CA 90089
gorbenko@marshall.usc.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26115
       A large body of academic work examines the problem of financial contracting, frequently
within the context of an entrepreneur negotiating a financing deal with an investor (e.g., Bolton
and Dewatripont, 2004; Salanie, 2005). Entrepreneurial firms are key drivers of innovation and
employment growth, and the efficient allocation of capital to early stage firms is crucial to their suc-
cess (Solow, 1957).1 Financial contracting plays an important role at this stage, as entrepreneurs'
ability to promise outcome-independent payments to venture capitalists (VCs) is affected by their
limited initial resources and the limited liability constraint, as well as severe information asym-
metries and agency problems (Hall and Lerner, 2010). The resulting observed contracts between
entrepreneurs and VCs are quite complex. The predominant explanation in the theoretical lit-
erature is that complex contractual features improve incentives and information sharing (e.g.,
Cornelli and Yosha, 2003; Kaplan and Str¨
                                        omberg, 2003; Schmidt, 2003; Repullo and Suarez, 2004;
Hellmann, 2006). A typical, but not necessary set of assumptions in deriving this result is that
investors are homogeneous and competitive, do not actively impact the value of the start-up, and
thus earn zero rents.
       A contrasting view, considered by papers that primarily focus on the VC market, is that
in the presence of limited liability and various market imperfections, investors negotiate certain
contract terms, not to grow the size of the pie divided between the contracting parties, but to
change the distribution of the pie in investors' favor. This outcome is possible because VCs
are not homogeneous, as evidenced by the persistence in VC returns (e.g., Kaplan and Schoar,
2005; Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2014; Korteweg and Sorensen, 2017) and the
positive relation between VC fees and performance (Robinson and Sensoy, 2013). Similar to models
of economic superstars (Rosen, 1981), when VCs can actively impact the startup value, a VC of
lesser quality (a shorthand for its experience, network, and other value-added activities) is usually
a poor substitute for a higher quality investor. Moreover, VCs are not perfectly competitive, as
each investor faces a flow of entrepreneurs and can choose among them (e.g., Opp, 2019). Finally,
as repeat players in the market for startup financing, VCs have a broader view of the market and
the distribution of possible outcomes than entrepreneurs, as well as a better understanding of the
implications of complicated contract terms. As a result, VCs have substantial bargaining power;
furthermore, lawyers and regulators do not have strong incentives to correct this imbalance. The
resulting contracts are favorable to the VC ­ even if VC-friendly contracts reduce the startup's
value ­ but come at a cost to the entrepreneur, who experiences poor returns (e.g., Moskowitz
and Vissing-Jørgensen, 2002; Hall and Woodward, 2010; Cestone, 2014). As of yet, there is little
   1
    Successful entrepreneurial firms represent a sizable component of the economy. In 2015, public VC-backed firms
in the US accounted for 21% of equity market capitalization, 44% of research and development expense, and 11%
of employment (Gornall and Strebulaev, 2015).



                                                        2
empirical evidence that quantifies in which direction, let alone how much, various contract terms
impact outcomes and the distribution of value. This paper helps fill that gap.
   A key empirical problem is that contracts are related to the underlying qualities of the en-
trepreneur and investor, which are unobserved. To address the resulting omitted variables problem
we specify a dynamic search and matching model. In broad strokes, the model works as follows.
Penniless entrepreneurs search for investors in their startups, and vice versa. When two potential
counterparties meet, the investor can either offer a contract or resume its search in the hopes of
meeting a better entrepreneur. The entrepreneur has bargaining power due to the possibility of
refusing the contract and resuming the search process in the hopes of meeting a higher quality
investor. The model allows for the contract to affect outcomes (the size of the pie) and the split
between investor and entrepreneur (the distribution of the pie). It also allows, as a special case, a
world with perfectly competitive homogenous investors with no bargaining power. Compared to
static matching models, our model is tractable and intuitive despite the addition of dynamics and
contracts. Intuitively, the dynamic search feature of the model generates a random component to
matches, which helps identify the impact of contracts on outcomes and value splits, controlling
for the qualities of the entrepreneur and the investor.
   The second main problem is that startup contracts are private, and data is difficult to find.
To take the model to the data, we collect a new data set that contains over 10,000 first round
VC financings between 2002 and 2015. After applying reasonable data filters, we have between
1,695 and 2,581 contracts, depending on the outcome variable. This constitutes the largest set
of first round contracts studied in the literature to date and includes data on both cash flow and
control rights. Nearly all contracts are some form of convertible preferred equity. We focus on the
investor's equity share upon conversion to common stock, participation rights, pay-to-play, and
investor seats on the startup's board. Participation is a cash flow right that gives the investor
a preferred equity payout with an additional common equity claim. In contrast, in a convertible
preferred security without participation, the investor must ultimately choose between receiving
the preferred payout or converting to common equity (see Figure 1 for an illustration). Pay-to-play
is a term that takes away certain cash flow and/or voting rights if an investor does not participate
in a subsequent round of financing. Board seats are an important control right that give the VC
direct influence over corporate decisions.
   We find that contracts materially affect startup values, with both value-increasing and de-
creasing components. Fixing the quality of investor and entrepreneur, the average startup's value
increases with the investor's equity share up to an ownership stake (upon conversion) of 15%.
Any further increase in the VC's share decreases firm value. An internal optimal equity share is
consistent with, for example, theories of double moral hazard in which both the investor and the

                                                 3
entrepreneur need to exert effort for the company to succeed. While 15% may appear to be a low
stake in the case of common equity contracts, this corresponds to 28% of the average firm's value,
due to preferred terms such as liquidation preferences, which shift more value towards the VC.
In the data, however, the average deal gives the VC an equity share of 40%, which corresponds
to nearly half of the firm's value due to the value of preferred terms and VC board seats. Higher
quality investors can bargain for even higher ownership stakes since they add more value to the
firm, and it is costly for the entrepreneur to search for another high-quality investor. Despite the
reduction in firm value that results from a suboptimal equity share (and other contract terms),
the VC benefits from a higher expected payoff: the average deal value is only 83% of the value
under the value-maximizing contract, but receiving nearly half of the lowered value is better than
28% of the maximal value (these numbers include the effects of other contract terms discussed
below).
   Other contract terms besides equity share also impact firm value and its distribution among
agents. Again fixing the agents' qualities, participation rights significantly lower the chance that
the venture will succeed, while transferring a larger fraction of its value to the VC. The effects
of investor board representation go in the same direction for the average startup. However, these
effects are only about a third as strong as participation and, for some deals, can raise rather
than lower the firm's success probability. Pay-to-play has the opposite effect, increasing value and
moving the split in favor of the entrepreneur. The effects of pay-to-play are also slightly weaker
in magnitude than those of VC board seats.
   We find that the equilibrium contract terms negotiated between VC and entrepreneur depend
on their respective qualities. There are also important interactions and trade-offs between cash
flow and control rights. Entrepreneurs (VCs) match with a range of counterparties between an
upper and lower quality threshold. While these ranges generally increase in the entrepreneur's
(VC's) quality, endogenous contracting introduces exceptions to this rule, and positively assorta-
tive matching does not necessarily hold. An entrepreneur who matches with her lowest acceptable
quality VC negotiates a contract with pay-to-play but with a low VC equity share and without
participation rights or VC board seats. As the same entrepreneur matches with a VC of increas-
ingly higher quality, the VC's equity share rises. Additionally, the VC has progressively more
bargaining power to first drop pay-to-play, then negotiate for board seats, and finally negotiate
additionally for participation.
   The model does not identify the mechanisms driving these results, but we offer the following
observations. First, the increased VC cash flow rights of the participation term explain the increase
in the fraction of firm value that goes to the VC. However, the channel through which participation
rights reduce total value is less clear. The traditional view is that participation induces the

                                                 4
entrepreneur to exert more effort, but this may be offset by, for example, asset substitution
incentives from the debt-like features of participation rights or preferences for window-dressing
that stem from such features (Cornelli and Yosha, 2003). Second, VC board seats can move a
higher fraction of value to VCs through increased control rights. At the same time, board seats
may reduce overall value by reducing incentives for entrepreneurs to exert effort because they have
less control over key decisions, and are possibly over-monitored (Burkart, Gromb, and Panunzi,
1997; Kaplan and Str¨
                    omberg, 2004; Zhu, 2019). This value reduction may offset any value creation
from improved governance and monitoring. In a large survey by Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan, and
Strebulaev (2019), 33% of VCs reported that the board of directors was an important factor
contributing to failed investments, slightly higher than the proportion that rates the board as
having contributed to success. This explanation is consistent with the observation that VC board
seats are not included in every deal and that they can be value-increasing in deals involving high-
quality VCs. Next, we observe that pay-to-play shifts a higher fraction of value to the entrepreneur
because cash flow and/or control rights are returned to the entrepreneur if the VC chooses not
to participate in a subsequent financing round. In turn, pay-to-play may increase firm value due
to increased incentives to exert effort on the part of the entrepreneur. Finally, the results on
interactions among contact terms also speak to the tension in the literature between models that
predict that cash flow and control rights should come together to assign control to investors with
equity-like claims (Bergl¨
                         of, 1994, Kalay and Zender, 1997, and Biais and Casamatta, 1999) and
models that allocate contingent control to investors with debt-like claims in the presence of costly
monitoring (Townsend, 1979, Diamond, 1984, Gale and Hellwig, 1985). In the entrepreneurial
finance setting considered here, the evidence favors the latter set of models.
   It is important to note that the above results do not imply that a VC investment destroys
value in equilibrium. An entrepreneur is still better off with a higher quality VC (consistent with
Sørensen, 2007). For example, for an entrepreneur at the 99% quality quantile, moving from the
lowest to the highest quality VC match raises the startup's value by 89% and the entrepreneur's
value by 33% (with endogenously determined contracts), even though firm value is not maximized
and a larger fraction goes to higher-quality VC due to a higher equity share, participation, and
board representation. Also note that to preserve incentives and remain competitive, even the high-
est quality VCs still leave almost half of firm value to the entrepreneur, despite their considerable
bargaining power.
   The estimated link between qualities and contracts also speaks to patterns of persistence and
"style" (Bengtsson and Sensoy, 2015; Bengtsson and Ravid, 2009). In equilibrium, VCs offer better
entrepreneurs more entrepreneur-friendly contracts that hardly vary with entrepreneur quality.
This result cannot be driven completely by style (i.e., a VC fixed effect) when VCs encounter

                                                 5
entrepreneurs from a range of qualities, of whom at least some have sufficient bargaining power to
negotiate entrepreneur-friendly terms. Our model suggests that persistence can at least be partly
explained by a market equilibrium in which VCs have much of the bargaining power.
   In counterfactuals, we consider the effects of decreasing search frictions. If the expected time
between encounters is halved (an order of magnitude lower), then the value of all deals in the
market increases by 1.2% (decreases by 5.1%). If VCs are able to meet new entrepreneurs more
frequently, they wield even more bargaining power and claim a higher fraction of the company,
negatively affecting its value. The tension between lower average firm value and higher matching
rates appears to only favor the market for a small decrease in frictions. A similar consequence
of reducing search frictions is derived theoretically for OTC markets by Glode and Opp (2018).
In the appendix we explore a different counterfactual that removes certain contractual features
(implemented by contract terms) altogether. Generally, removing VC-friendly features could lead
to modest firm value creation, but some VCs and entrepreneurs would be worse off. We should
note that these effects are all on the intensive margin because we cannot say what happens on
the extensive margin, in terms of how many entrepreneurs and investors would enter or leave the
market.
   Our search-and-matching model is designed to be tractable and transparent, but this comes
at the cost of making some judgement calls on model inputs and simplifying assumptions about
certain features of the data generating process. We show that our results are robust to alternative
measures of success (e.g. follow-on financings or IPOs), different discount rates, and sub-sample
splits by industry, location, time, syndication characteristics, and proxies for startup capital in-
tensity. Moreover, our results are qualitatively unaffected when the model incorporates directed
search among agents for counterparties, additional bargaining power of the entrepreneur, variation
in the startup value and contract for a given pair of agent qualities, entrepreneur overconfidence,
endogenous startup capital requirements, or one-dimensional asymmetric information about en-
trepreneur quality.
   Our paper is related to multiple strands of literature. First, we make a novel contribution to the
emerging empirical literature on selection in venture capital. Our paper is most related to Sørensen
(2007), who estimates the impact of matching versus observed entrepreneur and VC characteristics
on IPO rates. He estimates a static matching model in which the split of firm value between the
entrepreneur and VC is exogenously fixed across matches. Our paper differs in two important
ways. First, we model the market for venture capital as a dynamic market, instead of a one-shot
market, which is more realistic and more tractable. Second, we allow for the endogenous split of
total firm value between the entrepreneur and VC via negotiated contracts. These modifications
affect the estimated impact of selection on firm value, and allow us to characterize the impact

                                                 6
of contract terms on outcomes. Our work is also related to Fox, Hsu, and Yang (2015), who
study identification in a one-shot matching model with possibly endogenous terms of trade. Their
work is mostly theoretical and their application to venture capital does not include contracts.
Outside of VC, Matvos (2013) estimates the impact of contract terms in corporate loans, using
a different methodology from ours. Hagedorn, Law, and Manovskii (2017) estimate a dynamic
search-matching model of the labor market based on Shimer and Smith (2000). Their identification
approach is based on the knowledge of the dollar value of contracts (in their setup, one-dimensional
wages) between firms and employees, and the relative ranking of employee wages in different firms
as they switch jobs. Additionally, wages are assumed to not affect the value of the match. The
same approach does not work in the VC market because the dollar impact of various contract
terms on the value of the startup and its split has to be estimated. Also, most entrepreneurs
only match with a VC once. As a result, we estimate our model differently, using aggregate data
moments.
   Second, our paper is related to the empirical and theoretical literature on VC contracts and,
broadly, to the extensive theoretical literature on general contracting. We cite relevant findings
from the literature in our discussion of the estimated links between qualities, contracts, and
startup values below. Beyond connecting the evidence to the existing theory, our results show that
selection of agents into deals is a first-order factor to take into account in studies of contracting.
   Third, a complementary paper by Gornall and Strebulaev (2019) also considers the impact
of certain contract terms on valuations, using a contingent claims model in the spirit of Merton
(1973). Unlike our paper, they can provide valuations in dollars, whereas we can only study
indirect sensitivities of valuations to contract terms. However, they cannot determine the impact
of control terms (such as board seats) on outcomes or account for the importance of VC and
entrepreneur quality and the resulting balance of bargaining powers as drivers of valuations (their
VCs are assumed to break even). Key to obtaining valuations in dollars, their complex option
valuation model is sensitive, amongst others, to the assumption of a geometric Brownian motion
process for the value of the underlying asset, ignoring jumps and time-variation in volatility
(Peters, 2017).
   Fourth, our matching model borrows from the theoretical search-and-matching literature with
endogenous terms of trade. Shimer and Smith (2000) and Smith (2011) characterize the endoge-
nous matching equilibrium in a continuous-time model with a single class of agents meeting each
other. Adachi (2007) models endogenous matching with two classes of agents and endogenous
terms of trade as a discrete-time game; as the meet rates increase, the model outcomes converge
to those in the static model of Hatfield and Milgrom (2005). While our model is continuous-
time, the Poisson process for meetings makes it similar to Adachi (2007). Inderst and M¨
                                                                                       uller

                                                  7
(2004) analyze a two-sided exogenous matching model with endogenous contracts in which the
supply of venture capital affects the bargaining power of VCs and entrepreneurs. To address
such effects, we consider differences across time periods in our robustness tests.2 Axelson and
Makarov (2018) develop a one-sided sequential search model with endogenous contracts where,
in contrast to our model, entrepreneurs and VCs do not know each other's types, and VCs can
observe entrepreneurs' search histories through a credit registry. They show that credit registries
lead to more adverse selection and higher VC rents. A more fully developed extension of our two-
sided search and matching model would also include two-sided adverse selection and information
aggregation; however, we leave this extension for future work.


1        Identification Problem
To illustrate the identification problem and the source of variation the model exploits, consider
the following example. Entrepreneurs search for an investor to finance their startup company,
while at the same time investors are searching for entrepreneurs to fund. Due to search frictions,
potential counterparties encounter each other randomly (an assumption we relax in an extension).
Upon meeting, the parties attempt to negotiate a contract that is acceptable to both sides. For
the purpose of this example, a contract, c, is the share of common equity in the startup received
by the investor. Suppose that if successful, the value of the startup is

                                            = i · e · exp{-2.5 · c}.                                          (1)

The negative impact of c on the value can be justified by entrepreneurs working less if they retain
a smaller share of the startup (in the estimation, we do not restrict the impact to be negative).
Suppose there are three types of investors, characterized by i = 1, 2, 3, that an entrepreneur is
equally likely to encounter. Similarly, suppose there are three types of entrepreneurs, e = 1, 2, 3,
that an investor is equally likely to encounter. For example, if an i = 1 investor and an e = 2
entrepreneur meet and agree on c = 0.4, then  = 2 · exp{-1}, the investor receives shares worth
0.8 · exp{-1} and the entrepreneur retains an equity stake worth 1.2 · exp{-1}.
        Feasible matches are shown in the table below (for simplicity, these outcomes are presented
here as given, but they are determined endogenously in the equilibrium of the model for a certain
set of parameters). In cells where a match is feasible, we report the value of the startup,  , and
the contract that is acceptable to both the investor and entrepreneur, c . Empty cells indicate
that no contract is acceptable to both agents, relative to waiting for another counterparty to come
    2
     The importance of a dynamic link between contracts and deal volumes is also recognized by practitioners. See,
for example, the Cooley Venture Financing Report, Q1 2017.


                                                        8
along. For example, an i = 3 investor will match an with e = 2 or e = 3 entrepreneur, whoever is
encountered first, but not with an e = 1 type, because the value of waiting for one of the higher
type entrepreneurs is higher than the value that could be received from making this match.

                                                     Investor type (i)
                                                 1             2            3
                                        3                   = 4.39        = 5.11
                                                          c = 0.13       c = 0.23
                       Entrepreneur     2                   = 2.51        = 2.92
                       type (e)                           c   = 0.19     c = 0.29
                                        1    = 0.58         = 0.74
                                            c   = 0.21     c = 0.4

   If we could collect a data set of i, e, c , and  for a number of realized matches from this
game, then the regression
                                    log  = 1 c + 2 i + 3 e + ,                                    (2)

is identified and recovers the true coefficients, 1 = -2.5, 2 = 1, 3 = 1, even though matches
and contracts are formed endogenously. In practice, the researcher has very limited information
about most entrepreneurs and infrequently observes VC investors. Suppose e is not observed. The
regression using remaining observables,

                                       log  = b1 c + b2 i + ,                                     (3)

yields the biased estimates b1 = -4.16 and b2 = 2.29. This is an omitted variables problem, as e
is in the residual and is correlated with c and i. The bias in b1 is negative because higher type
entrepreneurs retain a larger share of their companies, so that e and c are negatively correlated.
The positive bias in b2 is due to the positive correlation between i and e, as better investors
tend to match with better entrepreneurs. Suppose next that both i and e are not observed. A
similar regression then yields an even more biased b1 = 2.04, which would lead the researcher to
incorrectly conclude that a higher c improves the company's value.
   To resolve the endogeneity problem, ideally we would have an instrument or natural experiment
that generates variation in c that is uncorrelated with i and e, but these are very difficult to find.
Another alternative would be to include fixed effects into the regression, which would identify the
model in a less statistically efficient manner compared to including agents' types, as there are many
investors and entrepreneurs of equal type for whom a separate fixed effect has to be estimated.
In our data set, however, almost all entrepreneurs and some investors only participate in a single

                                                     9
startup, leaving only a small and selected subset of repeat players to identify the model.3
       An alternative approach is to exploit the search friction and endogenous match formation.
In the example above, observing only c recovers the investor's and entrepreneur's exact types.
For example, c = 0.19 is only agreed upon by investor i = 2 and entrepreneur e = 2. In
practice, however, the number of the investor and entrepreneur types is large, so there will be
situations when different combinations of agents sign the same contract. Moreover, the researcher
typically does not have a reliable estimate of the startup's value,  , but instead observes only
coarse measures of its success (e.g., whether the startup ultimately underwent an initial public
offering). These complications mean that recovering the individual agents' types and the value
for each match has to be done simultaneously from contracts and an outcome measure that is
correlated with value. This can be imprecise and is extremely computationally intensive. Instead
of reverse-engineering individual i, e, and  for each match, we take a more feasible approach
and recover aggregate distributions of i, e, and  across all agents present in the market. We do
so by matching model-implied moments of the aggregate joint distributions of match frequencies,
contracts, and outcomes across matches with their counterparts in the data.4 For example, when
given a random sample of matches from the above game, the theoretical moments of our model
best fit the empirical moments when parameters equal their true value (that is, 1 = -2.5 and
an equal-weighted multinomial distribution of both investor's and entrepreneur's types). Section
4.2.2 discusses parameter identification in our method-of-moments setting in more detail.5
   3
      Using multiple investment rounds for the same startup is also not helpful because the startup's decision makers
and objectives are likely very different across rounds.
    4
      For reasons similar to ours, distributions rather than point estimates of agents' qualities have previously been
estimated in the literatures on mutual funds (e.g., Barras, Scaillet, and Wermers, 2010) and hedge funds (e.g.,
Buraschi, Kosowski, and Sritrakul, 2014). Similarly, most papers in the empirical auctions literature, starting
with Paarsch (1992) and summarized in Paarsch and Hong (2006), focus on distributions of bidders' qualities (or
valuations) to analyze the efficiency of the auction format.
    5
      A different way of viewing our dynamic search and matching model is to interpret it as a selection model that
captures the endogenonous selection of agents into deals. Like an instrument in a Heckman model, the randomness
in agents' encounters serves as a source of exogenous match variation that helps to identify the model. As a point
of contrast, the prior literature has relied on static matching without search (Sørensen, 2007), where all agents
immediately see everyone else in the sample and each investor type matches with exactly one entrepreneur type
(and vice versa). This does not leave enough exogenous variation to separately identify the impact of agent types
on contracts and the impact of types and contracts on values. The literature resolves this problem through the
use of subsamples (e.g., by time period), assuming that agents cannot observe potential counterparties subsamples
other than their own. If subsamples are exogenously different, a given investor type exogenously matches with a
different entrepreneur type (and vice versa) across subsamples, resolving the identification problem. The necessary
randomness in encounters for a given agent's type arises naturally in our dynamic model, without any need for
arbitrarily splitting the market. Another advantage of the dynamic search and matching model is that it is compu-
tationally more feasible. Static matching models are estimated by comparing realized matches with all unrealized
counterfactual matches, choosing parameters that best approximate the set of theoretical matches to the set of
observed matches in the sample. In the presence of multiple contract terms, the sheer number of counterfactual
matches and contracts makes this approach infeasible. In contrast, the dynamic search and matching model only
requires a comparison of observed matches with agents' continuation values, since agents only encounter a single
counterparty at a time and they know the distribution of counterparty types. This is relatively fast to compute.


                                                         10
2        Model
This section describes the full model, which formalizes the intuition from the previous section.
Time is continuous and indexed by t  0. There are two populations of agents in the market,
one containing a continuum of investors (VCs) and the other a continuum of entrepreneurs. Each
investor is characterized by a type i  [i, ¯
                                           i], distributed according to a continuous cumulative den-
sity function Fi (i) with a continuous and positive probability density. Similarly, each entrepreneur
is characterized by a type e  [e, e
                                  ¯], with cumulative density Fe (e) and a continuous and positive
probability density. Agents cannot switch populations, and their types do not change over time.
        Agents arrive to the market unmatched and search for a suitable partner to form a startup.
Search is exogenous: each investor randomly encounters an entrepreneur from the population of en-
trepreneurs according to a Poisson process with positive intensity i . Similarly, each entrepreneur
randomly encounters an investor from the population of investors according to a Poisson process
with positive intensity e . The likelihood of meeting a counterparty of a certain type is indepen-
dent of a searching agent's type, as well as across agents.6 Search is costly because agents discount
the value of potential future encounters at a constant rate r. Upon an encounter, counterparties'
identities are instantly revealed to each other, and they may enter contract negotiations.7
        During negotiations, an investor offers a take-it-or-leave-it contract c  C to the entrepreneur,
where the contract space C is the set of all possible combinations of contract terms in the market.8
For reasons explained below, this set explicitly prohibits fixed cash transfers from the entrepreneur
to the investor (transfers in the opposite direction can be allowed). For example, if the counter-
parties can only negotiate over the fraction of equity that the investor receives, then the contract
space is a one-dimensional set of fractions of equity: C  [0, 1]. If the counterparties can addi-
tionally negotiate over, say, the participation term, then C  [0, 1] × {0, 1}: the second dimension
of the contract space captures the absence or presence of the participation term.
        If the entrepreneur rejects the offer, the agents separate, receive instantaneous payoffs of zero,
    6
     In Section 7, we present an extension that allows for directed search. The qualitative results do not change,
and the random search assumption makes the driving forces of the model more transparent.
   7
     Chemmanur, Krishnan, and Nandy (2011) and Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar (2011) provide evidence that coun-
terparties acquire much information about each other before financing. Section 7 discusses a model extension with
one-sided asymmetric information.
   8
     The survey evidence from Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan, and Strebulaev (2019) provides empirical support for
this assumption, which contrasts with the perfect competition assumption in most previous theoretical work. The
authors find that 80% of the contracts (i.e., term sheets) offered by early-stage VCs lead to a closed deal. Some of the
remaining 20% likely fall through for reasons unrelated to competing term sheet options for the entrepreneur, such
as intellectual property ownership issues or other legal complications. This finding is consistent with the average
entrepreneur having few contemporaneous contract alternatives. Casual conversations with first-time entrepreneurs
confirm that at early stages of startup financings, there is little room for contract negotiation. Nevertheless, in
Section 7 we present an extension that allows the entrepreneur to retain a fraction of the startup's surplus over and
above her outside option. The qualitative results do not change.


                                                          11
and resume their search. In a dynamic model, the ability to walk away from an unfavorable offer
thus endogenously gives the entrepreneur a type-specific bargaining power, which the investor
internalizes in its take-it-or-leave-it offer. If the entrepreneur accepts the offer, the startup has an
expected value of
                                             (i, e, c) = g (i, e) · h(c).                                       (4)

    Importantly,  is the expected present value of all the startup's future uncertain cash flows,
including the exit value, and is obtained over the course of several years. This uncertainty, coupled
with very limited wealth on the part of the early-stage entrepreneur and her limited liability
(startups financed by VCs typically incorporate), implies that the Coase Theorem (Coase, 1960)
does not generally hold. That is, the agents cannot simply agree on a firm value-maximizing
fixed cash transfer from the entrepreneur to the investor; instead, they have to sign an outcome-
contingent contract. The expected value  is affected by the types of counterparties and by the
contract they sign through continuous and bounded functions g (i, e) and h(c).9 Functional forms
that we use for estimation are specified in Section 4 below.
    The investor receives a fraction (c)  [0, 1] of the value, and the entrepreneur retains the
remainder,

                                     i (i, e, c) = (c) ·  (i, e, c),                                            (5)
                                    e (i, e, c) = (1 - (c)) ·  (i, e, c).                                       (6)

For example, if the counterparties can only negotiate over the fraction of common equity that the
investor receives, then (c) = c. In practice, they can negotiate over additional contract terms,
so (c) may be different from the investor's equity fraction.
    The equilibrium contract c  c (i, e) offered by investor i to entrepreneur e solves

                                     c (i, e) =       arg max           i (i, e, c).                            (7)
                                                  cC :e (i,e,c)Ve (e)


Intuitively, the investor offers the contract that maximizes its payoff, subject to the participation
constraint of the entrepreneur, who receives the continuation value Ve (e) if she rejects the offer. If
i (i, e, c )  Vi (i), the investor offers c , and the startup is formed. Otherwise, the investor does
not offer a contract, walks away, and receives the expected present value Vi (i). Both Ve (e) and
Vi (i) are defined below. The counterparties that successfully form a startup exit the market and
   9
     Ultimately, i, e, and c interact to impact  in subtler ways because the equilibrium contract depends on matched
agents' types.




                                                         12
are replaced by new unmatched agents in their populations.10
       All unmatched agents maximize their expected present values or continuation values, Vi (i) or
Ve (e), respectively. Let µi (i) be the set of types e of entrepreneurs who are willing to accept offer
c (i, e) from investor i. Similarly, let µe (e) be the set of types i of investors who are willing to
offer c (i, e) to entrepreneur e. Because populations of agents remain stationary over time, the
model is stationary, so Vi (i) and Ve (e) do not depend on time t. Consider Vi (i). At any time,
three mutually exclusive events can happen over the next small interval of time dt. First, with
probability i dt    eµi (i) dFe (e),   investor i can encounter an entrepreneur with type e  µi (i), who is
willing to accept the investor's offer of c (i, e). If i (i, e, c )  Vi (i), the agents form a startup and
exit the search market, and the investor receives the instantaneous payoff i (i, e, c ). Otherwise the
investor resumes its search and retains Vi (i). Second, with probability i dt 1 -               eµi (i) dFe (e)   ,
investor i can encounter an entrepreneur with type e  µi (i), who is unwilling to accept the
investor's offer. Third, with probability 1 - i dt, the investor may not encounter an entrepreneur
at all. In the last two cases, the investor resumes its search and retains Vi (i). Similarly, there are
three mutually exclusive events that can happen to any entrepreneur e over the next small interval
of time dt, which shape Ve (e). The following proposition (with proof in Appendix A) presents
compact expressions for the agents' expected present values:


Proposition 1. Expected present values admit a discrete-time representation

                                         i
                         Vi (i) =                  max 1eµi (i) i (i, e, c ), Vi (i) dF (e),                 (8)
                                       r + i   e
                                         e
                         Ve (e) =                  max 1iµe (e) e (i, e, c ), Ve (e) dF (i).                 (9)
                                       r + e   i



       Proposition 1 shows that our model is equivalent to a discrete-time model in which periods
t = 1, 2, ... capture the number of potential encounters by a given agent. These periods are of
                                                         1
random length with expected length equal to              j ,   j  {i, e}, so that the next period's payoffs are
                  j
discounted at    r+j .   The discrete-time representation allows us to use the results of Adachi (2003,
2007) to numerically solve the contraction mapping (8) and (9).
       The model described above is quite general. First, it allows but does not restrict both VCs
and entrepreneurs to have bargaining power, due to their option to continue the search process.
  10
     This assumption ensures that at any time, populations of unmatched agents are characterized by the same
density functions. Stationarity of populations implies that, in equilibrium, measures of unmatched agents, mi and
me , have to satisfy i mi = e me . These measures do not play any further role in the model and estimation, and
only become relevant again when we examine the present value of all potential deals in Sections 4 and 5.




                                                          13
The model includes, as a special case, perfectly competitive investors as typically assumed in the
theoretical literature. Investors become more competitive when they increase in number (e is
higher), when they are more substitutable (Fi (i) has lower dispersion), and when their impact on
the startup value is small ( (i, e, c)   (e, c)), reaching perfect competition in the limit. The model
estimates thus inform us about the split of bargaining power. Second, contract terms impact the
expected value of a startup and its split between counterparties in a flexible reduced-form way, via
the functions h(c ) and (c ). In Section 4, we flexibly parameterize and estimate these functions.
Importantly, we do not explicitly model a multitude of mechanisms through which contracts can
impact values. By doing so, we do not commit to a specific microeconomic model that potentially
omits or mis-specifies the important mechanisms.11 Still, our estimates are informative about
which mechanisms are likely important in practice. Additionally, by considering the impact of
contracts on expected values and evaluating them from agents' revealed preferences at the time of
startup formation (since they make rational negotiation decisions to maximize their own payoffs),
we avoid the problem of having to derive values of contracts with a multitude of complicated
derivative features on an underlying asset.


3     Data
We construct the initial sample from several sources, starting with financing rounds of U.S.-
headquartered startup companies between 2002 and 2015, collected from the Dow Jones Ven-
tureSource database. We augment this sample with data from VentureEconomics (a well-known
venture capital data source), Pitchbook (owned by Morningstar), and Correlation Ventures (a
quantitative venture capital fund). These additional data significantly supplement and improve
the quality and coverage of financing round and outcome information, such as equity stakes,
acquisition prices, and failure dates.
    A key advantage of Pitchbook over the other data sets is that it contains contract terms
beyond the equity share sold to investors, with reasonable coverage going back as far as 2002. We
further supplement this sample with contract terms information collected by VC Experts. Both
Pitchbook and VC Experts collect articles of incorporation filings from Delaware and California,
and encode key contract terms from the financing rounds described in those documents.12 We
  11
     For example, the mechanisms in Schmidt (2003) and Hellmann (2006) can be used to micro-found our setting,
but there may be others (see, e.g., Da Rin, Hellmann, and Puri (2013) for a survey of the theoretical literature on VC
contracting and Section 4.2 for a detailed discussion). In a model of covenant contracting for a firm borrowing from
a financial intermediary, Matvos (2013) shows how to micro-found a reduced-form impact of covenants on expected
outcomes. For reasons similar to ours, he does not explore the additional detail provided by the microeconomic
model in his estimation.
  12
     California and Delaware are the preferred choices of states of incorporation. Of all startups in VentureSource,



                                                         14
include data from restatements of the articles of incorporation filed after later financing rounds,
as supplemental prior-round contract terms can sometimes be identified from such re-filings. The
unfiltered sample has over 21,000 contracts, with some 8,500 associated with first round financings.
Appendix B shows the major elements of an example certificate of incorporation.
    Our empirical model considers the first-time interaction between an entrepreneur and a profit-
maximizing investor, as the existence of prior investment rounds or alternative objective functions
would significantly complicate the contracting game. To best approximate the model setup in the
data, we restrict the sample to a startup's seed-round or Series A financings in which the lead
investor is a venture capital firm. Financings greater than $100 million are also excluded as they
are more likely to involve non-VC-backed startups. Other early-stage investors, such as friends
and family, angels, or incubators, may have objectives other than profit-maximization. Although
startups often raise funds from other investors prior to accepting VC money, such funding is usually
small relative to the size of the VC round and is typically in the form of convertible notes, loans
or grants whose terms do not materially affect the VC round contracts. The lead investor is the
one who negotiates the contract with the entrepreneur and is identified by a flag in VentureSource
or by the largest investor in the round if a flag is missing. In the 29% of cases where neither is
available, we assume the lead investor is the VC with the most experience measured by the years
since first investment at the time of financing. We limit the sample to rounds that involve the
sale of common or preferred equity, the predominant form of VC securities. This filter drops 11%
of first financing rounds, all of which involve either debt financings, such as loans and convertible
notes that have no immediate impact on equity stakes, or small financings through accelerators
or government grants. Our final filter requires that the outcome variable and the main contract
terms of interest (equity share, participation, VC board seats, and pay-to-play) are known for each
deal. Section 4.2 explains why we restrict ourselves to these specific contract terms. Our main
outcome variable, defined below, is based on initial public offerings and high-value acquisitions.
To leave enough time for IPOs and acquisitions to realize, we only consider financing rounds prior
to 2011, while we collect information on exit events through March of 2018.


3.1    Descriptive Statistics

The final sample consists of 1,695 first financing rounds between 2002 and 2010. Variable defini-
tions are in Table I, and Table II reports summary statistics. Panel A of Table II reveals that at
at least 86% are incorporated in one of these two states: 65% are headquartered in California (and 90% of those are
incorporated in Delaware during our sample period), and 61% of non-California firms are incorporated in Delaware.
These numbers are lower bounds due to noise in matching names to articles of incorporation. The sample bias
towards companies founded in those two states is therefore limited.




                                                        15
the time of financing, the average (median) startup is 1.6 (1.1) years old, measured from the date
of incorporation. Most startups are in the information technology industry (46% of firms), fol-
lowed by healthcare (26%). The average (median) time between first financing rounds for a given
lead VC is 0.69 (0.28) years.13 This variable helps identify the frequency with which investors and
entrepreneurs meet.
    In the average (median) round, 1.8 (2.0) financiers invest $7.3 million ($5.2 million) in the
firm at a post-money valuation of $21.2 million ($13.0 million), in 2012 dollars. Post-money is
the valuation proxy of the startup after the capital infusion, calculated from the investors' equity
share.14 While the post-money valuation is usually interpreted as the market value of the firm at
the time of financing ( in the model), it is calculated under the assumption that the entrepreneur
(and any other investors) own the same security as the investor in the current round and that the
investor breaks even (i.e., no VC bargaining power). However, in virtually all cases in our data
(96%), the investor receives preferred equity that is convertible into common stock, whereas the
entrepreneur retains common equity. Since we are interested in the impact of contract terms on
valuation, the post-money valuation would thus be a poor choice of metric.15 Still, post-money
valuations are useful to compute the equity share of the company sold to investors (from post-
money valuation and the total capital invested). VentureSource, a traditional data source used
in earlier studies, only contains post-money valuations for 553 deals in our sample period, mostly
gathered from IPO filings of successful firms. Our additional data collection efforts provide another
1,142 observations in the 2002 to 2010 period (after imposing data filters), resulting in a more
complete and balanced sample. Panel B of Table II shows that the average (median, unreported)
share sold to the first-round investors is 40% (38.5%), with a standard deviation of 17.5%.
    Contract terms beyond the equity share (other than board representation) are not reported
in the traditional VC data sets, and the empirical literature on contracts is small. Kaplan and
Str¨
   omberg (2003) analyze 213 contracts from a proprietary data source. Bengtsson and Sensoy
(2011) and Bengtsson and Bernhardt (2014) use the VC Experts data and have 425 and approx-
imately 1,110 first-round contracts, respectively. Gornall and Strebulaev (2019) use a sample of
contracts for 135 unicorns from VC Experts. We are the first to add the Pitchbook data, which
  13
     To give an unbiased view on deal frequency, this statistic does not impose the filter that the outcome variable
and the main contract terms of interest are known for each deal.
  14
     The investors' equity share is the share of the company owned by investors upon conversion, assuming no future
dilution. For example, suppose the VC invests $2 million by purchasing 1 million convertible preferred shares at
$2 per share, with a 1:1 conversion ratio to common stock. The entrepreneur owns 4 million common shares. VCs
calculate the post-money valuation to be $10 million (5 million shares at $2 each). The ratio of invested amount to
post-money valuation is 20%, which is identical to the ratio of investor shares to total shares upon conversion.
  15
     Metrick and Yasuda (2010) show that these additional contract terms lead to a poor connection between firm
value and post-money valuation. Gornall and Strebulaev (2019) make a similar point using a sample of over 100
contracts and a contingent claims model framework.



                                                        16
contributes more deals and spans a longer time series than VC Experts.
   We consider two classes of contract terms. The first class involves the cash flow rights of
investors. When the startup has a liquidity event (that is, when it is acquired, goes public, or is
liquidated in bankruptcy), the investor can either collect the preferred security payoff or convert it
into common stock, whichever is more lucrative. In the case of non-conversion, the investor receives
a payoff equal to the liquidation preference (or less if funds are insufficient) before common equity
receives anything, similar to a debt security payoff. The liquidation preference is typically equal
to the invested amount (referred to as "1X") in first round financings, but in 4% of first rounds
the investor receives a higher multiple of invested capital. This provision serves as additional
downside protection for the investor, as conversion to common equity is only attractive when the
exit valuation is high. Participation, a term used in 51% of contracts, allows the investor to take
the liquidation preference payout and then convert its shares to common equity, after which the
investor receives its share of the remaining value. This raises the investor's payoff in most outcome
scenarios. Figure 1 presents a graphical representation of the investor's payoff at the time of a
liquidity event for both nonparticipating and participating convertible preferred stock.
   Other contractual features that involve cash flow rights include cumulative dividends, which
are set at a fixed rate (often 8% per year) and cumulate from investment to exit but payable only
at liquidation. One-fifth of contracts feature this term. Absent the cumulative dividend term,
dividends are only paid if the board declares them, which virtually never happens. Full ratchet
anti-dilution rights are an investor downside protection term that reduces the conversion price
to the price of any future financing round that is lower than the current round. They are only
used in 2% of contracts. Approximately 12% of financings have entrepreneur-friendly pay-to-play
requirements, which punish investors that do not reinvest in future financings. Finally, 39% of
financings have redemption rights, an implicit put option that gives the investor the option to
demand their capital back from the startup after 3 to 5 years. If a startup is unable to meet this
demand, then the preferred shareholder is given additional control or cash flow rights.
   The second class of contract terms involves investor control rights over the startup. The one
key control term that we observe is lead investor board seats (sourced from both VentureSource
and Pitchbook). At the time of their first investment, 89% of lead investors receive a board seat.
Overall, there is a substantial variation in both cash flow and control terms across deals.
   Panel C of Table II summarizes exit outcomes, tracked until March 2018. Binary outcome
variables have been the traditional measure of success in the empirical VC literature. To treat all
firms symmetrically, we set outcomes to zero (i.e., still private) if the exit occurs more than seven
years after their first financing. The table shows that 4% of startups went public via an initial
public offering (IPO). Acquisitions are more common at 39%. One issue with using acquisitions as

                                                 17
a measure of success is that many are hidden failures (e.g., Puri and Zarutskie, 2012). To separate
these out, we define our main outcome variable, "IPO or Acq. > 2X capital", as an indicator that
equals one if the startup ultimately had an IPO or was acquired at a reported exit valuation of
at least two times total capital raised. By this metric, 13% of firms have a successful exit. By the
end of March 2018, 43% of startups are still private. The "Out of business" outcome characterizes
whether a startup shut down or went into bankruptcy. It appears to be low at 13%; however, this
excludes the hidden failures in acquisitions, and many firms that are still private are in fact failed
firms. An alternative measure of success that we use in the robustness section is the incidence of
follow-on financing rounds. Startups on a good trajectory towards ultimate success typically need
follow-on financing within a year to 18 months of their first financing rounds. Using a two-year
cutoff, 73% of sample firms had a follow-on financing round. This variable also allows us to extend
the sample to include all first financing rounds up to and including 2015, resulting in 2,581 deals.


3.2   Sample Selection

Since contract terms are not always observed, we only exploit a subset of all financings. To assess
any sample selection concerns, we compare our sample to the sample of all first-round deals over
the same period that does not condition on observing any contract terms. Summary statistics for
this broader sample are shown in the columns labeled "All deals 2002­2010" of Table II. Firms in
the estimation sample are financed by VCs who conclude first-round deals slightly faster (0.69 vs.
0.85 years since leading their previous first-round deal), raise more capital per deal ($7.3 million
vs. $6.3 million) and have higher post-money valuations ($21.2 million vs. $18.9 million). These
differences are expected if the data providers focus their energy on more high-profile startups or
investors. Reassuringly, the differences are economically small.
   Panel B reveals that our requirement that all contract terms are available does not result in
major differences in usage of contract terms. With the exception of board seats, the fraction of
deals with each contract term is similar between the two samples. Finally, Panel C shows that
the sample of firms with full contract coverage are more successful in terms of IPOs (4% vs. 2%)
and have fewer failures (13% vs. 17%). However, our main variable "IPO or Acq. > 2X capital"
is statistically indistinguishable across the samples.
   We further address selection in the robustness section by relaxing the filters on contract data
availability, resulting in a larger sample of 2,439 deals. Given that our data represent the largest
set of both valuation and contracts data to date, any remaining selection issues are likely to be
smaller compared to prior studies that use investment-level returns or contracts.




                                                 18
4     Results

4.1     Regression Analysis

Table III presents regression results that explore the correlations between contract terms and
startup outcomes. The dependent variable in columns 1 to 4 is the "IPO or Acq. > 2X capital"
outcome. The explanatory variables include various combinations of the four major contract
terms, including the squared value of the investor's equity share (we explain the choice of these
specific terms in the next section). All regressions include fixed effects for financing year, startup
founding year, industry, and startup headquarters state.
    The results reveal a U-shaped relationship between VC equity share and outcomes. This result
is counterintuitive as it suggests that full ownership by either a VC or entrepreneur maximizes
the probability of success. In contrast, a hump-shaped relation with an internal optimal equity
share is predicted by theory (for example, double moral hazard problems that require both agents
to expend effort), which we discuss in more detail below. Pay-to-play and VC board seats weakly
correlate with higher valuations and success probabilities, while participation strongly correlates
with lower outcomes. The last two columns of Table III consider the IPO indicator that is standard
in the literature and the (log) post-money valuation as dependent variables. The correlations are
similar, with changes only in statistical significance.


4.2     Search Model

The simple regressions of the previous section do not control for the selection issues and omitted
variables described in the identification section above. We address these problems using the search
model. To operationalize the model, we have to make a few implementation choices.


4.2.1    Empirical Implementation

We assume that the quality distributions, Fi (i) and Fe (e), are Beta distributions on [0, 10] with
parameters (ai , bi ) and (ae , be ). The Beta family is very flexible and can generate hump-shaped,
U-shaped, skewed, and even uniform distributions. We discretize i and e on a 50 point grid. This
grid is fine enough, and the support is wide enough, to find precise solutions to the contraction
mapping (8) and (9). More details on these solutions are described in Appendix C.
    We assume that the impact of qualities i and e on firm value is captured by a flexible constant-
elasticity-of-substitution (CES) function,

                                                              2
                                     g (i, e) = (0.5i + 0.5e )  .                                (10)


                                                  19
A few special cases are noteworthy. When   0, the impact of qualities is multiplicative:
g (i, e) = i · e. When  = 1, qualities are perfect substitutes, and when   -, they are perfect
complements. Note that the qualities are normalized numbers, and they are not comparable
across agents (e.g., an i = 2 investor would not necessarily provide the same quality as an e = 2
entrepreneur, if the agents' roles shifted).16
       Next, we choose a flexible functional form for the impact of contract terms on firm value,

                            h(c ) = exp 1 c       2                   
                                           1 + 2 c1 + 3:D+1 c1 (1 - c1 )c2:D ,                                    (11)

where D = dim{C } is the dimensionality of the contract space. The exponential function prevents
negative valuations. Contract terms are generic in principle, but we pay special attention to the
fraction of equity retained by the investor, c                                                  
                                              1 . In the case of convertible preferred equity, c1 is the
share after conversion to common stock. The linear and quadratic terms, 1 c         2
                                                                           1 and 2 c1 , allow
for an internal optimal equity share, as predicted by theory, but it is not assumed.
       The other contract terms, collected in the vector c2:D , are indicators that equal one when the
term is present and zero otherwise. We include participation, pay-to-play, and VC board seats.
Restricting the set of terms makes estimation computationally feasible. Moreover, liquidation
multiples and full ratchet anti-dilution show virtually no variation in the data (see Table II), so
we cannot say much about their quantitative impact on value. Redemption rights are not likely
to be important, despite their frequent occurrence. While this term might appear relevant if there
is value in the startup but it is not successful enough to exit via an IPO or acquisition, the en-
trepreneur usually does not have the liquidity to buy out the VC. Finally, cumulative dividends are
only quantitatively important in a mediocre outcome. In a computationally expensive extension
of our main model, we find that cumulative dividends do not materially impact the firm value and
its split.
       The terms in c                               
                     2:D are multiplied by c1 (1 - c1 ) because their impact vanishes when investor
ownership is very large or very small. For example, in the extreme case of 0% or 100% investor
equity ownership, there is no incremental impact of the cash flow terms in c2:D on agents' payoffs
and hence on their incentive to affect value. Investor board seats are also irrelevant in the case of
100% ownership, and their impact is likely greatly diminished when the investor owns no equity.
       The distribution of value between investor and entrepreneur is also specified in a flexible way,

                     1 - (c ) = (1 - c                                    
                                      1 ) exp 1 (1 - c1 ) + 2:D c1 (1 - c1 )c2:D .                                (12)
                                                                                         2
  16
    Note also that the more general asymmetric specification g (i, e) = (si + (1 - s)e )  , in which one of the parties
has a stronger impact on the value (e.g., VC, if s > 1 2
                                                         ), is subsumed into our model: a stronger (weaker) impact is
isomorphic to a left (right) skew of the quality distribution.


                                                          20
Without the exponential term, this equation represents a common equity contract (that is, (c ) =
c1 ). The exponential term captures the effect of additional contract terms. The observed contract
terms, c                                 
        2:D , are multiplied by c1 (1 - c1 ) because, similar to the firm value function, their impact
on the agents' payoffs vanishes when the investor owns a very large or very small fraction of the
company.17 The intercept, 1 , captures the effect of any terms for which we do not have data or
for terms that are always present. Of these terms, liquidation preference is probably the most
important. In contrast to other cash flow terms in c , its impact is largest when c1 = 0, but it
vanishes when c                                          
               1 = 1. Therefore, 1 is multiplied by 1 - c1 . The value split is bounded between
zero and one at estimated parameters.18
    Because equations (11) and (12) are (log-)linear but interactions among contract terms may
be important, we slightly expand the definition of the contract space C to also include interactions
between pairs of non-equity share terms. Without interactions, contract terms are highly substi-
tutable, such that, for example, participation and board seats almost never coexist in equilibrium.
But in practice these terms are often jointly encountered in deals. Intuitively, adding a first generic
investor-friendly term has a much larger effect on both firm value and its split compared to adding,
say, the fifth such term. Interactions among terms capture this decreasing incremental impact,
allowing multiple terms to coexist in equilibrium and resulting in a better model fit.
    Since  is not observed, we add an outcome equation for the probability of success (captured
by "IPO or Acq. > 2X capital") using a probit-type specification. Define the latent variable

                                       Z (i, e, c ) = 0 + 1 ·  (i, e, c ) + ,                                        (13)

with   N (0, 1). A given startup is successful if Z  0, which happens with probability

                              P r(Success = 1|i, e, c ) = (0 + 1 ·  (i, e, c )),                                     (14)

where (·) is the standard normal cumulative distribution function.
    We calibrate the discount rate, r, to 10%, and use the generalized method of moments (GMM)
with efficient weights to estimate all other model parameters. The set of moments includes all
first and second moments of the equilibrium model outcomes (contract terms, success rates, and
investors' time between financings), and their covariances. The only exception is that we exclude
   17
      For both the value function (11), and the value split (12), all our quantitative results remain robust if we use a
more flexible multiplication term c    1       2
                                      1 (1 - c1 )   with 1 , 2 > 0, or if we assume that the impact of board seats does
                     
not vanish when c1 = 0 (i.e., 1 = 0).
   18
      To be precise, in the model solution we flip the sign of any term that is perceived as entrepreneur-friendly, so that
all  coefficients in equation (12) are less than or equal to zero. The functional form of equation (12) then ensures
that (c )  [c   1 , 1]. But we do not enforce this condition in the estimation and revert signs of entrepreneur-friendly
term coefficients to positive in all figures and tables.


                                                            21
the second moments for binary contract terms because these do not contain additional information
beyond their first moments. We also include the third moment of the only non-binary contract
term, VC equity share. Appendix D describes the computation of the theoretical moments in
detail.


4.2.2     Identification and estimated moments

Our empirical model has 24 parameters and uses 24 moments to estimate them. In general, each
moment contains information about each parameter. However, economic forces in our model
dictate that small subsets of moments contain much more information about certain subsets of
parameters and hence can be said to economically "identify" these parameters. Here, we briefly
discuss such first-order links between models and parameters. Outcomes and their correlations
with contract terms are key in identifying the main parameters. The  parameters ­ which capture
the impact of contract terms on the startup value ­ are identified from the contract terms and
their correlations with the success variable. Intuitively, a change in  has a first-order effect on
both the incidence of a term across deals and the likelihood of a success. The  parameters ­
which capture the impact of contract terms on the split of value between the VC and entrepreneur
­ are identified from the the remaining information in contract terms. Intuitively, a change in 
only has an indirect effect on the likelihood of a success (via rebalancing of terms across deals and
rematching) but a first-order effect on the incidence of a term across deals. The subset of  and 
parameters that captures interactions among simple contract terms is intuitively identified from
pairwise correlations among terms.
    The frequencies of encounters parameters, i and e , have a first-order impact on the moments
related to the time between investors' deals, as shown in the top row of graphs in Figure 2. An
increase in i decreases both the first moment (deals occur more frequently on average) and the
second moment (an increase in investor frequency of meets, in the model, is equivalent to there
being more entrepreneurs to match with, so VCs of all qualities make deals more frequently,
compressing the distribution of time between deals). An increase in e also decreases the first
moment but increases the second moment (a decrease in investor frequency of meets is equivalent
to there being more VCs, so VCs of lower qualities are rarely accepted as matches, widening the
distribution of time between deals). The impact of i and e on other moments is weaker.
    The quality distribution parameters ­ ai , bi , ae and be ­ have the strongest impact on the
correlations between time between deals and contract terms.19 Intuitively, the change in quality
distributions changes the bargaining power both within populations of VCs and entrepreneurs
  19
     While these parameters also impact the moments of the time between deals and contract terms, this impact is
easily overshadowed by the frequency of encounters parameters.


                                                      22
and across populations, jointly changing contracts and match rates. The middle row of graphs in
Figure 2 shows that an increase in ai (be ) shifts a mass of VCs (entrepreneurs) from low quality
to middle quality (from high quality to middle quality), increasing competition among VCs for
high-quality entrepreneurs. This affects the correlations through a simultaneous shift in both
the expected time between deals and contracts, which is uniquely different from non-distribution
parameters. Since the impact of ai and be is often both qualitatively and quantitatively different,
they are not interchangeable and can be separately estimated. Conversely, an increase in ae (bi )
shifts a mass of VCs (entrepreneurs) from high quality to middle quality (from low quality to
middle quality), decreasing competition among VCs and generally affecting the correlations in the
opposite direction.
   Next, a lower value of the complementarity parameter, , makes the matching function g (i, e)
in (10) more complementary. As a result, high-quality (low-quality) VCs and entrepreneurs be-
come more (less) competitive. This increases the dispersion of time between investors' deals
(low-quality VCs become less attractive and wait longer between deals, widening the distribution
of time between investors' deals) but decreases the dispersion of contract terms (with high com-
plementarities, the market becomes more segmented in quality, so VCs of all qualities become
unafraid to lose entrepreneurs and offer more VC-friendly contracts with lower variation across
investors). The bottom row of graphs in Figure 2 illustrates this intuition (as we will see below,
the estimated  turns out to be negative such that an increase along the horizontal axis means a
more negative value of ). Hence, higher-order moments of the VC equity share (as well as the
remaining information in moments capturing time between deals) intuitively identify . The re-
maining two success outcome-related moments, the average success frequency and the correlation
between time between investors' deals and success, naturally identify the parameters capturing
the link between the firm value and success, 0 and 1 .
   Table IV compares theoretical moments at the estimated parameter values to empirical mo-
ments. Most first moments and covariance moments are matched well, but the model produces
somewhat low second moments of the time between VC deals and VC equity share. The model can
easily match these moments in isolation, but the GMM puts more weight on other, more precisely
measured moments. Since the model is just identified, a test of overidentifying restrictions is not
possible, but the overall fit appears visually sensible.


4.2.3   Impact of Contract Terms on Firm Value and Distribution

Table V reports parameter estimates and standard errors. Holding the qualities of investor and
entrepreneur constant, the impact of VC equity share on the startup's value is concave (^1 > 0



                                                  23
and ^2 < 0). This implies that firm value ( ) is maximized at an internal VC equity share, in
sharp contrast to the naive regression estimates presented above. Inclusion of the participation
term lowers firm value (^3 < 0) but increases the share of the firm that goes to VCs (^2 < 0).
Conversely, pay-to-play is beneficial to the firm (^4 > 0) and increases entrepreneurs' share (^
                                                                                               3 >
0), but the effect is weak compared to participation and its impact on value is not statistically
significant. VC board seats work similarly to participation in the absence of other contract terms.
Its impact is statistically significant, but small compared to participation and of comparable
economic magnitude to pay-to-play (but of opposite sign). However, investor board representation
becomes value-increasing and beneficial for both agents when participation is also present (since
^5 + 
     ^7 > 0 and ^4 + ^6 > 0). This result underscores the importance of including the interactions
between contract terms in the model. While the interaction term parameters ^7 and ^6 are
individually not statistically significant, their joint effect is significant (see the "Joint significant
tests" panel in Table V).20
    Taken together, the estimates in Table V imply that the firm value-maximizing contract, cM ax ,
features a 14.7% VC equity share and pay-to-play, but no participation or VC board seats.21


4.2.4     Deviations from the Value-maximizing Contract

In equilibrium, the observed contracts between VCs and entrepreneurs depend not only on the im-
pact of contract terms on firm value and its distribution, but also on the frequencies of encounters
and the other features of the search and matching process that determine outside options. How
close are equilibrium contracts to the value-maximizing contract? Figure 3 shows the contracts
for all combinations of VC and entrepreneur qualities for which both parties are willing to match
with each other. Better VCs tend to match with better entrepreneurs, largely driven by the neg-
ative estimate of , which implies that VC and entrepreneur qualities are complementary. But
this pattern is imperfect: compared to a model with exogenous contracts, lower-quality VCs can
  20
     The impact of contract terms on the first-round expected firm value and its split captures both their direct
impact and their indirect impact through contracts signed in follow-on rounds and potential contract renegoti-
ations. Formally, without loss of generality, suppose there are two rounds of financing. Consider the choice
of first-round terms cI by an entrepreneur of quality e and a VC of quality iI . By backward induction, the
choice is made considering the second-round equilibrium, in which, irrespective of the exact mechanism, iI ,
e, cI , and possibly some random between-stage shock II with parameters  determine the set of acceptable
                                                                          II, I
second-round investors iII  µII        I     I  II
                                  i (i , e, c ,  ), second-round terms c     (i , e, cI , II , iII ), and total and agent-
                  II I     I  II II    II, I                    II, I
specific values j (i , e, c ,  , i , c    (i , e, c ,  , i ))  j (i , e, c , II , iII ), j  {, i, e}. The choice of first-
                                                   I  II II                I

                                                                                                         II, I
round terms then incorporates first-round expectations of equilibrium second-round values Ej                (i , e, cI ,  ) =
     II, I      I   II II                                 I   I
E [j (i , e, c ,  , i )] and is fully determined by i , e, c , and  . See also Matvos (2013) for a similar argument
in a study of the impact of debt covenants on a firm borrowing from a financial intermediary.
  21
     Note that we cannot evaluate the value impact of terms that are always present. The maximal value is therefore
conditional on the presence of these terms. It is not necessarily the first-best value, as we only model the VC-
entrepreneur conflict and omit, for example, the LP-GP conflict within the VC firm.



                                                             24
sometimes attract higher quality entrepreneurs by offering more entrepreneur-friendly terms.22
Across all feasible deals, the average VC equity share is 40.6%. For a given entrepreneur, the
lowest quality VCs are willing to offer pay-to-play and lower-than-average VC equity share, both
of which benefit the entrepreneur. Better VCs remove pay-to-play from their offer and eventu-
ally replace it with moderately VC-friendly board seats. The best VCs have sufficient bargaining
power to combine board seats with strongly VC-friendly participation and increase the VC equity
share up to 44.5%. This equity share is an unconstrained maximizer of i (i, e, c). In these deals,
the entrepreneur-unfriendly impact of participation is somewhat softened by the positive effect of
VC board seats.
    The large distance between equilibrium contracts and cM ax is important. The left panel of
Figure 4 shows how a startup's equilibrium value (as a fraction of the maximum value under
cM ax ) changes when we vary the contract terms while holding agents' qualities fixed. We focus
on two salient contracts. The first is the representative contract in the data, with an average
observed equity share of 39.6%, participation, and VC board seats, but no pay-to-play. With this
contract, c,Avg , the firm's value is 82.6% of its maximal value. The second salient contract is
the unconstrained contract, c,U nc , offered by the highest quality VC that a given entrepreneur
can feasibly attract. This contract has a 44.5% equity share but is otherwise the same as the
representative contract. Firm value is 77.5% of its maximal value under this contract.


4.2.5    Deviations from Common Equity Split

To gain a better understanding of the quantitative impact of contract terms on the split of value
between VC and entrepreneur, the right panel of Figure 4 shows how the VC's fraction of total
value varies with the terms, holding the parties' qualities fixed. The negative intercept 1 in
equation (12) means that terms that are always present in contracts (such as 1X liquidation
preference), or that are unavailable in our data are on average VC-friendly, resulting in a larger
VC fraction of the firm than the VC equity share alone suggests. In particular, while a 14.7% VC
equity share in the value-maximizing contract cM ax may appear low, this contract actually leaves
the VC with 28.2% of the total value. In Appendix F, we use a simple Black-Scholes calibration
to show that the 13.5% gap is mainly due to the presence of the 1X liquidation preference in the
value-maximizing convertible preferred equity contract: It accounts for approximately 76% of the
  22
     Positively assortative matching does not necessarily hold in matching models with endogenous contracts. The
restrictive theoretical conditions for positively assortative matching in search and matching models are provided in
Shimer and Smith (2000) and Smith (2011). Hagedorn, Law, and Manovskii (2017) find violations of assortative
matching in the labor market. In their model, contracts (wages) do not impact firm value by assumption. Our result
shows that assortative matching also does not generally hold when contracts impact value. Appendix E provides a
more detailed discussion.



                                                        25
gap (10.3% of the 13.5% gap). The presence of participation and VC board seats further increases
the VC's fraction of firm value. For example, c,Avg leaves the VC with 49.1% of the total value,
while c,U nc leaves the VC with 52.8% of the value.
   The substantial difference between the VC equity share and the fraction of firm value it retains
suggests that the post-money valuation, which is calculated under the assumption that the VC
equity share is the only relevant contract term, is a poor metric to compute firm value. A sensible
practical modification is to instead use the fraction of the firm retained by the VC. For example,
because the best VCs for a given entrepreneur offer c,U nc , which has a 44.5% equity share, the
post-money valuation per dollar invested is $1/0.445 = $2.25. In contrast, because the best VCs
retain 52.8% of the total value, the modified valuation is instead $1/0.528 = $1.89, which is
15.7% lower than the post-money valuation. In deals with the representative contract, c,Avg , the
difference in valuations is 19.3%. In large first-round financings, the dollar difference between the
post-money and modified valuation can easily reach millions of dollars.


4.2.6   Equilibrium Effects of Matching

Figure 4 isolates the impact of contract terms by fixing the qualities of the VC and entrepreneur.
However, in equilibrium, contracts differ across deals because they are impacted by the parties'
qualities. For example, a higher quality VC offers more investor-friendly contracts to the same
entrepreneur, compared to a lower quality VC. While such contracts reduce firm value relative to
that under the value-maximizing contract, the VC's payoff is higher because the contract leaves a
larger share to the investor. At first glance this outcome may seem irrational for the entrepreneur,
but the entrepreneur in fact benefits from matching with a higher-quality VC. The reason is that
the startup's value increases with VC quality, and this value increase offsets the entrepreneur's
loss of value from accepting more investor-friendly terms (consistent with the mechanism in Hsu,
2004). Figure 5 illustrates and quantifies this intuition. As a stark example, consider a high-
quality entrepreneur at the 99th percentile, e = 8.32. The VCs who are willing to match with
this entrepreneur are in the quality set µe (e) = [4.13, 10]. Moving from the lowest- to the highest-
quality VC in this range raises firm value by 89.0%. The entrepreneur's value increases by 32.8%,
even though the firm's value is not maximized and a larger fraction goes to the VC through a
higher equity share, as well as the addition of participation and board representation. As a point
of comparison, in the off-equilibrium scenario in which the entrepreneur could retain the contract
it signs with the lowest-quality VC, i = 4.13, both the firm's and the entrepreneur's value would
instead have increased by 141.4%.
   Table VI provides additional details on the total value and its split across deals completed



                                                 26
by the bottom 10%, 10­50%, 50­90%, and the top 10% of VC and entrepreneur qualities. Deals
completed by top-quality VCs (entrepreneurs) are, on average, 33 (144) times larger than deals
completed by bottom-quality VCs (entrepreneurs). Overall, there is more heterogeneity in the
total value as a function of entrepreneur quality than VC quality. The VC share of total value
peaks for top-quality VCs and decreases with entrepreneur quality.


4.2.7      Connections to the Literature

Our paper does not explicitly model mechanisms that link contracts to the value of the firm.
By modeling this link in reduced form, our results instead inform the theoretical VC contracting
literature on which mechanisms are likely at work in practice and uncover new insights for consid-
eration in future work. First, both parties' efforts can be valuable but difficult to verify, setting
up the popular double moral hazard problem between VC and entrepreneur in the literature (e.g.,
Hellmann and Puri, 2002; Schmidt, 2003; Casamatta, 2003; Kaplan and Str¨
                                                                       omberg, 2004; Inderst
and M¨
     uller, 2004; Hellmann, 2006). This problem is mitigated by each side retaining a positive
equity share, and the internal optimal VC equity share in cM ax aligns with this prediction. How-
ever, this result is also generally consistent with adverse selection. For example, if VCs are unsure
about the entrepreneur's type, they can leave the entrepreneur an equity share to screen out low
types. This modeling setup is rarely used in VC contracting theory and it is outside our base
model as well. A more detailed discussion is in the robustness section below.
       Second, convertible securities and debt-equity mixes have been shown to mitigate inefficiencies
related to asset substitution (Green, 1984), exit decisions (Hellmann, 2006), sequential investment
(Schmidt, 2003), and sequential investment combined with window dressing (Cornelli and Yosha,
2003). The focus in this literature is on a competitive investor or on the feasibility of optimal
contracts that may not necessarily occur in equilibrium. Our results suggest that participation
(which effectively makes the contract a debt-equity mix) reduces the effectiveness of the contract
to deal with the above inefficiencies, compared to a regular convertible equity contract in equilibria
without perfect competition.23 However, this term can still be offered in equilibrium because it
increases the payoff value of VCs with substantial bargaining power, even if it is detrimental to
the value of the firm. In contrast, pay-to-play, which affects future investment rounds, appears to
improve the ability to deal with the inefficiencies related to sequential investment.
       Third, the venture capital literature highlights the value of control terms, for example by
  23
     This finding is consistent with Cornelli and Yosha (2003), who point to window dressing as a potential inef-
ficiency. Alternatively, convex incentives provided by participation may force entrepreneurs to gamble for success
(e.g., DeMarzo, Livdan, and Tchistyi, 2013, and Makarov and Plantin, 2015) instead of working harder to achieve
an IPO or follow-on financing. Gambling can increase the likelihood of a good outcome by increasing the likelihood
of high firm value realizations yet decrease the firm's expected value.


                                                       27
giving VCs the power to replace underperforming founders (Ewens and Marx, 2018). In theory
these terms may also have drawbacks. For example, firms may face a trade-off between the
benefits of VC support and the costs of VC interference in the presence of costly monitoring
(Cestone, 2014). Monitoring may also be harmful if it has strong incentive power but is based
on weak information (Zhu, 2019). Empirically, Cumming (2008) finds that stronger VC control
(measured by board seats) relates to worse outcomes (measured as the probability of an IPO).
Caselli, Garcia-Appendini, and Ippolito (2013) find the same result in a sample of Italian private
equity deals, using various outcome measures. Practitioners have also become concerned with the
possibility that some VC-driven boards can negatively impact firm value.24 Relatedly, investor
over-monitoring may kill managerial incentives in public firms with large institutional investors,
who share many control privileges of VCs, reducing the value of the firm (Burkart, Gromb, and
Panunzi, 1997). Put differently, our control term, VC board seats, cannot be unequivocally
beneficial for all deals, or else it would always be included in contracts. Instead, this term is
absent in 11% of deals in our sample. Since VCs benefit from having more control, the term must
sometimes hurt entrepreneurs' value. Indeed we find that VC board seats decrease firm value
in the absence of participation. When the contract includes participation (only offered by high-
quality VCs), VC board seats improve the firm's value. This result is consistent with Rosenstein,
Bruno, Bygrave, and Taylor (1993), who report that startup CEOs rate VC advice no different
from outside board members, except for top VC directors, whose advice is considered to be more
valuable. It may be that in this case, VC support and interference are both valuable in the
presence of the distorted incentives and inefficiencies outlined above. In the robustness section we
consider an alternative explanation based on heterogeneous effects of board seats.
       Finally, cash flow and control terms have been shown to either come together to allocate
control to investors with equity-like claims (Bergl¨
                                                   of, 1994, Kalay and Zender, 1997, and Biais and
Casamatta, 1999) or separately to allocate control to investors with debt-like claims in the presence
of costly monitoring (Townsend, 1979, Diamond, 1984, Gale and Hellwig, 1985, and Cestone, 2014).
Across all deals, we find a positive correlation between VC board seats and participation, though
they do not necessarily appear together. Additionally, these two terms are complements in deals
by high-quality VCs. Since participation makes the convertible equity security more debt-like, our
results yield more support to the second group of papers.
  24
   A data-driven analysis by Correlation Ventures can be found on https://medium.com/correlation-ventures/
too-many-vc-cooks-in-the-kitchen-65439f422b8.




                                                   28
4.2.8    Encounter Frequencies

In the model and the data, the entrepreneur population of interest is comprised of the "serious"
entrepreneurs who possess positive NPV projects and are able to attract at least the lowest-type
investor. Such entrepreneurs are quite rare: a VC meets a serious entrepreneur, on average, every
1/^ i = 27 days. A serious entrepreneur arranges a meeting with a VC, on average, every 1/^ e = 35
days.
    Meetings only result in deals if both parties fall within the counterparties' acceptable ranges
(µi (i) and µe (e)). The bottom right graph of Figure 3 shows the quality distributions (recall
that qualities are not comparable across investors and entrepreneurs). The investor population is
right-skewed, as high-quality VCs are relatively rare. The distribution of serious entrepreneurs is
more symmetric, given that even the lowest-quality entrepreneurs are quite promising, lopping off
the far left tail.
    We combine the frequency of encounters with the quality distributions to compute the fre-
quency of deals. Table VI reports that VCs lead a deal every 1/2.025 = 180 days on average.
Note that this number does not mean that a given VC makes investments at this rate, as VCs
regularly participate in deals as non-lead investors. Lower-quality VCs are the most active: for
example, VCs in the 10­50th quality percentiles lead a deal every 150 days on average, while the
top 10% lead a deal every 350 days.
    Entrepreneurs take an average of 1/1.565 = 233 days to make a deal. The lowest quality decile
entrepreneurs rarely sign a deal, while the top 10% contract, on average, in 103 days. Received
wisdom is that it can take from 3 to 9 months to raise a first round of financing. High quality
entrepreneurs are at the lower end of that range, while lower-quality ones take much longer.


4.2.9    Market Size

We measure total market size as the expected present value of all deals in the market. This
present value combines our estimates of total firm values and the frequencies of encounters. A
necessary ingredient for this calculation is the measures of VCs and entrepreneurs in the market.
In equilibrium, measures of encounters by the parties have to be equal: i mi = e me . The
estimated ratio of measures of entrepreneurs to VCs is therefore me /mi = ^ i /^ e . On a per-VC
basis the present value of all deals in the market is then the sum of Vi (i) and Ve (e) · me /mi across
all i and e and with appropriate probability weights. Table VI shows that overall, VCs retain
61.15% of the present value of all deals in the market. The bottom 10% of VCs retain 0.45% of
this value, while the top 10% retain 15.60%. In contrast, the bottom 10% of entrepreneurs only
retain 0.07% of the value, while the top 10% retain 16.05%.


                                                  29
4.2.10    Persistence in Contracts

Without making any explicit assumptions about choice persistence, our model produces persistent
contracts for a given VC. In equilibrium, the VC offers its most VC-friendly contract to worse
entrepreneurs. To better entrepreneurs, the VC offers a set of more entrepreneur-friendly contracts
that vary little with entrepreneur quality. Bengtsson and Bernhardt (2014) associate persistence
of VC contracts with VC-specific style. However, style alone is insufficient to generate persistence
when VCs encounter entrepreneurs of varying qualities and both parties have sufficient bargaining
power to negotiate contracts. Our model suggests that persistence can be at least partly explained
by a market equilibrium in which VCs have most of the bargaining power.


5    Counterfactual Analysis: Search Frictions
The introduction of online platforms where agents can easily find each other, such as AngelList
(which is also used by VCs), may lower search frictions in the market for early-stage financing. We
compute the impact of such an event on the present value of all deals in the market by increasing
the rate at which investors and entrepreneurs meet each other (i and e , respectively) by a factor
of 2, 5, and 10. Table VII shows that a small reduction in frictions increases the market size, while
a large reduction decreases it. A 2X increase in encounter frequencies causes a 1.19% increase in
the expected present value of all deals. VCs (entrepreneurs) on average gain 2.43% (lose 1.24%)
(all effects are expressed as a percentage of the expected present value of all deals under estimated
parameters). A 10X increase in encounter frequencies results in a 5.14% decrease in the present
value of deals, while VCs (entrepreneurs) on average gain 7.25% (lose 12.38%).
    The intuition behind this result is as follows. An increase in encounter frequencies has two
effects on the present value of deals in the market. The positive effect is that deals with the
same counterparties (assuming the agents are still willing to match) occur more frequently. The
negative effect is that agents become more selective: intervals of agents' acceptable counterparties
µi (i) and µe (e) contract, reducing to a single point if encounters are instantaneous (as in static
models of matching). This effect, first, decreases the frequency of deals (although not sufficiently
to counterbalance the positive effect), and, second, makes investors less competitive and increases
their bargaining power, leading them to offer more VC-friendly contracts that result in lower-
valued startups. The positive effect outweighs the negative, resulting in a higher market size for a
small increase in encounter frequencies. However, when a reduction in frictions is large, frequent
deals encumbered by VC-friendly contracts lead to a smaller market size.
    While the mechanism in our paper is different, we note that a result that search frictions should



                                                 30
not unambiguously lead to more efficient outcomes has also been explored theoretically in Glode
and Opp (2018). They find that more severe frictions in OTC markets (as opposed to centralized
limit-order markets) lead to a more cautious and generous pricing and, as a result, to strategic
acquisition of expertise by well-connected traders. Additional expertise, despite causing adverse
selection, can improve allocative efficiency.
         A caveat to our counterfactual results is that encounter frequencies in our model proxy for both
search frictions and the arrival of new agents to replace the matched ones. If search frictions reduce
but the arrival rate does not change, the market size may shrink more than our estimates suggest.
Moreover, entrepreneurs may depart to seek financing elsewhere, especially if the reduction in
search frictions is due to the appearance of new online platforms that allow entrepreneurs to raise
financing without a VC intermediary. Overall, our results suggest that benefits from low-cost
search in the VC market are not obvious.25
         Appendix G explores a different counterfactual, in which we consider the removal of VC-
friendly contractual features (such as the "double-dip" of receiving a liquidation payment and
participating in the firm's upside) implemented by observed contract terms (such as participation).
While the model predicts a modest increase in firm value creation, implementing a prohibition
on contractual features is difficult to achieve in reality and may affect entry and exit into the VC
market.


6         Robustness
In this section, we examine the robustness of our results to changes in various model inputs and in
subsamples. First, we use IPOs or follow-on financings as alternative outcome variables. The IPO
outcome variable is the most commonly used measure of a success in the venture capital literature,
while the follow-on financing variable focuses on shorter-term success. The sample using IPOs is
the same as the one in the main model (see Table II); the sample using follow-on financings uses
several additional years of contract data, resulting in 2,581 deals, and is described in Table A1
in the appendix. Alternative outcome variables do not materially affect moments and result in
similar parameter estimates, as reported in Panels A and B of Table A3 in the appendix. Note
that the link between firm value and follow-on financing becomes insignificant. However, this is
not surprising because 73% of startups receive follow-on financing, and many are likely of low
    25
    The exercise in this section is also useful to assess bias from modeling selection via a static matching model
with no search frictions. When i and e are high, our model converges to a static matching model (Adachi, 2003;
Adachi, 2007). Estimation of the model when the 's are very high is difficult, as the system of Bellman equations
                                                              i       e
(8) and (9) converges slowly when the discount factor ( r+     i
                                                                 and r+ e
                                                                           ) of the next expected encounter is close to
one. Since we find that the value is split very differently when 's change, the estimates obtained from a model with
no frictions will likely be very different, underscoring the importance of modeling search frictions in the VC market.


                                                          31
quality.
       Second, we check robustness to missing data. Instead of requiring that all modeled contract
terms be observed, we impute missing contract terms as zero for deals containing information
about the equity share and at least one of the additional terms. This imputation expands the
sample to 2,439 deals for our main outcome variable. Panel C of Table A3 in the appendix shows
that our parameter estimates are qualitatively unaffected.
       Third, we consider whether our results are driven by certain sub-markets, such as the IT or
Healthcare industries, California or Massachusetts markets, the time period before or after the
release of Amazon's AWS cloud (a structural technological change, see Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-
Kropf, 2018), and before or during the 2008 crisis. Panels A and B of Table A4 in the appendix
show that the parties encounter each other more frequently in IT, compared to Healthcare. Agent
qualities in Healthcare are more complementary, possibly due to higher required VC expertise in
this market. The participation term in the IT industry is notably more detrimental to startup
value, perhaps because it is easier for an entrepreneur to walk away from a project in IT when faced
with bad incentives created by VC-friendly terms. Panel C of Table A4 shows that the California
market is more similar to the IT market, likely due to the high concentration of IT startups in
the Silicon Valley. Unfortunately, we do not have enough data to obtain highly reliable results in
other geographical markets, but unreported point estimates from the Massachusetts market are
very similar to those from our main model.
       Panels A and B of Table A5 in the appendix show that the frequency of encounters rises after
the introduction of Amazon's AWS, reflecting the burgeoning IT startup market. Of additional
note is that the average VC quality increases in the post-AWS period, and that the participation
term becomes costlier to the startup. The latter result may be due to the higher prevalence of IT
startups after the introduction of the cloud.26 Panels C and D of Table A5 show similar results
when we compare time periods before and during the 2008 crisis (we split the sample around the
Lehman bankruptcy on 9/15/2008). Unfortunately, because the main sample of contracts ends
by 2010, we are unable to examine the post-crisis period.
       Finally, in unreported results, we have also estimated our model in subsamples of only seed
rounds or only series A rounds; syndicated or non-syndicated deals; high or low capital intensity
startups; and narrower industry definitions, to account for potential sources of unobserved varia-
tion other than qualities (e.g., projects with different capital intensity or syndicated rounds can
result in different contracts and success probabilities). Our results are quantitatively unaffected.
  26
   An alternative way to account for technological change is to include a technology state in the model, but this
comes at the cost of additional model assumptions and substantially higher computational complexity.




                                                       32
7    Extensions
Our search-and-matching model is designed to be tractable and transparent, but this comes at
the cost of making simplifying assumptions about certain features of the data generating process.
We examine the robustness of our results to various assumptions through model extensions.
    First and perhaps most importantly, it may be the case that higher-quality VCs and en-
trepreneurs are more likely to encounter counterparties more frequently or to encounter counter-
parties from a more favorable distribution of qualities, as a result of a directed rather than random
search. While a full-blown model of an optimally conducted directed search is beyond the scope
of this paper, we examine two reduced-form versions. In the first version, encounter frequencies
are i + i i and e + e e, so different agent qualities encounter counterparties with different
frequencies. In the second version, counterparties encountered by investor i (entrepreneur e) are
drawn from distributions Fe (e, i) (Fi (i, e)), so different agent qualities encounter counterparties
from different quality pools. Since both model extensions are fundamentally similar to the main
model but more notationally tedious, we make them available upon request. Panels A and B
of Table A6 in the appendix show that while there is some evidence of directed search in both
extensions (agents of higher quality encounter counterparties of higher quality and faster), our
main results are robust.
    Second, the main model assumes that investors make take-it-or-leave-it offers to worthy en-
trepreneurs they encounter. Note that this assumption does not imply that the entrepreneur never
shares in the startup's surplus,  (i, e, c ) - Vi (i) - Ve (e): as long as the entrepreneur's input into
the startup is sufficient, it is often in the interest of the investor to motivate the entrepreneur
with a fraction of the surplus. In fact, under estimated parameters, entrepreneurs in our model
are further motivated in every deal in which the investor offers the unconstrained contract c,U nc .
Still, it is possible that entrepreneurs have additional bargaining power during contract negotia-
tions and can therefore secure a higher fraction of the surplus. In an extension (available upon
request), we add an "entrepreneur bargaining power" parameter, which impacts negotiations (by
acting similarly to a "Nash Bargaining Solution" parameter). In estimation, we fix this parameter
at 20%, which is generous and likely overstates the extent of the entrepreneur's influence on the
contract. Panel C of Table A6 in the appendix shows that qualitative results do not change.
    In a third set of extensions, we change the discount rate from 10% to 20% to capture higher
impatience; we allow VCs and entrepreneurs to be overconfident; and we allow for a match-specific
shock to the startup value, so that different deals by the same pair of VC and entrepreneur qualities
can have different contracts and expected values. Because the last two model extensions are less
trivial, Appendix H describes them in detail. Table A7 in the appendix shows that in all cases,


                                                  33
our results remain robust.
       Fourth, Appendix H includes an extension in which the amount of capital raised is an additional
endogenous contract term. Due to high computational complexity, this case is not estimated, but
uses comparative statics.
       Fifth, to account for omitted, ex-ante less important contract terms such as redemption rights
or cumulative dividends, we have estimated models in which the least important included term,
pay-to-play, is substituted with each omitted term. We also estimate (at great computational cost)
models in which each omitted term is added in turn to the set of three included terms. Neither of
the newly included terms' impacts is statistically or economically significant in any specification.
       Sixth, we estimate alternative specifications of the impact of contract terms on the firm value
and its split. For example, the incremental impact of VC board representation may be uniformly
stronger when the VC owns more of the firm's equity, and therefore is better captured by (1 - c1 )c4
and not c        
         1 (1 - c1 )c4 in (11) and (12). The results (unreported) remain quantitatively unchanged.
       Two more extensions are of potential interest. First, a VC firm can manage multiple invest-
ments at the same time. To our knowledge there are no dynamic search-and-matching papers that
allow agents to form multiple matches. A way of interpreting our assumption that a matched VC
exits the market and is replaced by a same-quality VC is that the same VC (perhaps, a different
partner in the VC firm) starts to search for the next deal. However, this interpretation does not
allow for a VC to pursue multiple deals simultaneously, and ignores any dynamic considerations
that can make the VC fund's first deal different from, say, its tenth deal. We leave this extension
for future research. A second extension is to allow for counterparties to not completely observe
each other's type even after an encounter, giving rise to adverse selection concerns. To our knowl-
edge there are no papers that model adverse selection in VC contracting specifically (though it is
used in some other topics in VC, for example, Winegar, 2018). Even the case of one-dimensional
asymmetric information (e.g., about entrepreneurs' quality) is difficult to estimate, as it expands
the state space of the model into an additional dimension (true versus perceived entrepreneur
quality). We have estimated a very simple model with asymmetric information, in which the per-
ceived quality of the entrepreneur e informs the investor that the true quality is either e or a fixed
t, where t and its likelihood are the same across investors and entrepreneurs (t can be, for example,
the expected quality or the lowest possible quality). This case is numerically tractable (although
far from general) and results in very similar estimates. We leave estimation of the precise form
and impact of asymmetric information for future research.27
  27
    We expect results from a more general adverse selection to be qualitatively similar to the main model (i.e.,
negative impact of participation and weak or negative impact of board seats) as long as the VCs retain the power
to make take-it-or-leave-it offers to entrepreneurs (or as long as VC bargaining power dominates in negotiations).



                                                       34
    Finally, in equation (4), agent qualities and contracts have separate impacts on firm value. This
setup implies that the same contract maximizes firm value for any combination of agent types. In
theory, our model can easily accommodate interactions between contract terms and agent qualities.
However, estimation of this model is not as straightforward. Adding such interactions is akin to
interacting agent type fixed effects in OLS regressions with all other regressors. Due to the large
increase in dimensionality, it is not standard to introduce such interactions in structural work
(for example, in estimating total factor productivity at the industry level, or the distribution of
valuations across auctions net of the effect of observed covariates). Some reassurance that our
model assumptions are reasonable can be found in the fact that our results are virtually unaffected
in various subsample analyses of deals that are more homogeneous (see Section 6).


8    Conclusion
This paper estimates the impact of venture capital contract terms on startup outcomes and the
split of value between entrepreneur and investor using a dynamic search and matching model to
control for endogenous selection. Based on a new, large data set of first financing rounds, we find
that contracts materially affect the value of the firm, as well as its split between entrepreneur and
investor. Consistent with double moral hazard problems that are common in the literature, there
is an internally optimal split between investor and entrepreneur that maximizes the probability of
success. However, in virtually all deals, VCs receive more equity than is value-maximizing for the
startup. Due to the positive impact of VC quality on startup values, having a higher quality VC
still benefits the startup and the entrepreneur in equilibrium, though not as much as they could
in theory. Overall, our results show that selection of investors and entrepreneurs into deals is a
first-order factor to take into account in both the empirical and theoretical literature on financial
contracting.




                                                 35
References
Adachi, Hiroyuki, 2003, A search model of two-sided matching under nontransferable utility,
 Journal of Economic Theory 113, 182­198.
       , 2007, A search model of two-sided matching with terms of trade, Working Paper.
Axelson, Ulf, and Igor Makarov, 2018, Sequential credit markets, Working paper.
Barras, Laurent, Oliver Scaillet, and Russ Wermers, 2010, False discoveries in mutual fund per-
  formance: measuring luck in estimated alphas, Journal of Finance 65, 179­216.
Bengtsson, Ola, and Dan Bernhardt, 2014, Different problem, same solution: Contract-
  specialization in venture capital, Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 23, 396­426.
Bengtsson, Ola, and S Abraham Ravid, 2009, The importance of geographical location and dis-
  tance on venture capital contracts, Working paper.
Bengtsson, Ola, and Berk A Sensoy, 2011, Investor abilities and financial contracting: Evidence
  from venture capital, Journal of Financial Intermediation 20, 477­502.
Bengtsson, Ola, and Berk A. Sensoy, 2015, Changing the nexus: The evolution and renegotiation
  of venture capital contracts, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 50, 349­375.
Bergl¨
     of, Erik, 1994, A control theory of venture capital finance, Journal of Law, Economics and
  Organization 10, 247­267.
Bernardo, Antonio E, and Ivo Welch, 2001, On the evolution of overconfidence and entrepreneurs,
  Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 10, 301­330.
Biais, Bruno, and Catherine Casamatta, 1999, Optimal leverage and aggregate investment, Journal
  of Finance 54, 1291­1323.
Bolton, Patrick, and Mathias Dewatripont, 2004, Contract Theory (MIT Press).
Buraschi, Andrea, Robert Kosowski, and Worrawat Sritrakul, 2014, Incentives and endogenous
  risk taking: A structural view on hedge fund alphas, Journal of Finance 69, 2819­2870.
Burkart, Mike, Denis Gromb, and Fausto Panunzi, 1997, Large shareholders, monitoring, and the
  value of the firm, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 693­728.
Busenitz, Lowell W, and Jay B Barney, 1997, Differences between entrepreneurs and managers
  in large organizations: Biases and heuristics in strategic decision-making, Journal of Business
  Venturing 12, 9­30.
Camerer, Colin, and Dan Lovallo, 1999, Overconfidence and excess entry: An experimental ap-
  proach, American economic review 89, 306­318.
Casamatta, Catherine, 2003, Financing and advising: optimal financial contracts with venture
  capitalists, Journal of Finance 58, 2059­2085.
Caselli, Stefano, Emilia Garcia-Appendini, and Filippo Ippolito, 2013, Contracts and returns in
  private equity investments, Journal of Financial Intermediation 22, 201­217.
Cestone, Giacinta, 2014, Venture capital meets contract theory: Risky claims or formal control?,
  Review of Finance 18, 1097­1137.



                                               36
Chemmanur, Thomas J, Karthik Krishnan, and Debarshi K Nandy, 2011, How does venture
  capital financing improve efficiency in private firms? a look beneath the surface, The Review of
  Financial Studies 24, 4037­4090.
Coase, Ronald H., 1960, The problem of social cost, Journal of Law and Economics 3, 1­44.
Cong, Lin William, and Yizhou Xiao, 2018, Persistent blessings of luck, Working Paper.
Cooper, Arnold C, Carolyn Y Woo, and William C Dunkelberg, 1988, Entrepreneurs' perceived
  chances for success, Journal of Business Venturing 3, 97­108.
Cornelli, Francesca, and Oved Yosha, 2003, Stage financing and the role of convertible securities,
  Review of Economic Studies 70, 1­32.
Cumming, Douglas, 2008, Contracts and exits in venture capital finance, Review of Financial
  Studies 21, 1947­1982.
Da Rin, Marco, Thomas Hellmann, and Manju Puri, 2013, A survey of venture capital research,
 in Handbook of the Economics of Finance vol. 2 . chap. 8, pp. 573­648 (Elsevier).
DeMarzo, Peter M, Dmitry Livdan, and Alexei Tchistyi, 2013, Risking other people's money:
  Gambling, limited liability, and optimal incentives, Working Paper.
Diamond, Douglas W, 1984, Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring, Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies 51, 393­414.
Ewens, Michael, and Matt Marx, 2018, Founder replacement and startup performance, The Review
 of Financial Studies 31, 1532­1565.
Ewens, Michael, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2018, Cost of experimentation and
 the evolution of venture capital, Journal of Financial Economics 128, 422­442.
Fox, Jeremy T, David H Hsu, and Chenyu Yang, 2015, Unobserved heterogeneity in matching
  games with an application to venture capital, Working Paper.
Gale, Douglas, and Martin Hellwig, 1985, Incentive-compatible debt contracts, Review of Eco-
 nomic Studies 52, 647­663.
Glode, Vincent, and Christian C. Opp, 2018, Over-the-counter vs. limit-order markets: The role
  of traders' expertise, Working paper.
Gompers, Paul A, Will Gornall, Steven N Kaplan, and Ilya A Strebulaev, 2019, How do venture
 capitalists make decisions?, Journal of Financial Economics.
Gornall, Will, and Ilya A Strebulaev, 2015, The economic impact of venture capital: Evidence
 from public companies, Working paper.
       , 2019, Squaring venture capital valuations with reality, Journal of Financial Economics.
Green, Richard C, 1984, Investment incentives, debt, and warrants, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 13, 115­136.
Grossman, Sanford J, and Oliver D Hart, 1986, The costs and benefits of ownership: a theory of
  vertical and lateral integration, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691­719.
Hagedorn, Marcus, Tzuo Hann Law, and Iourii Manovskii, 2017, Identifying equilibrium models
  of labor market sorting, Econometrica 85, 29­65.


                                               37
Hall, Bronwyn H, and Josh Lerner, 2010, The financing of r&d and innovation, Handbook of the
  Economics of Innovation 1, 609­639.
Hall, Robert E, and Susan E Woodward, 2010, The burden of the nondiversifiable risk of en-
  trepreneurship, American Economic Review 100, 1163­94.
Hatfield, John William, and Paul R Milgrom, 2005, Matching with contracts, American Economic
  Review 95, 913­935.
Hellmann, Thomas, 2006, Ipos, acquisitions, and the use of convertible securities in venture capital,
  Journal of Financial Economics 81, 649­679.
      , and Manju Puri, 2002, Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up firms:
  Empirical evidence, Journal of Finance pp. 169­197.
Hochberg, Yael V., Alexander Ljungqvist, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2014, Informational
 hold-up and performance persistence in venture capital, Review of Financial Studies 27, 102­
 152.
Hsu, David H, 2004, What do entrepreneurs pay for venture capital affiliation?, Journal of Finance
  59, 1805­1844.
Inderst, Roman, and Holger M M¨    uller, 2004, The effect of capital market characteristics on the
  value of start-up firms, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 319­256.
Kalay, Avner, and Jaime F Zender, 1997, Bankruptcy, warrants, and state-contingent changes in
 the ownership of control, Journal of Financial Intermediation 6, 347­379.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private equity performance: Returns, persis-
 tence, and capital flows, Journal of Finance 60, 1791­1823.
Kaplan, Steven N, and Per Str¨omberg, 2003, Financial contracting theory meets the real world:
 An empirical analysis of venture capital contracts, Review of Economic Studies 70, 281­315.
       , 2004, Characteristics, contracts, and actions: Evidence from venture capital analyses,
  Journal of Finance 59, 2177­2210.
Kerr, William R, Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar, 2011, The consequences of entrepreneurial
  finance: Evidence from angel financings, The Review of Financial Studies 27, 20­55.
Korteweg, Arthur, and Morten Sorensen, 2017, Skill and luck in private equity performance,
 Journal of Financial Economics 124, 535­562.
Makarov, Igor, and Guillaume Plantin, 2015, Rewarding trading skills without inducing gambling,
 Journal of Finance 70, 925­962.
Matvos, Gregor, 2013, Estimating the benefits of contractual completeness, Review of Financial
 Studies 26, 2798­2844.
Merton, Robert C, 1973, Theory of rational option pricing, Bell Journal of Economics and Man-
 agement Science pp. 141­183.
Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda, 2010, Venture capital and the finance of innovation, 2nd
 ed., in Venture capital and the finance of innovation, 2nd ed. (John Wiley & Sons).
Moskowitz, Tobias J, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, 2002, The returns to entrepreneurial invest-
 ment: A private equity premium puzzle?, American Economic Review 92, 745­778.


                                                 38
Opp, Christian C, 2019, Venture capital and the macroeconomy, The Review of Financial Studies
 32, 4387­4446.
Paarsch, Harry J., 1992, Deciding between the common value and private value paradigms in
  empirical models of auctions, Journal of Econometrics 51, 191­215.
       , and Han Hong, 2006, An introduction to the structural econometrics of auction data, in
  An introduction to the structural econometrics of auction data (The MIT Press).
Peters, Ryan H, 2017, Volatility and venture capital, Working Paper.
Puri, Manju, and Rebecca Zarutskie, 2012, On the life cycle dynamics of venture-capital-and
  non-venture-capital-financed firms, Journal of Finance 67, 2247­2293.
Repullo, Rafael, and Javier Suarez, 2004, Venture capital finance: A security design approach,
  Review of Finance 8, 75­108.
Robinson, David T., and Berk A. Sensoy, 2013, Do private equity fund managers earn their fees?
  compensation, ownership, and cash flow performance, Review of Financial Studies 26, 2760­
  2797.
Rosen, Sherwin, 1981, The economics of superstars, American Economic Review 71, 845­858.
Rosenstein, Joseph, Albert V. Bruno, WIlliam D. Bygrave, and Natalie T. Taylor, 1993, The ceo,
  venture capitalists, and the board, Journal of Business Venturing 8, 99­113.
Salanie, Bernard, 2005, The Economics of Contracts: A Primer, 2nd ed. (MIT Press).
Sannino, Francesco, 2019, A theory of venture capital fund size with directed search, Working
  Paper.
Schmidt, Klaus M, 2003, Convertible securities and venture capital finance, Journal of Finance
  58, 1139­1166.
Shimer, Robert, and Lones Smith, 2000, Assortative matching and search, Econometrica 68, 343­
  369.
Smith, Lones, 2011, Frictional matching models, Annu. Rev. Econ. 3, 319­338.
Solow, Robert M, 1957, Technical change and the aggregate production function, Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics pp. 312­320.
Sørensen, Morten, 2007, How smart is smart money? a two-sided matching model of venture
  capital, Journal of Finance 62, 2725­2762.
Townsend, Robert M, 1979, Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly state verifi-
  cation, Journal of Economic Theory 21, 265­293.
Winegar, Adam, 2018, Adverse selection, capital supply, and venture capital allocation, Working
 paper.
Zhu, John Y, 2019, Better monitoring... worse productivity?, Working Paper.




                                              39
Figure 1: Exit payoff diagrams. The left graph shows the final payoff to convertible preferred
stock (vertical axis) as a function of the startup's exit value (horizontal axis). The investor has
the right to receive a liquidation preference (equal to a multiple of the invested amount, typically
1X for a seed or A round), but may instead choose to convert the preferred shares into a fraction
c of the startup's common stock. The right graph shows the payoff for a participating convertible
preferred security, in which the investor has the right to receive the liquidation preference, and
then participates in the remaining value on an as-converted basis.




                                                40
                                                                                                                                                       0.8                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                                                                            i




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Variance(Time between deals)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            e




                                                                                                               Mean(Time between deals)
                                                                                                                                                       0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6

                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                       0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                       0.4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                         0.5                 1                                  1.5                                                       0.5                1                                      1.5
                                                                                                                                                                     Parameter/Estimate                                                                                               Parmeter/Estimate


                                              -3                                                                                                                -3                                                                                                               -3                                                                                                         -3
                                           x 10                                                                                                              x 10                                                                                                             x 10                                                                                                       x 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cov(Time between deals, pay-to-play)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cov(Time between deals, board seats)
                                                                                                               Cov (Time between deals, part. pref.)
Cov(Time between deals, VC equity)




                                     1.6                                                                                                                5                                                                                                                 1                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                  ai
                                                                                                  ae                                                    4                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                     1.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  bi
                                                                                                                                                        3                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                     1.2                                                          be                                                                                                                                                                 -1
                                                                                                                                                        2                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                      1                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -2
                                                                                                                                                        1                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1

                                     0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -3
                                                                                                                                                        0                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                     0.6                                                                                                               -1                                                                                                            -4                                                                                                             -1
                                       0.95                1                                           1.05                                             0.95                 1                               1.05                                                     0.95                    1                                     1.05                                             0.95                1            1.05
                                                   Parameter/Estimate                                                                                                Parameter/Estimate                                                                                               Parameter/Estimate                                                                                         Parameter/Estimate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                -3                                                                                                                  -4
                                                                                                                                                                                                           x 10                                                                                                                  x 10
                                                                                              8                                                                                                      3.4                                                                                                                  -1.2
                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                    Var(Time between deals)




                                                                                                                                                                                                     3.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Skewness(VC equity)
                                                                                              6                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1.4
                                                                                                                                                                                    Var(VC equity)




                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                              4                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.8

                                                                                              2                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.6


                                                                                              0                                                                                                      2.4                                                                                                                   -2
                                                                                              0.5                     1                                                       1.5                      0.5                    1                                                               1.5                           0.5                    1                                                     1.5
                                                                                                              Parameter/Estimate                                                                                      Parameter/Estimate                                                                                                   Parameter/Estimate




                                           Figure 2: Sensitivity of selected moments to model parameters. The top row shows
                                           sensitivity of moments of the time between investors' deals to the change in frequency of encounters
                                           parameters, i and e . The middle row shows sensitivity of covariances between time between
                                           deals and contract terms to the change in quality distribution parameters, ai , bi , ae , and be . The
                                           bottom row shows sensitivity of higher moments of time between deals and the VC equity share to
                                           the change in the complementarity parameter, . The change in parameters on the horizontal axes
                                           is relative to their estimated values presented in Table V. The estimated  is negative, such that
                                           a higher parameter value relative to the estimate means a more negative . All other parameters
                                           estimates are positive.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  41
Figure 3: Equilibrium contract terms at estimated model parameters. Panel A shows the
VC equity share, Panel B shows participation, Panel C shows pay-to-play, Panel D shows the VC
board seat, and Panel E shows the resulting VC share of the firm for each combination of investor
(VC) and entrepreneur quality. The VC equity share and VC share of the firm take values in
[0, 1] and are shown in gray-scale. Participation, pay-to-play and the VC board seat take values
in {0, 1}, and their inclusion is shown in black. Absence of a term is in light gray. Combinations
of qualities that do not match are shown in white. Panel F shows the distribution of VC and
entrepreneur qualities on the horizontal and vertical axes, respectively.




                                               42
                                                       Efficiency of contracts                                                                                                  Split of value               X: 0.445
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Y: 0.528
                                         1
                                                   X: 0.147
                                                   Y: 1                                                                                                                                           X: 0.396
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Y: 0.491
                                                                                                                                                         0.5




                                                                                                           Percentage of expected value retained by VC
Percentage of maximal expected value




                                       0.95


                                                                                                                                                         0.4

                                        0.9



                                                                                                                                                         0.3
                                       0.85                                                                                                                         X: 0.147
                                                                                                                                                                    Y: 0.282


                                                                                                                                                                                     Conv. pref. equity
                                                                                X: 0.396
                                                                                Y: 0.826                                                                                             + participation
                                                                                                                                                         0.2                         + pay-to-play
                                        0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                     + VC board
                                                                                           X: 0.445
                                                                                           Y: 0.775
                                                                                                                                                                                     + participation, VC board
                                                                                                                                                                                     Common equity
                                          0.1   0.15    0.2      0.25   0.3   0.35         0.4                                                             0.1   0.15    0.2      0.25   0.3     0.35        0.4
                                                              VC equity share                                                                                                  VC equity share


Figure 4: Impact of contract terms on the startup value and its distribution. The
figure in the left panel shows the ratio of the total startup value to the maximal value, and right
side panel shows the fraction of value acquired by the VC, as a function of VC equity share.
Qualities of the VC and entrepreneur are kept fixed across contracts. Different lines are shown for
the presence of participation, pay-to-play, and VC board representation, as well as for the joint
presence of participation and VC board representation. Datatips represent the contract (VC equity
share, participation, pay-to-play, board seats) that maximizes the value, cM ax = (0.147, 0, 1, 0),
the representative contract in the data, c,Avg = (0.396, 1, 0, 1), and the unconstrained VC-optimal
contract, c,U nc = (0.445, 1, 0, 1), on the startup value and its split. These three contracts achieve
100%, 82.6%, and 77.5% of the maximal value and leave the VC with 28.2%, 49.1%, and 52.8%
of the firm, respectively.




                                                                                                      43
                                                                              Max VC,
                    90                                                        c*(Min)

                    80

                    70                                                  Max


                    60

                    50
            Value




                    40
                                                                  Min

                    30
                                                        Max VC,
                                                        c*(Min)
                    20                            Max
                                            Min
                                 Max VC,
                    10           c*(Min)
                         Min Max

                     0
                            50%                   75%                   99%
                                  Quantile of entrepreneur quality

Figure 5: VC and entrepreneur value creation. Each bar shows the expected value to the VC
(light yellow color) and entrepreneur (dark blue color) for a given combination of their qualities
in the estimated equilibrium. These values add up to the expected value of the startup. The sets
of bars refer to entrepreneurs at the 50th, 75th, and 99th quality percentiles, respectively. For a
given entrepreneur quality, the first two bars show the expected values for the VC of the lowest
(Min) and highest (Max) quality that matches with this entrepreneur quality. The last bar shows
the expected values for the VC of the highest quality that matches with this entrepreneur quality
in a hypothetical scenario where such VC offers the equilibrium contract of the VC of the lowest
quality that matches with this entrepreneur quality.




                                                  44
                                       Table I: Variable definitions.


This table shows the definition of variables used throughout the paper.

  Variable                              Definition
  Firm age at financing (yrs)           Years from the startup's date of incorporation to the date of the first
                                        round financing.
  Information technology                An indicator equal to one if the startup's industry is information tech-
                                        nology.
  Healthcare                            An indicator equal to one if the startup's industry is healthcare, which
                                        include biotechnology.
  Time since last VC financing (yrs)    The number of years since the lead investors' last lead investment in a
                                        first round financing.
  Syndicate size                        The total number of investors in the first round financing.
  Capital raised in round (2012 $m)     Total capital raised (in millions of 2012 dollars) in the startup's first
                                        financing rounds (across all investors).
  Post-money valuation (2012 $m)        The post-money valuation of the first round financing (capital raised
                                        plus pre-money valuation, in millions of 2012 dollars).
  Financing year                        The year of the financing.
  % equity sold to investors            The fraction of equity (as-if-common) sold to investors in the financing
                                        round, calculated as the capital raised in the round divided by the post-
                                        money valuation.
  Participating preferred               An indicator variable equal to one if the stock sold in the financing event
                                        includes participation (aka "double-dip").
  Common stock sold                     An indicator variable equal to one if the equity issued in the financing
                                        is common stock.
  Liquidation multiple > 1              An indicator variable that is equal to one if the liquidation multiple
                                        exceeds 1X. The liquidation multiple provides holders 100% of exit pro-
                                        ceeds for sales that are less than X times the original investment amount.
  Cumulative dividends                  An indicator variable equal to one if the stock sold includes cumulative
                                        dividends. Such dividends cumulate each year pre-liquidation and are
                                        only paid at liquidation.
  Full ratchet anti-dilution            An indicator variable equal to one if the preferred stock includes full
                                        ratchet anti-dilution protection. Such protection results in the original
                                        share price to be adjusted 1:1 with any future stock offerings with a
                                        lower stock price (through a change in the conversion price).
  Pay-to-play                           An indicator variable equal to ones if the preferred stock sold includes
                                        pay-to-play provisions. These provisions penalize the holder if they fail
                                        to reinvest in future financing rounds.
  Redemption rights                     An indicator variable equal to one if the preferred stock sold includes
                                        redemption rights. These are types of puts (available after some number
                                        of years) that allow the holder to sell back their shares to the startup at
                                        a predetermined price.
  VC has board seat                     An indicator variable equal to one if the VC investor has a board seat
                                        at the time of the first financing.
  IPO                                   An indicator variable that is equal to one if the startup had an IPO by
                                        March 31st, 2018.
  Acquired                              An indicator variable that is equal to one if the startup was acquired by
                                        March 31st, 2018.
  IPO or Acq. > 2X capital              An indicator variable that is equal to one if the startup had an IPO
                                        or had an acquisition with a purchase price at least two times capital
                                        invested across all its financings by the end of 2018Q1.
  Out of business                       An indicator variable that is equal to one if the startup had gone out of
                                        business by the end of 2018Q1.
  Still private                         An indicator variable that is equal to one if the startup had not exited
                                        by the end of 2018Q1.
  Seed round                            An indicator variable that is equal to one if the first round financing is
                                        a Seed round (other rounds as traditional Series A).


                                                        45
                                                             Table II: Summary statistics


     Descriptive statistics of startups and their first round equity financings for the samples described in section 3. The
     "IPO/Good acq. sample" includes financing rounds between 2002 and 2010 where the outcome variable is a dummy
     variable equal to one if the startup had a successful exit (an initial public offering or an acquisition worth at least
     twice the invested capital). A financing is in this sample if the outcome variable and contract terms are observed. The
     "All deals 2002­2010" sample includes all first-round financings between 2002 and 2010 regardless of missing contract
     data. The variables are as defined in Table I. Only means are reported for indicator variables.

                                                               IPO/Good acq. sample                   All deals 2002­2010
                                                      Obs.        Mean   Median   Std. dev.   Obs.     Mean     Median      Std. dev.
                                                   Panel A: Firm and financing characteristics
          Firm age at financing (yrs)                1,695      1.621    1.098     1.703   5,510        1.695    1.084         1.793
          Information technology                     1,695      0.465                      5,510        0.477
          Healthcare                                 1,695      0.262                      5,510        0.230
          Time since last VC financing (yrs)         1,556      0.689    0.279     1.130   4,782        0.849    0.364         1.318
          Syndicate size                             1,695      1.756        2     0.905   5,510        1.568        1         0.852
          Capital raised in round (2012, $ mil.)     1,695      7.261    5.202     8.373 5,185          6.327    4.210         7.988




46
          Post-money valuation (2012, $ mil.)        1,695     21.201   13.014    39.385 3,359         18.905   12.269        31.345
          Financing year                             1,695  2006.331      2006     2.260 5,510       2006.352     2007         2.403
          Seed round                                 1,695      0.118                      5,510        0.162
                                                               Panel B: Contracts
          % equity sold to investors                 1,695      0.396              0.184   3,359        0.400                  0.181
          Liquidation mult. > 1                      1,689      0.043                      2,731        0.043
          Participating preferred                    1,695      0.512                      2,737        0.522
          Cumulative dividends                       1,694      0.207                      2,702        0.220
          Pay-to-play                                1,695      0.123                      2,022        0.119
          Full ratchet anti-dilution                 1,013      0.018                      1,816        0.017
          Redemption rights                          1,675      0.392                      2,199        0.411
          VC has board seat                          1,695      0.893                      5,510        0.752
          Common stock sold?                         1,694      0.038                      2,867        0.028
                                                               Panel C: Outcomes
          Went public                                1,695      0.045                      5,510        0.024
          Acquired                                   1,695      0.388                      5,510        0.397
          IPO or Acq. > 2X capital                   1,695      0.127                      5,510        0.115
          Out of business                            1,695      0.134                      5,510        0.170
          Still private                              1,695      0.434                      5,510        0.408
          Had follow-on within 2 years               1,695      0.727                      5,510        0.579
                                             Table III: Startup outcomes and contract terms

     Columns 1 through 4 of this table report probit regression results with the "IPO or Acq. > 2X capital" indicator outcome as the dependent
     variable for the sample of 1,695 startups described in Table II. "Log Raised" is the log of total capital invested in the financing (2012
     dollars). "Year FE" are fixed effects for the financing year, "Year founded FE" are fixed effect for the startup's founding year, "State
     FE" are fixed effects for the startup's state, and "Industry FE" are fixed effects for industry. All other explanatory variables, and all
     outcome variables, are defined in Table I. Column (5) shows the same regression specification as in column (4) but using the IPO indicator
     as dependent variable. The final column reports OLS regression estimates where the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the
     startup's post-money valuation. The table reports Pseudo-R2 for the probit regressions, and R2 for the OLS. The number of observations
     varies across dependent variables because the probit regressions drop observations for which the outcome is perfectly predicted by one or
     more of the explanatory variables. Standard errors are clustered by VC firm, and are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicates
     significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                             IPO or Acq. > 2X capital                       IPO        Log post-
                                                                                                                         money
                                                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)
                 % equity sold to investors         -1.589       -1.741       -1.561        -1.641       -2.367        -5.004
                                                    (1.067)      (1.025)      (1.052)       (0.964)      (1.703)       (0.490)




47
                 % equity sold to investors2         2.551        2.579        2.375         2.546        4.076         5.252
                                                    (1.190)      (1.173)      (1.162)       (1.088)      (1.547)       (0.458)
                 Participating preferred            -0.230         .            .           -0.238       -0.201        -0.0232
                                                    (0.0614)       .            .           (0.0653)     (0.0912)      (0.0432)
                 VC has board seat                    .           0.141         .            0.136        0.280         0.241
                                                      .          (0.196)        .           (0.198)      (0.219)       (0.103)
                 Pay-to-play                          .            .           0.0871        0.115        0.376         0.207
                                                      .            .          (0.124)       (0.133)      (0.135)       (0.0773)
                 Constant                           -4.608       -4.944       -4.807        -4.704       -4.527         2.678
                                                    (0.571)      (0.587)      (0.505)       (0.655)      (0.611)       (0.343)
                 Observations                         1,607        1,607        1,607         1,607        1,549         1,695
                 Pseudo-R2 , R2                      0.060        0.056        0.055         0.062        0.195         0.129
                 Year FE                                 Y            Y            Y            Y            Y              Y
                 Year founded FE                         Y            Y            Y            Y            Y              Y
                 State FE                                Y            Y            Y            Y            Y              Y
                 Industry FE                             Y            Y            Y            Y            Y              Y
                    Table IV: Empirical and theoretical moments


This table reports the empirical moments and their model counterparts computed at
estimated parameters of the search and matching model described in the paper (Section
4.2). "Success rate" is the fraction of deals that result in a good exit, as measured by
the variable "IPO or Acq. > 2X capital". This variable and the contract terms are
defined in Table I.

     Moment                                                         Data    Model
     Avg. time since last VC financing                              0.689    0.494
     Var. time since last VC financing                              1.276    0.420
     Avg. VC share of equity                                        0.396    0.406
     Var. VC share of equity                                        0.031    0.003
     Skew. VC share of equity                                       0.002   -0.000
     Cov. VC share of equity and time since last VC financing       0.003    0.001
     Avg. participation                                             0.512    0.465
     Cov. participation and time since last VC financing            0.055    0.002
     Cov. participation and VC share of equity                      0.015    0.018
     Avg. pay-to-play                                               0.122    0.049
     Cov. pay-to-play and time since last VC financing             -0.003   -0.001
     Cov. pay-to-play and VC share of equity                        0.012   -0.001
     Cov. pay-to-play and participation                             0.018   -0.023
     Avg. VC board seat                                             0.893    0.970
     Cov. VC board seat and time since last VC financing           -0.018   -0.001
     Cov. VC board seat and VC share of equity                      0.006    0.003
     Cov. VC board seat and participation                           0.004    0.014
     Cov. VC board seat and pay-to-play                             0.005    0.000
     Avg. success rate                                              0.127    0.093
     Cov. success rate and time since last VC financing            -0.014    0.024
     Cov. success rate and VC share of equity                       0.004   -0.001
     Cov. success rate and participation                           -0.012   -0.008
     Cov. success rate and pay-to-play                              0.005    0.005
     Cov. success rate and VC board seat                            0.002   -0.000




                                          48
                            Table V: Parameter estimates


The first panel reports the parameters of the dynamic search and matching model
(Section 4.2), estimated using the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) with the
efficient weight matrix. The second panel ­ "Joint significance tests" ­ reports results
from a set of hypothesis tests about the interaction coefficient estimates. *, **, and
*** indicates significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

   Parameter and Description                             Estimate    Standard error
   ai Distribution of investor qualities                  1.927           0.257
   bi Distribution of investor qualities                  3.602           0.760
   ae Distribution of entrepreneur qualities              3.142           0.334
   be Distribution of entrepreneur qualities              4.152           0.573
   i Frequency of investors meeting entrepreneurs        13.443           6.096
   e Frequency of entrepreneurs meeting investors        10.393           2.739
    Substitutability of qualities                        -1.370           0.078
   0 Probability of success, intercept                   -4.056           2.066
   1 Probability of success, total value                  0.104           0.061
   1 Total value, share of VC equity                      0.679           0.220
   2 Total value, share of VC equity squared             -2.362           0.233
   3 Total value, participation                          -0.163           0.027
   4 Total value, pay-to-play                             0.024           0.048
   5 Total value, VC board seat                          -0.026           0.006
   6 Total value, participation × pay-to-play             0.016           0.102
   7 Total value, participation × VC board seat           0.033           0.026
   8 Total value, pay-to-play × VC board seat             0.019           0.064
   1 Split of value, intercept                           -0.211           0.076
   2 Split of value, participation                       -0.174           0.027
   3 Split of value, pay-to-play                          0.055           0.029
   4 Split of value, VC board seat                       -0.040           0.007
   5 Split of value, participation × pay-to-play          0.015           0.113
   6 Split of value, participation × VC board seat        0.029           0.027
   7 Split of value, pay-to-play × VC board seat          0.012           0.107
       Number of observations                                         1,695


                              Joint significance tests
     Null hypothesis                                                       F-stat
     Total value and split: (6 , 7 , 8 ) = 0 and (5 , 6 , 7 ) = 0          14.838
     Participation & pay-to-play interaction: 6 = 0 and 5 = 0               0.028
     Participation & VC board seat interaction: 7 = 0 and 6 = 0             9.106
     Pay-to-play & VC board seat interaction: 8 = 0 and 7 = 0               0.332
     Total value: (6 , 7 , 8 ) = 0                                          1.571
     Split of value: (5 , 6 , 7 ) = 0                                       1.150


                                          49
Table VI: Startup values, deal frequencies, and present values of deals in the VC market


 The first column of this table reports the average expected startup value across deals
 completed by quality subgroups of VCs and entrepreneurs,   (Sub), as a percentage
 of the average expected startup value across all deals,   (All). Columns 2 and 3 show
 how the expected value in column 1 is distributed between investors and entrepreneurs,
 respectively. The percentages in these two columns add to 100%. The fourth column
 reports expected deal frequencies (expected number of deals per year),  (Sub), across
 all deals and by quality subgroups of VCs and entrepreneurs. The last column shows
 the present value (PV, a properly discounted combination of deal values and frequen-
 cies) that accrues to the two types of agents and their subgroups, as a percentage of
 the combined PV of all deals. The percentages for the subgroups add up to the PV
 percentage of all deals for each agent type. The PV percentages of all deals across the
 two agent types sum up to 100%. All numbers in this table are equilibrium numbers
 generated from the search and matching model with the parameter estimates from
 Table V.

                           Percentage of startup value       Deal frequencies   PV of deals
                                        (Sub)
                              (Sub)   i            e (Sub)                       P V  (Sub)
                              (All)     (Sub)        (Sub)       (Sub)           P V  (All)
 Investor                                                                           .
   All deals                  100     48.40        51.60          2.025           61.15
   0­10th percentile          8.51    49.39        50.61          2.213            0.45
   10th­50th percentile      57.60    48.10        51.90          2.435           12.49
   50th­90th percentile     166.80    47.40        52.60          1.788           32.62
   90th­100th percentile    279.30    52.60        47.40          1.043           15.60
 Entrepreneur                                                                       .
   All deals                 100      48.40        51.60          1.565           38.85
   0-10% percentile          1.55     51.11        48.89          0.158            0.07
   10-50% percentile        15.34     50.99        49.01          0.721            3.24
   50-90% percentile        82.37     49.35        50.65          2.370           19.49
   90-100% percentile       223.68    47.32        52.68          3.559           16.05




                                              50
                     Table VII: Counterfactuals: Search frictions


This table reports the results of counterfactual exercises that increase the frequency at
which investors and entrepreneurs meet each other by 2, 5, and 10 times the estimated
frequency of Table V. The table shows the change in the present value of all deals in
the market, P V cf (All) = P V cf (All) - P V  (All), and the change in present values
of all VCs and entrepreneurs. All present value changes are computed as percentages
of the unrestricted equilibrium present value of deals in the market, P V  (All), so that
columns 2 and 3 add up to the numbers in column 1.

                                           P V cf (All)   P Vicf (All)   P Vecf
                                                                                (All)
                                           P V  (All)     P V  (All)        
                                                                         P V (All)
        2X more frequent encounters           1.19           2.43           -1.24
        5X more frequent encounters           -2.74          5.42           -8.16
        10X more frequent encounters          -5.14          7.25          -12.38




                                           51
