                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      SKIN OR SKIM? INSIDE INVESTMENT AND HEDGE FUND PERFORMANCE

                                        Arpit Gupta
                                       Kunal Sachdeva

                                     Working Paper 26113
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26113


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019

We would like to thank Jules Van Binsbergen, Maria Chaderina, Quinn Curtis, Nickolay
Gantchev, Qiping Huang, Clemens Sialm, Lin Sun, and Sumudu Watugala (discussants). We
have also benefited from discussions with Simona Abis, Yakov Amihud, Charles Calomiris, Alan
Crane, Kent Daniel, Colleen Honigsberg, Sabrina Howell, Wei Jiang, Ralph Koijen, Anthony
Lynch, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Tarun Ramadorai, Matthew Richardson, Paul Tetlock, James
Weston, and Jeffrey Wurgler, as well as seminar participants at Berkeley (Haas), Columbia
University (GSB), New York University (Stern), University of Pennsylvania (Wharton), Rice
University (Jones), Yale University (SOM), NBER Long-Term Asset Management, the
NASDAQ DRP Research Day, the 13th Annual Penn/NYU Conference on Law and Finance,
IRMC, the CEPR ESSFM conference in Gerzensee, the Junior Entrepreneurial Finance and
Innovation Workshop, the Hedge Fund Research Symposium, the 10th Hedge Fund and Private
Equity Conference, the University of Kentucky Finance Conference, FIRS, MFA, NFA, SFS
Cavalcade, Two Sigma, Q Group. We thank HFR, CISDM, eVestment, BarclayHedge, and
Eurekahedge for data that contributed to this research. We gratefully acknowledge generous
research support from the NYU Stern Center for Global Economy and Business and Columbia
University. We thank Billy Xu for excellent research assistance. See https://www.skinorskim.org
for Form ADV data used in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Arpit Gupta and Kunal Sachdeva. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Skin or Skim? Inside Investment and Hedge Fund Performance
Arpit Gupta and Kunal Sachdeva
NBER Working Paper No. 26113
July 2019
JEL No. G23,G32,J33,J54

                                           ABSTRACT

Hedge fund managers contribute substantial personal capital, or "skin in the game," into their
funds. While these allocations may better align incentives, managers may also strategically
allocate their private capital in ways that negatively affect investors. We find that funds with
more inside investment outperform other funds within the same family. However, this
relationship is driven by managerial decisions to invest capital in their least-scalable strategies
and restrict the entry of new outsider capital into these funds. Our results suggest that skin in the
game may work as a rent-extraction mechanism at the expense of fund participation of outside
investors.


Arpit Gupta
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
agupta3@stern.nyu.edu

Kunal Sachdeva
Rice University
Janice and Robert McNair Hall
Houston, TX 77005
kunal.sachdeva@rice.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26113
Source Data is available at www.skinorskim.org
Of the $3 trillion in assets under management by hedge funds, $400 billion can be attributed

to investments from insiders: general firm partners (GPs) and related parties. While this

large allocation of insider capital can better align incentives between investors and hedge

fund managers, regulators have also raised concerns that insider "skin in the game" may

also have potentially adverse consequences.1 Because insiders have superior private in-

formation, have discretion over which of their funds to invest in, and may subsequently

alter the fund operations; managers with large personal stakes may choose actions which

negatively affect their investors.
    Using a Berk and Green (2004)-style model, we show that the strategic allocation of pri-

vate capital can help hedge fund managers raise earnings at the cost of capital participation

by outside investors. Managers in our model face a tradeoff between the choice of earning

returns on private capital against fee revenue levied on outside investors. This assumption

is realistic, as we find empirically that returns on privately-invested capital are roughly

as large for hedge fund managers as either management or performance fees (Figure I).

When choosing where to allocate personal capital, managers internalize the fact that rais-

ing additional capital dilutes the fund's return due to decreasing returns to scale. Previous

papers assessing decreasing returns to scale include: Yin (2016), Ramadorai (2013), Get-

mansky (2012), and Teo (2009). As a result, our model predicts that managers will invest

their capital in their least-scalable strategies, and that they will operate these funds with

greater insider capital at a smaller scale by restricting the entry of outside investors. In

equilibrium, returns are higher for funds with more insider capital, but this increase comes

at the cost of limited entry by outside investors.
    In this paper, we examine three hypotheses: (1) hedge fund managers allocate their

insider capital to their less-scalable strategies; (2) insiders will restrict access to outside

investors in these funds; and (3) insider funds, as a consequence, outperform on a risk-

adjusted basis.
   1 See Mary Jo White, SEC Chair, on Oct. 16, 2015: "Examiners observed that some hedge fund advisers
may not be adequately disclosing conflicts related to advisers' proprietary funds and the personal accounts of
their portfolio managers. Examiners saw, for example, advisers allocating profitable trades and investment
opportunities to proprietary funds rather than client accounts in contravention of existing policies and
procedures."


                                                      2
    First, we find evidence that insider capital is deployed to less-scalable funds. Funds

with more insider capital are smaller: one additional percent of inside investment is asso-

ciated with a fund that is smaller by $7­10 million. This result holds both unconditionally

and within-firm.2 We also test the relationship between inside investment and fund scala-

bility. Following the methodology employed by Yin (2016), which measures the decreasing

return to scale by regressing style-adjusted returns against lagged assets, we find that funds

with greater insider investment are also less scalable.

    Second, we find that funds with greater insider capital are more likely to restrict out-

sider capital entry on both intensive and extensive margins. On the intensive margin, man-

agers limit outsider inflows to the high-performing insider funds. On the extensive margin,

insiders can strategically close capital access to outsiders entirely. The presence of funds

closed to outside investors is a challenge for conventional models of delegated asset man-

agement, as managers are not capturing the entire surplus by forgoing the management

fees earned on additional capital. Instead, we find that such funds strongly outperform,

delivering 2­4% additional excess returns yearly. Such strong performance suggests that

outside investors are in fact rationed from fund participation. Notably, such funds closed

to outside investors are disproportionately funded by inside capital.

    Third, we find that inside investment is an important predictor of excess returns when

comparing different funds within firms, and within the same fund over time. Our panel

regression controls for the Fama and French (1992) and Carhart (1997) factors, as well as

the seven factors set out in Fung and Hsieh (2004), at the fund level. An increase in inside

investment by a standard deviation within the same firm (across funds), and within the

same fund (across time), is associated with annualized excess returns of 1.4­1.7%. We

confirm this finding in an event study that focuses on firms that create a second fund. In

these cases, we find that the original fund outperforms when inside capital stays in this

fund relative to when insiders move their capital to the newly-formed fund. These results

suggest the possibility of "skimming" motives on the part of fund managers.
    2 By   firms, we refer to the fund advisor--i.e., the company in charge of managing all funds within the
family.


                                                        3
   We rule out natural alternate explanations for our results. A chief concern is the sig-

naling issues associated with insider capital. We find that funds with greater insider cap-

ital accept less, not more, outside capital--including in other funds that are part of their

families--which is inconsistent with a story that emphasizes the role of inside investment

as a signaling tool or marketing strategy. We also find that funds with greater percent of in-

vestment funds take on less leverage and do not have assets with worse liquidity properties

nor exhibit greater tail risk--suggesting that these higher returns are not compensation for

some alternate forms of risk. Although we cannot fully rule out the relationship between

inside investment and other fund attributes, understanding inside investment through the

lens of fund capacity constraints appears to best explain our results.

   Our key contribution is to document how hedge fund managers prioritize personal in-

vestments to less-scalable strategies, and subsequently restrict the scale of their funds, in

ways that boost performance. This result connects closely with Yin (2016), who emphasizes

the role of decreasing returns to scale among hedge funds, which managers seem not to

fully internalize given their stated contract terms including management and performance

fees. We document that a non-stated contract term and the presence of insider capital pro-

vides an important additional reason for fund managers to operate their funds at smaller

scales. The impact of these personal stakes on outside investors is mixed: some investors

are able to co-invest with insiders and earn superior returns due to smaller fund sizes and

the alignment of interests. However, the smaller scale of insider funds can have detrimental

consequences on other outside investors, who are rationed out of fund participation.

   We also contribute to research on managerial ownership in the hedge fund industry.

Agarwal, Daniel, and Naik (2009) finds a positive relationship between estimated man-

agerial investment, based on the assumption that fee income is reinvested in funds, and

subsequent fund performance. We extend this result and provide additional context by

finding evidence for strategic allocation of private capital, as opposed to personal stakes

which are increasing mechanically, and by establishing one key mechanism for the outper-

formance of insider funds: the choice of managers to limit outside capital investment on


                                              4
funds with greater private capital.3

    Our results come with several important caveats. Though we establish inside ownership

as an important predictor of excess returns and highlight the role for the strategic allocation

and capacity constraints in understanding this result, it is possible that other channels

operate in addition to the ones we emphasize. It is possible that inside investors are better

informed about the skill of various fund managers, in ways that differ from fund scaling,

and that they deploy capital accordingly. Alternatively, high-insider-investment funds may

be less subject to agency conflicts and engage in superior research analysis, see Berk, van

Binsbergen, and Liu (2017). Finally, it is possible that higher returns from high insider-

investment funds are a proxy for some risk factors, unrelated to either the Fama and French

(1992), Carhart (1997), and Fung and Hsieh (2004) factors. In light of these caveats, our

paper provide a novel evidence to the literature examining fund families by showing that

hedge fund managers allocate personal capital strategically across funds at the expense of

crowding out outsider capital.4

    More broadly, our core results advance knowledge of the asset management industry

by highlighting the role for inside investment as an incentive to alter managers' decisions

to strategically allocate capital in ways that affect the returns and investment opportuni-

ties available to institutional investors. Further, this paper contributes to the literature on

managerial earnings by emphasizing the unique role for returns on personal capital contri-

butions as a component of overall managerial income in the hedge fund industry.5 We also

contribute to the literature on diseconomies of scale by highlighting the novel incentives

for more optimal fund scaling generated by non-contract features of managerial behavior

in the form of private capital stakes.6
   3 Other   papers analyze managerial investment at the firm level. Brown, Goetzmann, Liang, and Schwarz
(2008), for instance, finds that hedge fund firms with concentrated ownership are related to lower
performance and suggest possible agency conflicts driving these results.
    4 See Massa (2003), Sialm and Tham (2017), Berk, van Binsbergen, and Liu (2017).
    5 See Agarwal, Daniel, and Naik (2009), Burasachi, Kosowski, and Sritrakul (2014), Chen, Goldstein, and

Jiang (2008), Ackermann, McEnally, and Ravenscraft (1999), Qiu, Tang, and Walter (2016), Ibert, Kaniel,
Van Nieuwerburgh, and Vestman (2017), and Ozik and Sadka (2015).
    6 See Yin (2016), Ramadorai (2013). An important branch of this literature examines the role of liquidity

and diseconomies of scale, such as: Chen, Hong, Huang, and Kubik (2004), Bris, Gulen, Kadiyala, and Rau
(2006), and Yan (2008).


                                                      5
                                          I      Data

   Our dataset combines regulatory Form ADV filings with commercial hedge fund re-

turn series from HFR, eVestment, BarclayHedge, Eurekahedge, and CISDM. Form ADV is a

required regulatory disclosure form used to register with both the Securities and Exchange

Commission (SEC) and state securities authorities. Reporting under Form ADV is gov-

erned by the US Investment Advisers Act of 1940, as amended by Dodd-Frank. Disclosure

requirements under this form have changed over the years. In the period from 1996­2011,

funds with assets under management below $25 million, or fewer than 15 clients, were

generally exempt from registration. Hedge funds in this period frequently used complex

fund structures to evade disclosure even when assets were above this threshold.

   Private fund reporting increased in 2005, when the SEC went to court to force funds to

count all investors as clients. Though courts ultimately struck down the SEC's interpreta-

tion, disclosure through Form ADV increased throughout this period. Our primary sample

is formed after 2011, in the aftermath of changes in required disclosure imposed by Dodd-

Frank. Under prevailing regulations, all investment advisors--including hedge funds--are

now required to file a Form ADV with the SEC if they (1) reach a $100 million threshold for

assets under management for a typical fund, (2) reach a $150 million threshold if the firm

has only private clients, (3) have over $25 million in assets and are not subject to exami-

nation in their home states (states that do not require examination currently include New

York and Wyoming). Subsequent to their initial filing, firms must refile once a year (as

long as their assets under management exceed $25 million), or if there have been changes

in material information since the last filing.

   We obtain Form ADV from the SEC over the period 2011­2016. We link Form ADV

information together with information on hedge fund returns obtained from a combination

of five datasets: HFR, eVestment, BarclayHedge, Eurekahedge, and CISDM. We begin the

merge with HFR, eVestment and BarclayHedge, which contain for many firms an SEC

identifier common to both the commercial hedge fund datasets and Form ADV. If we do


                                                 6
not have an SEC identifier, we next look for close matches (selecting only perfect matches)

among firm and fund names in both datasets, after eliminating extraneous stop words and

abbreviations.

    In 2012, Form ADV was updated to include questions about the internal investment of

their funds. We draw specifically on Section 7.B.(1), question 14 of Form ADV: "What is

the approximate percentage of the private fund beneficially owned by you and your related

persons." This question asks funds to disclose the percentage of investment stakes in the

fund which can be attributed in ultimate ownership to "related persons."

    Summary Table I shows basic summary information about our core Form ADV dataset

taken from 2016, while Table II reports information on our merged sample. The broad

ADV sample is able to establish key statistics about the overall size and scope of the entire

hedge fund industry beyond prior work. Figure II demonstrates our merge rate across the

range of firm ownership. We find that funds with complete inside investment (100%) and

no inside investment (0%) exhibit worse merge rates into our ADV dataset. These funds

also pose additional identification questions--either outsiders cannot invest, or insiders

have chosen not to invest in these funds. For these reasons, we focus the remainder of our

analysis on funds in the interior of the internal investment distribution: between 1 and 99%

inside investment, inclusive (our result are robust to their inclusion).

    A breakdown of "related parties" is provided in Table III, which illustrates all possible

configurations of which parties constitute related parties. The most common response is

"Sponsor of GP,"7 suggesting that the definition of related party most often corresponds

to a vehicle used by the actual managers or general partners of the fund. Alternately,

related parties can include other closely-related entities, such as asset investment by a bro-

ker/dealer. A separate set of questions asks the legal name of all related parties: these

entities are typically closely related to the management company, share a supervised per-

son three-quarters of the time, and share a common physical office over half of the time.

   7 Appendix  Table A1 examines our main analysis regressing inside investment against excess returns,
focusing on the subset of funds with only GP investments as their related party.


                                                     7
Despite the limitations of this measure in calculating managerial stakes exactly, we docu-

ment that related parties are typically vehicles for fund investment by the general partners,

and that they typically represent asset management on behalf of closely-related entities

that can be considered "inside capital."

   The inside investment data used in this paper is illustrated in Figure III. Panel A shows

the density of responses on inside investment across our full merged dataset. Panel B shows

the distribution of assets under management attributable to inside investment, shown on a

log-dollar scale.

                                   II      Mechanism

   In this section, we outline the key possible mechanisms underlying the relationship

between inside investment and fund performance, as predicted by our model. A full expo-

sition of our model and implications can be found in Appendix A.

   1. Size Performance Tradeoff: Our basic explanation for the role of inside investment as

      a predictor of cross-sectional fund performance relies on the tradeoff between man-

      agerial earnings through fee income on delegated asset management and returns on

      privately-invested capital. With limited commitment, managers cannot credibly com-

      mit to not increasing the size of their fund in the future to the point that the excess

      returns to investment strategies are driven down to zero. Personal capital commit-

      ments better align the incentives of managers and outsiders, providing greater incen-

      tives for managers to scale their funds less aggressively in a manner which results in

      greater returns to investors--but at the cost of capital participation by other outside

      investors.

   2. Preferential Treatment: Another possibility is that managers allocate additional atten-

      tion or trade differently for funds which have greater amounts of insider capital.

      While our main proposed explanation highlights one aspect of this dynamic--the

      ability for managers to preferentially manage fund size for funds managing insider

      capital--managers may also potentially change other attributes of these funds. These

                                              8
        include allocating additional attention, allocating superior managers, or executing su-

        perior trading strategies. Funds may take different risks on funds managing insider

        capital than on funds managing the capital of outside investors.

  3. Superior Information: An alternate and complementary explanation for the relation-

        ship between inside investments and fund performance is that inside investors are

        simply better informed about managerial ability within the fund family, and they

        allocate their capital to the better fund managers.

  4. Signaling: A potentially offsetting role for managerial capital allocation relies on the

        role of public signaling. Fund managers, particularly for less-established funds, may

        need to use inside capital commitments in order to convince outside investors of

        fund quality. When managers are required to hold costly private stakes in order to

        demonstrate quality and earn management fees on outside capital, inside investment

        could potentially predict flows but would be a poor predictor of fund performance.

        As Form ADVs are commonly used by outside investors to assess fund quality, man-

        agerial stakes in this context reflect verifiable and costly personal commitments.


   These channels need not be mutually exclusive--for instance, the greater the role of

moral hazard or risk-shifting effects in driving managers to exert effort or allocate trades

based on inside capital investments, the more private information there will be regarding

the success of different funds within a firm.



                               III   Empirical Strategy

III.A    Excess Return Measures


   Throughout our empirical tests, we use three different excess return measures. First, we

run a return regression, taking as our benchmark the Fung and Hsieh (2004) Seven-Factor




                                                9
model:


             e
            rit  rit      r f t = ait + b 1,i S& Pt + b 2,i (SC      LC)t + b 3,i 10Yt + b 4,i CredSprt

                               + b 5,i BdOptt + b 6,i FXOptt + b 7,i ComOpt + # it           i = 1, . . . , N .      (1)


    The Fung and Hsieh (2004) factors are widely used in hedge fund research, including

Fung, Hsieh, Naik, and Ramadorai (2008) and Patton and Ramdorai (2013).8
    We also consider the Fama and French (1992) and Carhart (1997) Four-Factor model,

which is more commonly used in mutual fund research:


      rit     r f t = ait + b 1,i RMRFt + b 2,i SMBt + b 3,i HMLt + b 4,i MOMt + # it           i = 1, . . . , N .   (2)


    The factor exposures allow us to compute an average excess return ait for each month

and fund, shown here for the Fama-French and Carhart Four-Factor model (comparably,
                                                   FH ):
we estimate a Fung and Hsieh (2004) excess return ait


              FFC
             ait     e
                  = rit      ^ 1,i RMRFt + b
                                           ^ 2,i SMBt + b
                             b                                       ^ 4,i MOMt
                                                        ^ 3,i HMLt + b                     i = 1, . . . , N .        (3)


    The third return measure we consider is the a Style-Adjusted-Return measure, following

Yin (2016):

                                                            Sk
                                                       1
              Style-Adjusted-Returnit = rit
                                                       Sk   Â r jt    i = 1, . . . , N , Sk 2 strategies.            (4)
                                                            j=1


    The above specification differences the return earned by a fund for a given period

against the average return of all funds of the same style during the same period. This

specification is used for ease of calculation from raw returns, and for its ability to adjust

for the risk associated with different investment strategies.
    8 These factors are: 1) an equity market factor--the S&P 500 Index monthly return (S&P); 2) A size-spread

factor--the Russell 2000 Index monthly return, S&P 500 (SC-LC); 3) a bond market factor--the monthly
change on the 10-year Treasury constant maturity yield (10Y); 4) a credit spread factor--the monthly change
in the Moody's Baa yield, 10-year Treasury constant maturity yield (CredSpr); 5) a bond trend-following
factor (BdOpt); 6) a currency trend-following factor (FXOpt); and 7) a commodity trend-following factor
(ComOpt). Additional details on the factors can be found at:
http://faculty.fuqua.duke.edu/~dah7/DataLibrary/TF-FAC.xls.


                                                         10
III.B   Inside Investment and Fund Scalability


   We test the relationship between excess returns and scalability of the hedge fund, fol-

lowing Yin (2016):


                rie,t = b · log( AUMi,t   1 )  High   Ownershipi,t       1    + X0
                                                                                 i,t   1 Q + # it .             (5)



   In the above specification, we test three different dependent variables: (i) the return

in excess of the style average (following Yin (2016)), (ii) Fama-French-Carhart, and (iii)

Fung-Hsieh factor models. Our variable of interest is the coefficient b, from the interac-

tion term between log( AUMi,t       1)    and High Ownershipi,t          1,   an indicator variable taking

the value of 1 if the funds insider ownership is greater than the sample median. We control

for log( AUMt   1)   to take into account the general decreasing returns to scale for all funds.

Other controls in X include log(total firm AU Mt            1 ),   percent AUM Flowt           1! t ,   performance

fee, management fee, an indicator for a high water mark, log(minimum investment), re-

demption period, fund age, whether the fund is open to new investment, and leverage. We

include fixed effects for the firm, year, and strategy, and cluster at the fund level. All flow

and return measures are winsorized at the 1% level.


III.C Inside Investment and Size


   To test for the relationship between ownership and size, we also perform a compara-

ble analysis regressing the assets under fund management against the fraction of inside

investment:

                          AUMit = yOwnershipit         1   + Firmi + Yeart + # it .                             ( 6)


   The y coefficient here captures the relationship of size and fractional inside investment

within firm and year.




                                                  11
III.D   Fund-Flow Sensitivity and Return Predictability

    Following prior literature, such as Chevalier and Ellison (1997), we define fund flows

using net flows rit as:


                                                     AU Mit         (1 + rit ) · AU Mi,t           1
                                      Flowit =                                                         .                     (7)
                                                                    AU Mi,t 1

    Using this definition, we also test standard fund-flow sensitivities:


Flowit = h High Insider Ownershipit                          1   + b 1 ait   1     High Insider Ownershipit        1

         + b 2 ait     2    High Insider Ownershipit                         1   + b 3 ait   3    High Insider Ownershipit    1

         + d1 ait     1    + d2 ait   2   + d3 ait   3   + X0
                                                            it    1Q +   Firmi + Yeart + # it .                              (8)


    In flow specifications, time is measured quarterly. Other controls in X include leverage,

lagged fund size, management fees, performance fees, redemption period, high watermark,

lagged flows, fund formation, and strategy fixed effects.9 The key coefficient of interest is

b 1 : whether funds with high inside ownership (defined as inside investment above the

median) exhibit less flow-performance. Lower flow-performance would indicate when

funds with greater inside investment accept less additional funding in response to better

prior performance.


III.E   Inside Investment and Performance

    We next test whether inside investment results in greater risk-adjusted fund-level re-

turns. Accordingly, we adopt a two-step approach. In the first step, we estimate a time-

series regression of excess returns on factor exposures, as discussed in Section III.A. In the

second step, we consider both a panel regression (which allows us to control for firm and

year fixed effects) as well as a standard Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regres-

sion which relates excess returns from fund-specific factors to inside ownership and other
   9 Following   Getmansky, Liang, Schwarz, and Wermers (2015).


                                                                    12
variables. A summary of the main dependent variables used in our analysis can be found

in Table IV.

    In this specification, we consider excess returns (rit               r f t ) to be the net returns after fees

minus the risk-free rate, as we take the standpoint of an institutional investor interested

in allocating across the broad investable universe of fund managers.10 This monthly time-

series analysis is run for each of N funds in order to generate fund-specific factor loadings.

    We note important data limitations associated with commercial hedge fund return se-

ries which we do our best to address. As has been noted in prior research, funds retain

discretion on reporting their returns (see: Bollen and Pool (2008), Bollen and Pool (2009),

Jorion and Schwarz (2014), and Patton, Ramadorai, and Streatfield (2015)). We restrict

our sample to funds for which we have at least 24 months of data, excluding the first 24

months of data to avoid incubation bias, and we also require funds to have at least $20

million in gross asset value. We exclude fund-of-funds because their inside investment is

relatively limited, and the scope for investment is radically different.11 We also exclude

funds with either 0 or 100% inside ownership. We find that funds with complete inside

investment (100%) and no inside investment (0%) exhibit worse merge rates into our ADV

dataset. These funds also pose additional questions--either outsiders cannot invest, or in-

siders have chosen not to invest in these funds. For these reasons, we focus the remainder

of our analysis on funds in the interior of the inside investment distribution: between 1

and 99% inside investment, inclusive.12

    With the monthly estimates of risk-adjusted returns, we estimate (following Fama and

MacBeth (1973)) cross-sectional regressions against fund characteristics, including our mea-

sure of ownership:

                               ait = f + gOwnershipi,t      1   + X0
                                                                   i,t   1 Q + # it .                        ( 9)

   10 Our results also hold when we regress against gross returns, adding fee income back in.
   11 Because fund-of-funds invest in other investment vehicles, rather than underlying securities, we do not
expect the same patterns of diminishing returns. We also expect flow-performance and return persistence to
work very differently with these investment advisors.
   12 Our analysis is robust to the inclusion of funds with zero or 100% inside ownership, the inclusion of

fund-of-funds, and the inclusion of smaller funds.


                                                     13
   The key variable of interest is g, which captures the predictive role of greater inside

investment on excess returns. To measure ownership, we use both the percentage of the

fund that consists of insider investment (our preferred measure) as well as the gross insider

exposure. This measure of ownership is drawn from annual ADV forms, and it represents

the ownership stake from the prior year. Additional controls in X include controls for fund

age, size, and strategy.
   Though standard in the mutual fund literature, a key limitation of the Fama and Mac-

Beth (1973) cross-sectional specification is that it does not allow us to control for time and

firm fixed effects. To do so, our baseline specification is a panel regression of fund and

firm characteristics against excess returns:


                    ait = f + gOwnershipi,t      1   + X0
                                                        i,t   1Q +   Adviseri + Montht + # it .   (10)


   The fixed effects for adviser include (depending on the specification) firm fixed effects

(capturing the effects of moving from one fund in a family to another with greater in-

side investment), or fund fixed effects (using the time-series variation of inside investment,

within the same fund; holding equal all other time-invariant fund characteristics). There-

fore, in this specification: our key coefficient of interest, g, captures the impact of inside

investment, either as percentage of fund as well as gross exposure, on excess return relative

to another firm/fund in the same family and month with less inside investment. This al-

lows us to control for all other invariant firm, fund, and time characteristics which might

otherwise drive excess returns. Standard errors are clustered at the month level, following

Petersen (2009).13 We also extend our analysis to consider return smoothing motivations,

which have been documented for hedge funds, e.g. by Getmansky, Lo, and Makarov (2004).


                                              IV       Results

   The following subsections tests three hypotheses predicted by our framework: first,

hedge fund managers allocate their insider capital to their less-scalable strategies; second,
  13 Our   results are robust to double-clustering at the fund and month level.


                                                         14
insiders restrict access to outside investors in these funds; and third, insider funds, as a

consequence, outperform on a risk-adjusted basis.


IV.A Strategic Allocation of Inside Investment


IV.A.1   Fund Scalability and Inside Investment


   We first establish that hedge funds face decreasing returns to scale for funds with

high GP capital investments, or insider investments. We establish this by using a similar

approach as Yin (2016): by regressing excess returns against asset flows and fund-level

ownership.

   The results in Figure IV estimate equation 5 for specialized arbitrage strategies. This

figure plots the coefficient of the interaction between lagged assets and high insider funds

against style-adjusted returns. Negative coefficients suggest that high-insider funds are

less scalable, because higher fund assets predict more negative returns. We find that in-

sider capital is, in fact, allocated in general to funds with more decreasing returns to scale

strategies. We also contrast our results across different types of strategies. We find more

negative coefficients in categories such as event-driven and relative value, which are typ-

ically associated with lower scalability due to liquidity, price impact, and limited float.

We find that insider capital is even more tightly matched to decreasing returns to scale

strategies in those categories.

   The interpretation of these results is that when insider funds experience larger assets

under management, the excess returns to investors deteriorate more significantly relative to

outsider funds. This result holds whether we examine excess returns using a style-adjusted

average, as in Yin (2016), or whether we use the Fama-French or Fung-Hsieh factor models.


IV.A.2   Fund Size and Inside Investment


   We next establish the strategic aspect of managerial investments in their own funds

through analyzing the role of size and inside investment. As a reminder, our framework

                                             15
hypothesizes that a key mechanism driving the superior performance of insider funds is

their smaller size, due to decreasing returns to scale in investment technologies.

   We confirm that insider funds tend to be smaller, in line with the mechanism of our

framework. In Table V, we regress the size of the fund against inside investment. In column

2 of Panel A, we focus on our matched dataset and find that an additional percent of inside

investment is associated with a fund that is smaller by $4­8 million. This relationship

persists when we examine a specification where the dependent variable is the log of assets

under management in columns 3­4.

   To address concerns about biases in the merged dataset, we retest this specification on

the Form ADV dataset only and present the results in Table V, Panel B. These specifications

use the field "Gross Asset Value" derived from fund-level information in Form ADV. Gross

asset value differs from assets under management in that it does not subtract out the value

of short positions from the portfolio, and so it overestimates true fund size. Despite the

limitations of this measure, using this field as a dependent variable enables us to avoid

losing observations on the merge between our Form ADV dataset and the commercial

hedge fund datasets. The results are very similar when not restricting on funds that merge

into commercial hedge fund datasets: we find in column 2 that within a firm, funds with

an additional percent of inside investment are around $10 million smaller in gross asset

value. These results provide additional support for our main hypothesis: inside investment

funds are smaller, suggesting that managers are less likely to hit the limits of the capacity

constraints of their investment strategy when their own private capital is deployed.

   We examine other possible determinants of inside investment, reporting the results

in Appendix Table A2. In this specification, we run a yearly panel regression of inside

investment against a variety of fund and firm characteristics. We begin in column 1 with

a regression of the percentage of fund assets attributable to investments by insiders and

related parties against a number of fund and firm characteristics without additional fixed

effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. We then add fixed effects for fund

inception year, firm, and year of observation.

                                             16
    The most robust correlate of inside investment remains fund size: high inside invest-

ment funds are smaller. We also find that leverage is negatively associated with inside

investment once we control for firm fixed effects. One interpretation to the risk expla-

nation is that skilled managers facing capacity constraints may simply prefer to avoid all

outside money (both debt and equity) in select funds, in which they prioritize allocations

of their own private capital. For this reason, they may simply prefer to avoid accepting

additional assets under management as reflecting debt claims.14

    There is weak evidence that fees--particularly performance fees--are associated with

higher inside investment, though this relationship is generally small in magnitude and not

statistically significant once we add firm fixed effects. Though our basic approach assumes

that managers and investors take fees as given, one possible reason to consider the en-

dogenous determination of fees might be that insiders use higher fees to further ration out

investors in funds with greater levels of inside investment. However, the key predictions

of our framework--that inside investment will be associated with higher post-fee alpha--

remains as long as we assume that managers cannot fully set fees to maximize all of the

investor surplus. Fees appear to be sticky, do not exhibit substantial cross-sectional or time-

series variation, and are not robustly associated with inside investment once we control for

other variables.


IV.B Capital Rationing and Inside Investment

    We next test whether GP capital is allocated into less-scalable funds and will be most

valuable when managers are able to also restrict outside capital entry into these funds. We

first consider how lagged excess returns relate to asset flows to funds.

    Figure V plots a non-parametric relationship between lagged returns and fund inflows

by funds with a greater or lesser degree of insider investment measured at a quarterly

frequency. Insider funds are defined as those with a greater-than sample average amount

of fraction of fund assets attributable to insiders.15
  14 We  thank a referee for making this point.
  15 For all flow-based analysis, we exclude eVestment from our sample due to unreliable NAV information
from this data provider.


                                                   17
    This figure illustrates that outsider funds exhibit a standard fund flow-performance

relationship as documented in prior research on hedge funds and mutual funds.16 How-

ever, insider funds demonstrate a different profile: insider funds that experience positive

excess returns do not exhibit as subsequently high inflows, consistent with the idea that

high-performing funds with greater insider capital manage funds operate closer to their

optimal size by restricting inflows by outsiders after positive returns.

    The fact that high-inside-investment funds do not attract higher inflows is strong evi-

dence in our setting against signaling-based explanations of the role of inside investment.

If personal stakes by managers were necessary to attract additional capital, we would ex-

pect that funds with greater inside investment might attract additional funds--particularly

when prior returns were high. Instead, we find that high-inside-investment funds do not

scale up as much as outsider funds when returns are high. These results point to a role

for moral-hazard explanations for why inside investment is associated with superior per-

formance.

    Additionally, we find little evidence that insider funds feature greater capital stability--

we do not see strong evidence that poor returns are followed by lower outflows among

insider funds relative to funds catering to outside capital. This evidence suggests that

insider funds are not characterized by a longer horizon to wait out poor returns, offering

funds a more patient source of capital, or the limits of arbitrage (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997).

    Table VI presents additional flow performance specifications to test possible signaling

explanations, as outlined in equation 8. The dependent variable in these specifications is the

percent flow, or an indicator whether inflows are positive. A variety of other controls are

included in these specifications.17 We find in column 1 that greater lagged excess returns

predict lower flows among funds with greater inside investment, suggesting that insider

funds do not accept as much flow in response to positive returns. Column 2 of this table

highlights the extensive margin and suggests that funds with greater inside investment are
   16 See Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Sirri and Tufano (1998), Getmansky, Liang, Schwarz, and Wermers

(2015).
   17 These include leverage, management fees, number of redemption days, high watermark, lagged flow,

and the log of gross asset value (lagged one year).


                                                   18
also much less likely to accept any additional inflows at all in response to past superior

performance.

   The remaining columns of this table expand our analysis to the other funds within the

family. We do so to test a broader class of signaling explanations--perhaps funds operate

certain "flagship" funds to an optimum scale in order to advertise returns. If this is true,

we might expect that returns do not predict flows for some high insider funds (because

managers are using these funds to advertise high returns)--but signaling stories would

predict that foregoing additional fee income today (to produce better returns for marketing)

should be followed up with higher inflows in the future, perhaps in other funds, generating

future fee income.

   In columns 3­4, we find little evidence that lagged excess returns drive flows to other

funds in the family, measured at either the extensive or the intensive margin (whether

inflows are positive). In columns 5­6, we restrict our attention to high ownership funds.

For this subset, as well, we find little evidence that high returns drive inflows to other

funds in our family. Investors appear to distinguish between different funds in the family

when allocating capital, and to preferentially increase flows only to the funds that directly

outperform. As a result, we do not find evidence for the idea that managers may want

to leave personal capital in some funds in order to signal their quality, thus driving flows

(and management fees) to other vehicles they manage. While this finding does not fully

rule out a signaling explanation for our results, the bulk of the evidence is more consistent

with a moral hazard view.

   To further explore the role of active capital rationing, we focus on a sample of funds

for which we are able to establish the role of managerial discretion in accepting capital. In

Table VII, we examine funds which are explicitly closed to outside investors as reported

by commercial databases. In columns 3­6 of this table, we find strong evidence that funds

that are closed to outside investors strongly outperform on a factor-adjusted basis. In these

specifications, we regress a dummy variable for funds open to investors against excess

returns measured using a four- or seven-factor model, finding that funds closed to outside

                                             19
investors outperform by 0.23­0.45% each month, corresponding to 2­4% a year in excess

returns.

   Funds which do not accept additional inflows are able to generate superior perfor-

mance. These excess returns suggest that outsiders would like to enter these funds and

are being actively rationed out of them. The presence of these funds, however, poses

a challenge for traditional views of delegated asset managers--why do managers forgo

management fees by not accepting outside investors into these funds?

   A potential resolution to this puzzle is suggested in columns 1­2 of Table VII. In these

specifications, we examine the relationship between inside investment and funds that are

open to investors. We find that funds which are closed to investors are substantially more

likely to have a greater concentration of inside investment.

   These results highlights managerial capital rationing as a mechanism to explain the

outperformance of insider funds. Managers restrict the participation of outsider investors

both on the intensive margin, but restricting inflows to insider funds that outperform, and

on the extensive margin, by prohibiting outsider capital entry entirely on some highly

outperforming funds. The superior performance of these insider funds does not drive

inflows to other funds within the family, which points to the role of moral hazard as a key

driver of the relationship between inside investment and fund returns.


IV.C Inside Investment and Fund Performance

   The analysis so far has analyzed how managers allocate private capital to funds with

more decreasing returns to scale and optimize the size of such funds. In this section,

we build on this analysis to explore the implications of this capital scaling on the returns

experienced by outside investors.


IV.C.1     Cross-Sectional Relation

   Our framework predicts that within a firm, funds with a greater proportion of inside

capital will outperform, because managers will allocate their least-scalable strategies to

                                             20
funds managing their money, and further will internalize the capacity constraints of the

investment strategy when accepting new capital. Funds with greater inside capital retain

greater alpha, in equilibrium, because managers maximize profits by not accepting addi-

tional outside capital beyond the capacity limit of the investing strategy.

    In our main specifications, we use a two-step approach to control more closely for fund

factor exposures. We analyze the role of inside investment on risk-adjusted returns. Panel

A of Table VIII presents a panel specification, using as the key regressor the percent of a

fund's asset under management that can be attributed to insider investment in the prior

year against excess returns. In columns 1­3, we measure excess returns using a seven-

factor model in the first stage, and we show the results of a second-stage regression of

inside investment against excess returns. Columns 4­6 measure excess returns using the

Fama-French and Carhart Four-factor model instead.18

    Specifications (1) and (4) in this table shows impact of lagged inside investment on

excess returns, including a control only for size. Specifications (2) and (5) add controls

for fund characteristics (fund inception year and strategy), as well as a firm fixed effect.

This ensured we are comparing two funds within the same fund family. Both sets of

specifications suggest large positive, and statistically significant effects of inside investment

on fund performance. Our preferred specifications, in columns (3) and (6), replace the

fund controls and the firm fixed effect with a fund fixed effect. This controls for all fund-

invariant characteristics; using the time-series variation in inside investment within funds.

Our estimates in that column suggest that a fund with a 1% increase in inside investment

experiences a 0.54­0.66 basis point higher excess return per month, depending on whether

we use the Fama-French and Carhart or the Fung-Hsieh factor correction.

    Scaling our results, we find a 1.4­1.7% increase in alpha per year for a fund with a

standard deviation increase (22%) in the amount of inside investment relative to another

fund in the same firm with similar characteristics in the same year. These results are
   18 To better understand the underlying risk exposure behind these numbers, in Appendix Figures B.2 and

B.3 we plot estimated factor exposures for both sets of models; meanwhile, Appendix Figure B.4 shows the
correlation between risk factors and inside investment.


                                                   21
both economically and statistically significant and suggest a strong importance for internal

investment as a predictor of cross-sectional fund performance. The larger magnitude and

significance of results when controlling for both firm and fund fixed effects suggests the

importance of discretionary fund allocation by insiders: there is high dispersion of fund

returns within firms in our sample, and insiders choose which investment strategies to

pursue for which funds, as well as which funds to invest in. Our results suggest that inside

capital is more likely to be deployed in funds that outperform others within the family.

    We also find a strong role for inside investment in Panel B of Table VIII, in which we

examine the gross amount of inside investment, rather than the fractional amount, while

also controlling for size and other fund-level characteristics. These results make a series of

sample restrictions outlined in the section above.19

    In a robustness Table A4, we also examine a Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regression.

In this specification, as outlined above, we do not control for firm or year fixed effects.

However, we also find comparable results in these specifications across both the seven-

factor and four-factor models, illustrating the robustness of our result: that greater inside

investment is associated with superior performance.


IV.C.2    Event Study: Skimming

    The results from the previous section provide strong evidence of a role for insider

investment in driving fund returns. This raises the possibility that investments by insiders

are a critical component of the earnings for managers, alongside management and incentive

fees. Further, it is possible that fund managers may seek to further take advantage of this

relationship by steering clients into lower-performing funds.

    We explore this possibility in Figure VI, which conducts an event study in the aftermath

of the creation of a new fund among firms which previously only had one fund. The

creation of an additional fund presents two possibilities for fund managers: (i) they can
   19 To test for robustness of these restrictions, in Appendix Table A3 we include funds with 0 or 100% inside

investment. We find comparable results in these samples. We have also verified, in results available upon
request, that our results hold using a value-weighted measure.


                                                      22
either keep their internal capital invested in the original fund, using the new fund to attract

new capital, or (ii) they can shift their own capital to the new fund, and market the original

fund to investors. If the amount of insider capital is an important determinant of fund

performance, we expect different fund performance in the original fund under the two

cases. If managers are shifting their capital outside of the fund, we expect the performance

of the original fund to deteriorate, since managers are no longer as invested in success

of the fund. If, on the other hand, managers keep their capital in the original fund, the

performance of the original fund should remain strong.

    To test this possibility, we focus on all cases in which a hedge fund which previously

only operated one fund opens a new, second, fund. We isolate two cases: one in which

the new fund has less internal investment than the original, the new fund has "low inside

investment," and another in which the new fund has more internal investment than the

original. We plot cumulative returns of the original fund for the two-year window both

before and after the fund creation date. We track the returns on the original fund to avoid

the issue of incubation bias (Evans, 2010) which would be posed by analyzing the returns

of the newly-generated fund.

    Our results suggest that fund performance is relatively similar before the event date

for the original fund, regardless of whether the firm subsequently creates a new fund with

high or low internal investment. Differences grow more pronounced in the aftermath of

fund creation. We find that when the new fund has "low inside investment"--suggesting

that managers keep their internal capital in the original fund--fund performance suffers

relative to when the newly formed fund has "high inside investment." We expect to see

this difference because managers are more invested in the success of the initial fund if their

capital remains deployed in the fund. If their own capital has moved to a different fund,

performance tends to suffer in the window after fund creation.20

    Though these results are not fully conclusive, they are suggestive of the possibility

of "skimming" motives on the part of fund managers. If managers are able to shift their
   20 Ina difference-in-difference regression, the interacted term of High InsidePost has a coefficient of 0.969
and a standard error of 0.214, which is significant at the 1% level.


                                                      23
internal investments across funds within the same family, they seem to be able to focus their

investments on successful funds, while steering outside capital into the lower-performing

funds. These results provide additional context to our discussion of mechanisms in Section

II and previous empirical results suggesting that active decisions made by fund managers

regarding fund creation and capital deployment play a role in determining returns for

outside investors.

   To be clear, this analysis does not identify whether this is due to insiders having better

information on which fund managers can outperform relative to outsiders, or because

managers devote more effort when greater amounts of personal capital are on the line.

Despite the multiple possible explanations, we emphasize that our result provides novel

evidence on the role of inside investment in shaping fund performance as new funds are

created.


IV.D     Robustness Tests


   The previous results are subject to several important caveats. Firstly, while these results

suggest that fund-level inside investment predicts superior excess returns, the relationship

might not be causal. It may well be that our measure of inside investment is a proxy for

other fund-level characteristics. Another important caveat is that we are not able to fully

control for whether our results are driven by some element of risk or instead result from

agency conflicts within the firm. Despite our attempts to control for risk using the bench-

mark fund factors, it is also possible that the outperformance of high inside-investment

funds occurs due to a novel risk factor. To further analyze the mechanisms driving our

main result, we examine fund decisions along other dimensions.


IV.D.1     Alternative Risks Explanation


   One possible caveat to our analysis is that superior performance in insider funds may

reflect uncontrolled risk exposures. To account for this, we explore two other measures of



                                             24
liquidity and tail risk, as emphasized in the hedge fund industry (see Teo (2011), Agarwal,

Arisov, and Naik (2015), and Agarwal, Ruenzi, and Weigert (2017)).

   In Panel A of Figure VII, we explore the relationship between our measure of inside

investment and the Getmansky, Lo, and Makarov (2004) liquidity measure. This approach

uses an indication of autocorrelation in returns to estimate the extent to which return

series are smoothed, hence providing a measure of asset liquidity, with higher numbers

indicate greater asset liquidity. While we cannot reject equality across the distribution of

inside investment, we find that, if anything, funds with lower inside investment have lower

values of the smoothed index--indicating that their holdings have a higher autocorrelation,

suggestive that they are holding less liquid instruments. Despite the imprecision, we can

rule out the possibility that high inside investment funds are holding less liquid securities,

at least as judged by the autocorrelation of returns using this metric.

   In Panel B of Figure VII, we explore an alternate measure of performance--the max-

imum drawdown. This measures the greatest percentage loss the fund has experienced,

relative to the maximum asset value, thus providing an estimate of tail risk. We plot aver-

age maximum drawdown for funds by each percentage of inside investment, and we also

find no statistically significant relationship between inside investment and tail risk. How-

ever, there is a slight positive relationship between the extent of the maximum drawdown

and inside investment--which could potentially suggest that hedge fund managers prefer

to take risks with their own private capital which yield excess return in exchange for a

small probability of extreme losses. Despite the plausibility of this mechanism, we empha-

size that we find little statistically robust evidence that high inside investment funds are

systematically engaging in strategies characterized by greater tail risk.


IV.D.2   Heterogenous Treatment Effects


   As suggested by Getmansky, Liang, Schwarz, and Wermers (2015), investment styles

face different capacity constraints. If capacity constraints are driving our main effect,

we would also expect a heterogenous treatment effect across different investment styles.

                                             25
Specifically, investment styles that face larger capacity constraint frictions would have a

stronger relationship between inside investments and excess returns.

    Testing the relationship between inside investment and excess returns, we bucket by

investment styles and present the results in Figure VIII, as in column 2 of Panel A Table

VIII. Panel A of this figure plots the coefficient of inside investment against excess return

by fund categories, as measured in our set of commercial hedge fund datasets. The main

effects are driven by funds that engage in specialist absolute return strategies, arbitrage

strategies, and equity funds. Within equity funds, in Panel B, the effects are driven by

long­short funds. These fund strategies also plausibly feature capacity constraints in their

investment strategies. By contrast, effects are insignificant among fund-of-funds and CTAs,

which are typically associated with greater capacity.

    We additionally test our main result across the distribution of inside investment. As

shown by the quantile regression in Figure B.5 in the Appendix, our results are largely

being driven by funds with higher levels of inside investment: those funds for which

inside capital provides a substantial component of the capital base, for which we expect

to see the highest-powered incentives.21 In Appendix Table A6 we examine our basic

regression across different fund size levels, finding significant effects for the top two fund

size quantiles, corresponding to fund sizes of at least $126 million.22


IV.D.3    Mechanical Capital Contributions


    Next, we examine the possible mechanical relationship between capital contributions

from fee income. In Appendix Table A5, we first impute a "mechanical" component of per-

sonal capital contributions derived from rolling over prior fee income from the observed

   21 Our findings are weaker if we exclude high inside-investment funds from our sample. When we impose

a $500m cutoff and restrict to funds with inside investment of < 50%, we find similar results as in the analysis
in Kruttli, Monin, and Watugala (2019) based on a linkage of Form PF-ADV. However, our focus is on the
larger universe of hedge funds, including those smaller funds not required to file Form PFs and those funds
with substantial inside investment stakes.
   22 We also examine our results separately for funds with inception years prior to 2011 and funds started

afterwards, examining the hypothesis that funds originated more recently might be more subject to signaling
effects. We do not find evidence for a statistically significant difference between these two groups.


                                                      26
inside investment, attributing the residual as reflective of managers' discretionary capital

contributions. We find that even after subtracting this mechanical inside investment po-

tentially resulting from rolled over fees, the discretionary component remains a large and

statistically significant driver of fund returns.


IV.D.4   Firm-Level Ownership


   We also investigate the implications of dispersion in firm-level ownership and its re-

lation with fund-level inside investments. As shown in the Appendix, Table A7, column

3 suggests that inside investment at the fund level remains a significant predictor of ex-

cess returns, even when controlling for measures of firm-level ownership. In addition to

fund-level inside investment, we find that the number of equity owners, as a measure of

the dispersion in a hedge fund family's ownership structure, negatively predicts excess

returns. While this result would be consistent with the idea that dispersion in a firm's

equity structure is a sign of agency frictions and internal firm conflict, other explanations

might also explain the relationship between the dispersion in firm-level equity ownership

and fund performance. Despite the limitations of our measures of firm-level equity, we

emphasize that our paper is the first to our knowledge to examine measures of insider

capital allocations for a comprehensive sample of hedge funds at both the level of fund

allocation as well as firm-level equity contributions.


IV.D.5   Market Timing of Fund Managers


   An alternate and complementary mechanism in explaining our main result, that greater

insider investment predicts higher excess returns, is that managers have superior private

information about the abilities of funds than do outside investors, and so time the market

by deploying personal capital to these funds. To test this hypothesis, we estimate the

following specification in Table IX:


                  ait = b InsiderIn f lowi,t   1! t   + gOutsiderIn f lowi,t   1! t   + # it .   (11)

                                                      27
   This specification tests whether changes in insider investment predict excess returns.

Our test finds that changes do not predict excess returns in either inside or outside flows.

While this test is not fully conclusive regarding the channel of superior inside information,

this result suggests that insiders do not appear to be able to time their capital allocation

decisions in ways that predicts future excess returns. Put differently, levels of inside invest-

ment, rather than changes in investment, predict future returns. In conjunction with the

results on fund flows and performance, this result is perhaps unsurprising: fund insiders

appear to frequently extract assets from their best-performing funds, rather than further

investing, in order to continue to operate funds further from their capacity constraint and

gain excess returns.



                                   V     Conclusions

   A hedge fund manager's ability to access and allocate capital to profitable--but highly

limited--investment opportunities within the funds they oversee is a substantial element of

fund manager earnings. However, the managers' discretion to choose which of their funds

to invest in, and the effect of their decisions on access to limited arbitrage opportunities,

has rarely been empirically explored.

   Our paper highlights the tension produced by the incentives resulting from inside in-

vestment. Firstly, we document the strategic nature of GP capital investments into their

own funds and find that managers invest in their least-scalable strategies. Secondly, we find

that managers also limit outsider capital access into their insider funds, sometimes closing

access to outside investors completely. The consequence of these managerial capital deci-

sions (on both outside and inside capital) is that insider funds substantially outperform--

but are offered on a limited basis to outside investors.

   From an outside investor's perspective, a positive feature of managers' having "skin

in the game" is the usual alignment of incentives that improves their returns. Funds with

higher internal investment have greater excess returns, even when we control for firm


                                              28
and fund fixed effects. They do so by taking on less leverage and less exposure to asset

illiquidity, suggesting that hidden risks are not driving this result. Our results are large

in magnitude, and they suggest that a fund with a one-standard-deviation increase in

inside investment relative to the mean will provide an additional 1.4­1.7% of excess returns,

annually.
   This improvement in return performance comes at the cost of reduced fund participa-

tion by outsiders. We find evidence consistent with the idea that greater inside investment

incentivizes managers to better manage the size-performance tradeoff in ways that crowds-

out outside capital. High-insider investment funds are less likely to accept inflows in

response to positive returns and are more likely to be closed to outside investors entirely.

Additionally, we find evidence for strategic capital allocation at the time of new fund cre-

ation. When internal assets are shifted to newly-created funds, the original fund tends to

underperform relative to the case when managerial commitments remain with the original

fund. However, high returns on insider funds do not drive inflows to other funds in the

family, suggesting that signaling motives cannot entirely explain our results. The joint re-

lationship between internal investment, fund flows, and performance suggests that funds

better manage capacity constraints when managers have personal capital at stake, leading

to superior returns at the expense of fewer managed investments.
   These results, taken as a whole, provide powerful support for our equilibrium model,

along the lines of Berk and Green (2004), that hedge funds face capacity constraints in

their operations, and differentially allocate capital across their funds to maximize profits,

depending on the mix of inside and outside capital. When funds rely on outside capital,

managers are compensated primarily from managerial fees and leave little value to outside

investors. Greater reliance on internal financing better aligns the incentives of managers

and outside investors, leading them to leave substantial "slack" in fund size and operate

strategies on at a smaller size, thereby receiving greater excess returns, even in a competi-

tive market--but at the cost of outsider investor participation.
   Our results contribute to the ongoing debates regarding the presence of managerial

alpha and financial rents. Many observers are puzzled at the apparently outsize rents

                                             29
earned by financial intermediaries such as hedge funds, even in the wake of apparently

strong competition and the role of fund inflows on diminishing returns. In turn, these

managerial rents have driven top-end wealth and income inequality (see Kaplan and Rauh

(2013)). We suggest that a possible reconciliation of these facts can be found in examining

the option that fund managers have of not only earning management and performance

fees, but also deploying their own capital in funds they manage.




                                            30
                                     References

Ackermann, Carl, Richard McEnally, and David Ravenscraft, 1999, The performance of
 hedge funds: Risk, return, and incentives, Journal of Finance 54, 833­874.

Agarwal, Vikas, Eser Arisov, and Narayan Naik, 2015, Volatility of aggregate volatility and
 hedge fund returns, Working Paper.

Agarwal, Vikas, Naveen Daniel, and Narayan Naik, 2009, Role of managerial incentives
 and discretion in hedge fund performance, Journal of Finance 64, 2221­2256.

Agarwal, Vikas, Stefan Ruenzi, and Florian Weigert, 2017, Tail risk in hedge funds: A
 unique view from portfolio holdings, Journal of Financial Economics 125, 610­636.

Berk, Jonathan, Jules van Binsbergen, and Binying Liu, 2017, Matching capital and labor,
  Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance in
  rational markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269­1295.

Berk, Jonathan B., and Jules H. van Binsbergen, 2017, Mutual funds in equilibrium, Work-
  ing Paper.

Bollen, Nicolas PB, and Veronika K Pool, 2008, Conditional return smoothing in the hedge
  fund industry, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 267­298.

Bollen, Nicolas PB, and Veronika K Pool, 2009, Do hedge fund managers misreport returns?
  evidence from the pooled distribution, Journal of Finance 64, 2257­2288.

Bris, Arturo, Huseyin Gulen, Padma Kadiyala, and P Raghavendra Rau, 2006, Good stew-
  ards, cheap talkers, or family men? the impact of mutual fund closures on fund man-
  agers, flows, fees, and performance, Review of Financial Studies 20, 953­982.

Brown, Stephen, William Goetzmann, Bing Liang, and Christopher Schwarz, 2008, Manda-
  tory disclosure and operational risk: Evidence from hedge fund registration, Journal of
  Finance 63, 2785­2815.

Burasachi, Andrea, Robert Kosowski, and Worrawat Sritrakul, 2014, Incentives and en-
  dogenous risk taking: A structural view on hedge fund alphas, Journal of Finance 69,
  2819­2870.

Carhart, Mark, 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
  57­82.

Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Jeffrey Kubik, 2004, Does fund size erode
 mutual fund performance? the role of liquidity and organization, American Economic
 Review 94, 1276­1302.

Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2008, Directors' ownership in the us mutual fund
 industry, Journal of Finance 63, 2629­2677.


                                            31
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to
 incentives, Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167­1200.

Evans, Richard, 2010, Mutual fund incubation, Journal of Finance 4, 1581­1611.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
  Journal of Finance 47, 427­465.

Fama, Eugene, and James MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
  Journal of Political Economy 607­636.

Fung, William, and David Hsieh, 2004, Hedge fund benchmarks: A risk-based approach,
  Financial Analysts Journal 60, 65­80.

Fung, William, David Hsieh, Narayan Naik, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2008, Hedge funds:
  Performance, risk, and capital formation, Journal of Finance 63, 1777­1803.

Getmansky, Mila, 2012, The life cycle of hedge funds: Fund flows, size, competition, and
 performance, The Quarterly Journal of Finance 2, 1250003.

Getmansky, Mila, Bing Liang, Christopher Schwarz, and Russ Wermers, 2015, Share re-
 strictions and investor flows in the hedge fund industry, Working Paper.

Getmansky, Mila, Andrew Lo, and Igor Makarov, 2004, An econometric model of serial
 correlation and illiquidity in hedge fund returns, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 529­
 609.

Ibert, Markus, Ron Kaniel, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Roine Vestman, 2017, Are mutual
  fund managers paid for investment skill?, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Jorion, Philippe, and Christopher Schwarz, 2014, The strategic listing decisions of hedge
  funds, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 49, 773­796.

Kaplan, Steven, and Joshua Rauh, 2013, It's the market: The broad-based rise in the return
  to top talent, Journal of Economic Perspectives 27, 35­56.

Kruttli, Mathias, Phillip Monin, and Sumudu Watugala, 2019, Investor concentration, flows,
  and cash holdings: Evidence from hedge funds, Working Paper.

Massa, Massimo, 2003, How do family strategies affect fund performance? when
 performance-maximization is not the only game in town, Journal of Financial Economics
 67, 249­304.

Ozik, Gideon, and Ronnie Sadka, 2015, Skin in the game versus skimming the game: Gov-
 ernance, share restrictions, and insider flows, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
 50, 1293­1319.

Patton, Andrew, and Tarun Ramdorai, 2013, On the high-frequency dynamics of hedge
  fund risk exposures, Journal of Finance 68, 597­635.

Patton, Andrew J, Tarun Ramadorai, and Michael Streatfield, 2015, Change you can believe
  in? hedge fund data revisions, The Journal of Finance 70, 963­999.

                                              32
Petersen, Mitchell A, 2009, Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Compar-
  ing approaches, Review of Financial Studies 22, 435­480.

Qiu, Judy, Leilei Tang, and Ingo Walter, 2016, Hedge fund incentives, management com-
  mitment and survivorship, Working Paper.

Ramadorai, Tarun, 2013, Capacity constraints, investor information, and hedge fund re-
  turns, Journal of Financial Economics 107, 401­416.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52,
  35­55.

Sialm, Clemens, and Mandy Tham, 2017, Spillover effects in mutual fund companies, Man-
  agement Science, forthcoming.

Sirri, Erik R, and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund flows, Journal of Finance
  53, 1589­1622.

Teo, Melvyn, 2009, Does size matter in the hedge fund industry?, Working paper, Singapore
  Management University .

Teo, Melvyn, 2011, The liquidity risk of liquid hedge funds, Journal of Financial Economics
  24­44.

Yan, Xuemin, 2008, Liquidity, investment style, and the relation between fund size and
  fund performance, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 741­767.

Yin, Chengdong, 2016, The optimal size of hedge funds: Conflict between investors and
  fund managers, Journal of Finance 71, 1857­1894.




                                             33
                                             100%




                   Cumulative Compensation
                                             75%




                                             50%




                                             25%




                                              0%
                                                    2012   2013   2014      2015   2016
                                                                     Date




                FIGURE I Decomposition of Earnings for Hedge Fund Managers

This figure distinguishes between three possible sources of hedge fund earnings--managerial fees
(blue), performance fees (green), and excess returns on privately invested capital (red). The sample
is restricted to funds for which all fee data are available, and the sample excludes eVestment (for
which we do not have accurate assets under management data). To compute management fees, we
multiply listed management fees for each fund against monthly assets under management invested
by outside investors (assuming that insiders do not pay fees). Performance fees are computed
assuming that all funds operate under a high-water mark which begins the first month for which
we observe each fund's performance. Stated performance fees are multiplied by the total raw return
(assuming no hurdle rate) on outsider fund investment. Insider returns are calculated based on each
fund's excess return from a Fung-Hsieh Seven-Factor model multiplied by the quantity of inside
investment in place within each fund.




                                                                  34
                                    20




                                    15



                   Merge Rate (%)
                                    10




                                     5




                                     0
                                             5, )
                                             0, )
                                             5, )
                                             0, )
                                             5, )
                                             0, )
                                             5, )
                                             0, )
                                             5, )
                                             0, )
                                             5, )
                                             0, )
                                             5, )
                                             0, )
                                             5, )
                                             0, )
                                             5, )
                                             0 )
                                             5, )
                                                  0]
                                                 5
                                          [ 1 10
                                          [ 1 15
                                          [ 2 20
                                          [ 2 25
                                          [ 3 30
                                          [ 3 35
                                          [ 4 40
                                          [ 4 45
                                          [ 5 50
                                          [ 5 55
                                          [ 6 60
                                          [ 6 65
                                          [ 7 70
                                          [ 7 75
                                          [ 8 80
                                          [ 8 85
                                          [ 9 90
                                         [ 9 , 95
                                               10
                                     0,
                                    [
                                           [




                                                               Insider Ownership (%)


            Panel A: Among ADV Hedge Funds, merge rate into Commercial Datasets



                                    12




                                     9
                   Merge Rate (%)




                                     6




                                     3




                                     0
                                            FR




                                                          YS




                                                                         T




                                                                                        M




                                                                                                  A
                                                                      EN




                                                                                                 EK
                                                                                        D
                                                        LA
                                           H




                                                                                       IS
                                                                    TM




                                                                                             R
                                                     C




                                                                                   C




                                                                                            EU
                                                    R




                                                                 ES
                                                  BA




                                                               EV




                                                                      Source


                                          Panel B: Merge Rate by Commercial Data Provider

                                                       FIGURE II Merge Details

This figure plots the merge rate between observations in Form ADV and those in hedge fund
commercial return datasets (outlined in the data section). All data are taken as of 2015. In Panel A,
we report the fraction of observations in the ADV dataset for which we find a merged counterpart
in the commercial return datasets, with the fraction reported for each 5-point interval of inside
investment. In Panel B, we report the merge rate as a fraction of the total funds listed in each of
the commercial hedge fund data providers. The order of the datasets reflects the sequential match
process--we first search for matches in HFR, then BarclayHedge, then eVestment, then CISDM, then
Eureka. For this reason, the match rate for each dataset
                                                 35      reflects a conditional match rate, given that
the fund did not merge in the previous dataset, and so our merge rates generally decrease as we
move across providers.
                        0.075

              Density


                        0.050




                        0.025




                        0.000
                                0      25             50            75         100
                                    % of Assets Invested by Self or Related

       Panel A: Distribution of Insider Investment Across Funds, Percentage of Total Assets




                        0.25



                        0.20



                        0.15
              Density




                        0.10



                        0.05



                        0.00
                                          15                      20
                                    Log AUM Invested by Self or Related

        Panel B: Distribution of Insider Investment Across Funds, Gross Inside Investment

              FIGURE III Distribution of Insider Investment from Merged Sample

This figure plots insider investment into hedge funds from the merged sample of hedge fund returns
and ADV forms. Panel A is a histogram of insider investment, with units of percent of total
investment. Insider investment displays a "dumbbell"
                                                  36       distribution. Panel B is a histogram of
log(Gross Asset Value) of insider investment across funds for the merged sample between ADV
and the commercial hedge fund datasets.
                         0.5



                                                                                      
                                                                                  
                         0.0                                       
                                                                                         

                                                                                                                             
                                                                      
          Interaction




                                                                                                                     
                                                    
                                   

                                                 
                                                                                                       

                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                    

                        -0.5




                        -1.0
                                           ty



                                                                 en




                                                                                  e




                                                                                                    y
                                   l




                                                                                                                     ue
                                Al




                                                                                                   eg
                                                                                  m
                                          ui



                                                              riv




                                                                                                                      l
                                                                                                                   va
                                                                                 co
                                         eq




                                                                                                  t
                                                                                               ra
                                                         td




                                                                             in




                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                              st



                                                                                                              tiv
                                                         en




                                                                            ed




                                                                                            ti-



                                                                                                              la
                                                       ev




                                                                         fix




                                                                                          ul



                                                                                                             re
                                                                                         m




                                Return Correction             Style-Adjusted             Fung-Hsieh          Fama-French


                               FIGURE IV Insider Investment Allocation by Fund Scale

This figure plots the coefficients from a regression estimating a decreasing returns to scale pa-
rameter interacted with an indicator for high investment funds. The specification, following Yin
(2016), regresses measures of excess return against a number of covariates: Excess Returni,t =
blog( AUMi,t 1 )  High Ownershipi,t 1 + controls + # i,t . Measures of excess return include the return
in excess of the style average (following Yin (2016)), as well as the Fama-French and Fung-Hsieh
factor models. Controls include log( AU Mt 1 ), log(total firm AU Mt 1 ), percent AUM Flowt 1!t ,
performance fee, management fee, highwater mark, log(level of minimum investment), redemption
period, fund age, whether the fund is open to new investment, and leverage. Further, we include
fixed effects for the firm, year, and strategy, clustering at the fund level. All flow and return mea-
sures are winsorized at the 1% level. The key parameter plotted is b, which captures the extent
to which high insider funds experience greater dilution of returns when more capital is deployed,
consistent with returns to scale which are more decreasing.




                                                                      37
                            50
         Flow (% of AUM)




                             0




                           -50




                                 -10                   0                        10
                                            Lagged Excess Return
                                       Ownership of Fund   Insider   Outsider

       FIGURE V Flow-Performance Relationship of Funds, Split by Insider Fund Status

This figure plots the density of the relationship between lagged excess return and contemporaneous
                                                                           AUM
                                                                           it    it  (1+r )· AUM
                                                                                       i,t 1
flow, measured quarterly. The flow measure is defined as Flowit =             AUMi,t 1       . Excess
returns are defined using the Fung-Hsieh Seven-Factor model. Funds are divided by the average
level of inside investment into insider funds (> 20.8% Inside Investment) and outsider funds. Grey
bars correspond to 95% confidence intervals. Flows are winsorized at a 1% level.




                                                  38
                             60
     Cumulative Return (%)




                             40




                             20




                              0

                                  -20                    0                      20
                                              Event Time (Month)
                                        Original Fund    High Skin   Low Skin

     FIGURE VI Event Study, Transition From One Fund to Multiple Funds, Within a Firm

This figure plots the net cumulative returns of a firm which launches an additional fund after
previously only having one. Event times correspond to months from the fund creation date. The
lines plot the cumulative performance of the original fund, with the red line tracking a fund in
which inside investment increases in the original fund after new fund creation (suggesting that
the newly created fund is marketed to outside investors). The blue line tracks the performance of
funds in which inside investment the original fund falls after new fund creation (suggesting that
the original fund is marketed to outside investors). The red line's post-fund creation rise in returns
indicates that fund performance improves when inside investment is strengthened in the fund. In
a difference-in-difference regression, the interacted term of High InsidePost has a coefficient of
0.969 and a standard error of 0.214, which is significant at the 1% level.




                                                    39
                                                     1.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   




                   Getmansky et al. (2004) Measure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                      

                                                     0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

                                                     0.50




                                                     0.25




                                                     0.00
                                                             0                                                               25                                                                    50                                                                         75                                                                      100
                                                                                                                                                   Inside Investment (%)

                                                                             Panel A: Liquidity and Inside Investment
                                                     1.00
                   Maximum Drawdown of Fund




                                                     0.75




                                                     0.50


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

                                                                                                                                                                                                            

                                                     0.25                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                     0.00
                                                             0                                                            25                                                                       50                                                                         75                                                                      100
                                                                                                                                                   Inside Investment (%)

                                                            Panel B: Maximum Drawdown and Inside Investment

                                                       FIGURE VII Alternative Risks and Inside Investment

This figure explores the relationship between alternate possible risks and inside investment. In
Panel A, we examine asset liquidity. To measure liquidity, we adopt the return smoothing measure
from Getmansky, Lo, and Makarov (2004). For each percent of inside investment, we compute the
average normalized measure of liquidity risk, as highlighted in that paper. Lower measures cor-
respond to greater autocorrelation, indicative of less liquidity; higher numbers associate with less
autocorrelation, associated with more liquidity (or a worse fit). In Panel B, we plot the distribution
of maximum drawdowns (the greatest percentage loss in the fund's history, relative to the maxi-
mum attained asset value) across inside investment, so higher numbers indicate a greater average
percentage loss. For each percent of inside investment, we plot the average max drawdown for
funds in that bucket.

                                                                                                                                                                                 40
                             0.008




                  Estimate

                             0.004




                             0.000
                                                ue




                                                                       y




                                                                                     en




                                                                                                     ty




                                                                                                                        e




                                                                                                                                  F
                                                                      eg




                                                                                                                        m




                                                                                                                                 FO
                                                                                                 ui
                                                                                  riv
                                               l
                                            va




                                                                                                                       co
                                                                                                eq
                                                                     t
                                                                  ra




                                                                             td




                                                                                                                   in
                                            e




                                                                 st
                                         tiv




                                                                             en




                                                                                                                  ed
                                                                ti-
                                      la




                                                                           ev




                                                                                                               fix
                                                         ul
                                     re




                                                        m




                                                                                          Strategy


                                                                 Panel A: Effects by Fund Type

                                 0.010




                                 0.005
                     Estimate




                                 0.000




                                -0.005
                                                            t




                                                                                  or




                                                                                                           r




                                                                                                                            ng
                                                        or




                                                                                                          he
                                                                              ct




                                                                                                                            lo
                                                        h




                                                                                                          ot
                                                                             se
                                                     -s
                                                   ng
                                                lo




                                                                                           Strategy




                                     Panel B: Effects by Fund Type among Equity Funds

               FIGURE VIII Inside Investment Return Relationship by Fund Type

This figure presents a robustness analysis of the specification in column 1 of Panel A of Table
VIII, which is a panel regression of inside investment against factor-corrected returns. This figure
plots the coefficient on inside investment, corresponding to the predictive value of that variable on
excess returns, run in a separate regression for each fund category. Funds are categorized based on
descriptions found in commercial hedge fund datasets, as listed in the Data section. The error bars
indicate a 95% confidence interval for the estimated coefficients.


                                                                                          41
                            TABLE I Summary Statistics: ADV Data

This summary table describes data on investment advisors taken from Form ADV in 2016. Data
is only taken from funds which are registered as hedge funds; firms must have at least one hedge
fund and a minimum level of assets of $20 million. Panel A describes firm level information at the
level of the management company. Panel B describes information available at the level of individual
funds. Note that some assets may be double-counted due to the inclusion of fund of funds. Inside
Investment corresponds to ownership by management or related parties, the key variable explored
in this paper.

                                  Panel A: Firm Level Variables

      Names                             Total            Median      Mean         Std.Dev
      Custodial AUM ($m)                8, 525, 754.0    775.5       6, 458.9     28, 332.9
      Regulatory AUM ($m)               18, 084, 715     1, 166.7    13, 700.5    72, 114.3
      Discretionary AUM ($m)            17, 518, 589     1, 030.8    13, 271.7    71, 040.1
      Non-Discretionary AUM ($m)        566, 126         0           428.9        2, 585.1
      Number of Employees               139, 264         13          57.2         199.0
           Support Staff                81, 033          5           33.3         132.9
           Advisors                     58, 231          7           23.9         75.6
      Number of Firms                   2, 433
                                  Panel B: Fund Level Variables

   Names                                     Total           Median       Mean      Std.Dev
   Number of Hedge Funds                     9, 763
   Gross Asset Value ($m)                    6, 177, 174.0   127.8        632.7     3, 060.7
   Gross Assets, Inside Investment ($m)      772, 663        3.8          79.1      553.2
   Gross Assets, Fund of Funds ($m)          1, 160, 354.0   0            118.9     873
   Gross Assets, Non-US Investors ($m)       2, 492, 344.0   4.7          255.3     1, 698.6
   Number of Owners                                          19           66.8      544.3
   Minimum Investment ($m)                                   1            7.5       70.3
   Inside Investment (%)                                     3            16.7      28.6
   Investment by Fund of Funds (%)                           0            15.9      29.5
   Non-US Investors (%)                                      4            30.7      39.0
   Number of Fund of Funds                   2, 322




                                                42
                           TABLE II Summary Statistics: Merged Data

This summary table describes data on the primary dataset based on a merged dataset of Form ADV
and commercial hedge fund data providers (Eureka, HFR, BarclaysHedge, eVestment, and CISDM).
Data is taken as of 2016. Data is only taken from funds which are registered as hedge funds; firms
must have at least one hedge fund and a minimum level of assets of $20 million. Panel A describes
firm level information at the level of the management company. Panel B describes information
available at the level of individual funds. Note that some assets may be double-counted due to
the inclusion of fund of funds. Panel B reports additional variables not included in Table 1. Inside
Investment corresponds to ownership by management or related parties, the key variable explored
in this paper.

                                  Panel A: Firm Level Variables

       Names                             Total                Median      Mean       Std.Dev
       Custodial AUM                     1, 195, 040.0        591         5, 218.5   16, 444.6
       Regulatory AUM                    1, 759, 749.0        1, 022      7, 684.5   27, 716
       Discretionary AUM                 1, 750, 849          952.9       7, 645.6   27, 633.2
       Non-Discretionary AUM             8, 899.7             0           38.9       195.1
            Number of Employees          16, 665              12          38.8       100.4
            Number of Support Staff      9, 941               5           23.1       72.4
       Advisors                          6, 724               6           15.6       29.9
       Number of Firms                   504
                                  Panel B: Fund Level Variables

    Names                                        Total           Median      Mean     Std.Dev
    Number of Hedge Funds                        720
    Gross Asset Value ($m)                       497, 625.5      88.3        278.3    708.9
         Equity                                  219, 868.9
         Relative Value                          122, 522.7
         Fund of Funds                           53, 330.4
         Multi-Strategy                          55, 526.5
         Fixed Income                            29, 912.7
         CTA                                     26, 240.1
         Event Driven                            22, 403.2
         Other                                   20, 527.9
         Options                                 623.5
    Gross Assets, Inside Investment ($m)         61, 380.4       11.9        41.5     108.8
    Gross Assets, Fund of Funds ($m)             73, 352.2       0           45.8     200.8
    Gross Assets, Non-US Investors ($m)          176, 673.4      0.2         112.5    400.9
    Number of Owners                                             39          162.3    865.0
    Minimum Investment ($m)                                      1           1.1      3.3
    Inside Investment (%)                                        10          22.8     27.1
    Investment by Fund of Funds (%)                              0           9.0      16.7
    Non-US Investors (%)                                         1           24.6     36.2
    Management Fee                                               1.5         1.5      0.5
    Performance Fee                                              20          18.2     5.4
    Leverage Ratio                                               1.1         1.5      0.9
                                                  43
                              TABLE III Related Party Information

This table illustrates the identity of related parties, as listed in form ADV in 2016. The rows need
not sum to one: firms select as many options as needed to identify all related parties.

                        Statistic                        Mean        SD
                        Sponsor of GP                     0.741    0.438
                        Other Investment Advisor          0.501    0.500
                        Commodity Pool                    0.401    0.490
                        Broker/Dealer                     0.160    0.367
                        Insurance                         0.065    0.246
                        Sponsor of LP                     0.046    0.210
                        Bank or Thrift                    0.045    0.207
                        Trust                             0.042    0.201
                        Pension                           0.027    0.161
                        Accountant                        0.025    0.156
                        Real Estate                       0.024    0.153
                        Lawyer                            0.019    0.138
                        Municipal Advisor                 0.013    0.113
                        Futures Merchant                  0.009    0.094
                        Swap Dealer                       0.007    0.081
                        Swap Participant                  0.001    0.026
                        Share Supervised Persons          74%
                        Share Office                      59%




                                                44
                     TABLE IV Summary Statistics of Dependent Variables

This table presents the summary statistics of key dependent variable used throughout the paper.
Each panel summarizes the 10th, 25th, 50th, and 90th percentile, as well as the mean and standard
deviation. Years include 2011 through 2016, inclusive. Panel A summarizes the excess return
imputed by a Fama-French and Carhart model. Panel B summarizes the excess return imputed
by the a Fung-Hsieh model. Panel C summarizes the percent asset flow, computed quarterly, and
winsorized at the 1% level. Panel D summarizes the percent of inside investment at the fund level.

                     Panel A: Alpha from Fama-French and Carhart Model

             Year     10%       25%     50%      75%     90%        Mean     St.Dev
             2011     -3.73     -1.68   -0.16    1.00    2.49       -0.46     3.25
             2012     -2.28     -0.79    0.31    1.31    2.68        0.24     2.53
             2013     -2.28     -0.85    0.18    1.13    2.49        0.14     2.56
             2014     -2.55     -0.96    0.14    1.17    2.71        0.14     3.25
             2015     -2.77     -1.09    0.13    1.25    2.90        0.16     3.26
             2016     -3.36     -1.58   -0.02    1.15    2.77       -0.26     3.13

                              Panel B: Alpha from Fung-Hsieh Model

              Year     10%      25%     50%     75%      90%        Mean     St.Dev
              2011    -3.49     -1.17    0.27    1.69    3.94       0.18      3.72
              2012    -2.59     -0.84    0.37    1.54    3.18       0.32      2.85
              2013    -1.51     -0.20    0.84    2.18    3.87       1.04      2.73
              2014    -2.81     -0.97    0.40    1.82    3.73       0.45      3.49
              2015    -3.48     -1.24    0.28    1.69    3.76       0.23      3.57
              2016    -3.79     -1.25    0.31    1.73    3.69       0.07      3.54

                                 Panel C: Percent Flow, Quarterly

            Year      10%       25%      50%     75%      90%       Mean      St.Dev
            2011      -9.66     -4.11   -0.44    1.29    6.49        -1.13     10.83
            2012     -10.55     -3.45   -0.07    2.96    11.92        1.04     14.78
            2013      -9.26     -2.93    0.24    4.09    17.89        2.86     17.21
            2014      -7.66     -2.56    0.02    3.31    12.38        1.59     14.53
            2015      -8.49     -3.12   -0.51    1.49    9.62         0.42     12.20
            2016     -10.08     -3.82   -0.57    1.59     8.58       -0.32     12.42

                              Panel D: Inside Investment, Percentage

              Year     10%      25%     50%     75%     90%      Mean        St.Dev
              2011       2        4       9      22      46      17.35       20.87
              2012       2        4      10      23      50      17.89       21.04
              2013       2        4      10      25      54      19.11       21.59
              2014       2        5      11      26      58      20.15       22.48
              2015       2        5      11      25      58      20.19       22.72
              2016       2        5      11      25
                                                45       59      20.23       22.74
                            TABLE V Inside Investment and Fund Size

This table shows the panel regression between size and inside investment. Panel A conducts anal-
ysis on the matched sample connecting Form ADV with commercial hedge fund datasets (where
the key dependent variable is assets under management, taken from the commercial hedge fund
datasets, reported as the log of AUM or in millions). Panel B performs analysis on the complete
ADV dataset, using Gross Asset Value as the dependent variable. All specifications regress the frac-
tion of the fund which consists on insider investment against a measure of size, measured yearly.
Across all specifications, columns 1 and 3 perform this regression with no additional controls;
columns 2 and 4 add firm and year fixed effects. Standard errors are in parenthesis.

                                Panel A: Results on Matched Dataset

                                                   AUM (in $m)                 Log(AUM)
                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)
            Inside Investment (Percent)       3.82            7.86          0.01        0.02
                                              (0.24)          (1.20)       (0.001)     (0.003)

            Year FE                           No               Yes          No          Yes
            Firm FE                           No               Yes          No          Yes
            Fund Controls                     No               Yes          No          Yes
            Dataset                         Matched          Matched      Matched     Matched
            Observations                     2,633            2,633        2,633       2,633
            R2                                0.01            0.88         0.02        0.86



                                   Panel B: Results on ADV Dataset

                                          Gross Asset Value (in $m)        Log(Gross Asset Value)
                                            (1)               (2)             (3)          (4)
          Inside Investment (Percent)      6.34              10.14           0.01         0.02
                                           (0.89)            (1.12)         (0.001)      (0.001)

          Year FE                            No               Yes            No            Yes
          Firm FE                            No               Yes            No            Yes
          Fund Controls                      No               Yes            No            Yes
          Dataset                          ADV               ADV            ADV           ADV
          Observations                     35,960            35,960         35,960        35,960
          R2                                0.002             0.57           0.03          0.57
          Note:                                                         p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01




                                                        46
                                                          TABLE VI Fund Flow Analysis

     This table summarizes the relationship between fund flows and quarterly excess returns. Columns 1 and 2 relate excess returns to fund flows
     of the same funds. Columns 3 through 6 relate excess returns to fund flows of funds within the same family, referred to as complementary
     funds. Columns 5 and 6 restrict their analysis to funds where the inside investment is greater than the median level. Firm, inception year,
     calendar year, and strategy fixed effects are included in all regressions.

                                  Flow Percent     Flow Percent >0     Complementary       Complementary        Complementary        Complementary
                                                                        Flow Percent       Flow Percent >0       Flow Percent        Flow Percent >0
                                       (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)                  (6)
     High Ownership                    0.0073           0.0295                0.0033             0.0201
                                     (0.0079)          (0.0331)             (0.0121)            (0.0403)

     Excess Returnt   1             0.1880             0.7927                 0.1365             0.3876              0.0121                0.3650
                                     (0.0509)           (0.2714)            (0.1238)            (0.2340)            (0.1206)             (0.2230)

     Excess Returnt   2             0.1780             0.7715                0.2110              0.7776               0.1350               0.6218
                                     (0.0639)           (0.2541)            (0.1216)            (0.3324)            (0.1275)             (0.4062)




47
     Excess Returnt   3             0.2122             0.7774                0.1875              0.7340               0.1188              0.5208
                                     (0.0685)           (0.2081)            (0.0967)            (0.2971)            (0.0810)             (0.3019)

     Excess Returnt   1 Insider        0.0523            0.1669
                                     (0.0713)          (0.2577)

     Excess Returnt   2 Insider        0.0960           0.4574
                                     (0.0900)          (0.1960)

     Excess Returnt   3 Insider       0.0056             0.1894
                                     (0.0792)          (0.3437)

     Firm FE                            Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
     Inception Year FE                  Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
     Year FE                            Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
     Strategy FE                        Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
     High Ownership                     No                No                  No                  No                   Yes                  Yes
     Observations                     4,918             4,918                2,130              2,130                 1,133                1,133
     R2                               0.2563            0.2612              0.2325              0.2163               0.4750               0.2462
     Note:                                                                                                                p<0.1;    p<0.05;  p<0.01
                             TABLE VII Open for New Investments

This table shows the panel regressions between fund and whether they are open for new invest-
ments. The analysis is based on the HFR, Eurekahedge, and BarclayHedge datasets. Columns 1 and
2 relate percent of inside investment to the openness of a fund. Columns 3 and 4 relate the open-
ness of the fund to monthly excess returns, as measured by the Fung-Hsieh Seven-Factors model.
Columns 5 and 6 similarly show results with and without controls for the Fama-French and Carhart
model.

                            Open for Investors          Excess Returns (FH)         Excess Returns (FFC)
                             (1)           (2)           ( 3)          (4)            (5)             (6)
Inside Investment (%)      0.0013        0.0021
                          (0.0003)       (0.0003)

Open for Investors                                      0.2291       0.2186        0.4463           0.3141
                                                       (0.0971)      (0.0746)      (0.0660)         (0.0706)

Fixed Effects                No            Yes           No            Yes            No            Yes
Log(Fund Size)               No            Yes           No            Yes            No            Yes
Sample:                    Yearly        Yearly       Monthly       Monthly        Monthly       Monthly
Observations                1,977         1,977        12,065        12,065         12,065        12,065
R2                         0.0069        0.1385        0.0007        0.0168         0.0034        0.0130
Note:                                                                            p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01




                                                 48
                 TABLE VIII Relationship between Inside Investment and Excess Return

This table shows the panel regression between the excess monthly return of an investment advisor
and insider investment. Panel A measures inside investment as a percentage of fund assets, while
Panel B uses the log of gross inside investment. The first three columns in both panels regress
against the Fung-Hsieh Seven Factor measure of excess return, while the last three columns regress
against the Fama-French and Carhart Four-Factor model, as outlined in equations 4 and 5 in the
text. A size control is always included. Specifications (1) and (4) include only size and three lags of
excess return. Specifications (2) and (5) add Firm fixed effects, month fixed effects, and fund level
controls (age of fund inception and strategy type). Specifications (3) and (6) include size, three lags
of excess return, and a fund fixed-effect. Standard errors are clustered monthly.

                                       Panel A Baseline Specification

                                           FH Excess Returns                          FFC Excess Returns
                                  (1)            (2)              (3)          ( 4)           ( 5)           (6)
Inside Investment (Percent)     0.0025        0.0061           0.0066       0.0021         0.0045      0.0054
                                (0.0010)       (0.0013)         (0.0022)    (0.0009)        (0.0013)   (0.0021)

Returni,t    1                   0.0066         0.0087           0.0022    0.1027          0.0638      0.0577
                                (0.0384)       (0.0271)         (0.0267)    (0.0206)        (0.0221)   (0.0225)

Returni,t    2                    0.0014         0.0140           0.0204     0.0334          0.0159         0.0097
                                (0.0331)       (0.0235)         (0.0228)    (0.0238)        (0.0227)       (0.0225)

Returni,t    3                   0.0341          0.0126           0.0185     0.0138           0.0132         0.0188
                                (0.0369)       (0.0272)         (0.0271)    (0.0202)        (0.0193)       (0.0194)

Month Fixed Effects                No             Yes             Yes          No              Yes           Yes
Fund Level Controls                No             Yes             No           No              Yes           No
Adviser Fixed Effects              No            Firm           Fund           No             Firm         Fund
Observations                     37,958         37,958          37,958       37,958          37,958        37,958
R2                               0.0020         0.1875          0.1941       0.0212          0.0843        0.0925

                                   Panel B: Gross Inside Investment

                                          FH Excess Returns                           FFC Excess Returns
                                 (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)             (6)
 Inside Investment (Gross)     0.0406         0.1010           0.1288      0.0246         0.0811       0.1165
                               (0.0195)       (0.0227)         (0.0366)    (0.0144)        (0.0228)     (0.0434)

 Returni,t   1                  0.0067         0.0088           0.0022     0.1028         0.0639       0.0576
                               (0.0384)       (0.0271)         (0.0275)     (0.0206)       (0.0221)    (0.0225)

 Returni,t   2                   0.0013         0.0139           0.0204     0.0335          0.0159      0.0096
                               (0.0331)       (0.0235)         (0.0235)    (0.0238)        (0.0227)    (0.0225)

 Returni,t   3                  0.0342          0.0126           0.0186     0.0139           0.0131      0.0189
                               (0.0369)       (0.0272)         (0.0272)    (0.0202)        (0.0193)    (0.0194)

 Month Fixed Effects              No             Yes             Yes          No              Yes            Yes
 Fund Level Controls              No             Yes             No           No              Yes            No
 Adviser Fixed Effects            No            Firm           Fund           No             Firm          Fund
 Observations                   37,958         37,958          37,958       37,958          37,958         37,958
 R2                             0.0019         0.1874          0.1941       0.0211          0.0842         0.0925
                                                          49
                            TABLE IX Fund Flows and Performance

This table shows the panel regression between size and flows by insiders and outsiders. "Insider
Flow" corresponds to changes in capital provided by insiders and related parties, while "Outsider
Flow" captures changes in capital provision by all other investors. Changes in both types of flow
are measured annually with the release of new ADV forms. Column 2 adds year fixed effects, and
column 3 adds firm fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the year level.


                                            (1)           (2)          (3)
                 Insider Flow (%)          0.00034      0.00025       0.00029
                                         (0.00023)    (0.00023)     (0.00039)

                 Outsider Flow (%)        0.00002      0.00003      0.00003
                                         (0.00002)    (0.00002)     (0.00002)

                 Size                       Yes         Yes          Yes
                 Year FE                    No          Yes          Yes
                 Firm FE                    No          No           Yes
                 Observations               228         228          228
                 R2                       0.00372     0.05192      0.11300
                 Note:                          p<0.1;  p<0.05;     p<0.01




                                               50
