                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE MARGINS OF TRADE

                                        Jonathan Eaton
                                       Ana Cecília Fieler

                                      Working Paper 26124
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26124


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




We thank Sam Kortum, Eduardo Morales, and David Weinstein for extremely valuable
suggestions. We also benefited from helpful comments at various presentations. Eaton gratefully
acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation under Grant Number 1426267. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jonathan Eaton and Ana Cecília Fieler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Margins of Trade
Jonathan Eaton and Ana Cecília Fieler
NBER Working Paper No. 26124
July 2019
JEL No. F11,F14

                                          ABSTRACT

We introduce quality differentiation and an extensive margin of products into a standard
quantitative, general equilibrium model of international trade. Both the quality and the quantity of
a product play a role in its contribution both to consumption and to production. The framework
allows bilateral trade to vary at the extensive and intensive margins and the intensive margin of
trade to vary at the quantity and unit-value margins. We estimate the parameters of the model
using bilateral data on trade flows and on unit values in trade. The model captures (i) the well-
documented increasing relation between unit values and both importer and exporter per capita
income and (ii) how the extensive margin rises with importer and exporter size. But, unlike other
contributions to the literature confronting these margins in international trade, our framework
delivers a standard gravity formulation for trade flows and standard measures of the gains from
trade apply.


Jonathan Eaton
Department of Economics
Pennsylvania State University
303 Kern Graduate Building
University Park, PA 16801
and NBER
jxe22@psu.edu

Ana Cecília Fieler
Yale University
Department of Economics
27 Hillhouse Ave
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
ana.fieler@yale.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26124
1       Introduction
Quantitative work in international trade has advanced on several fronts in the last two
decades. One line of research has developed global general equilibrium models to under-
stand the determinants of bilateral trade flows and their implications for welfare.1 Another
literature has delved into trade data to ask how total bilateral exports decompose into var-
ious margins, such as that between number of products (the extensive margin) and sales
per product (the intensive margin), and how sales per product decompose into quantity
and unit value.2 These studies have revealed several robust and intriguing regularities.
    While both lines of research have been extremely fruitful, they remain somewhat at
odds with each other. Capturing a complex world with a general equilibrium system
has required assumptions inconsistent with richer countries paying more for the same
product and richer countries charging more for the same product, two of the most robust
regularities to emerge from this second line of inquiry. Incorporating how trade volumes
break down into their extensive and intensive margins has also proved challenging for
general equilibrium modeling.
    This paper seeks to reconcile these two research fronts by developing a general equilib-
rium framework consistent with observed regularities in the margins of trade. The model
delivers the same aggregate relationships governing bilateral trade that emerge in a stan-
dard general equilibrium framework, in particular the Ricardian formulation of Eaton
and Kortum (2002) (henceforth EK), with a continuum of varieties, CES aggregation,
and perfect competition. Hence, at the level of total spending, our model delivers the
same observations as EK's.
    In line with previous work, we associate differences in unit values of a variety with
differences in its quality.3 We allow for two dimensions of quality, which we call vertical
and horizontal. Horizontal quality substitutes perfectly for quantity, and is valued equally
by all users of the variety, whether a household using the variety for final consumption
or a producer using the variety as an intermediate input. Vertical quality complements
quantity. As a buyer chooses to spend more on a variety, the increased spending is divided
between more effective quantity and higher vertical quality. The framework implies that
    1
     Early examples are Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003), using an Armington approach, Eaton and
Kortum (2002), whose approach is Ricardian, and quantitative papers building on Melitz (2003), such as
Chaney (2008) and Eaton et al. (2011).
   2
     Early contributions here are by Hummels and Klenow (2005), which we build on very directly, Schott
(2004), and Hallak (2006).
   3
     Aside from Hummels and Klenow (2005) and Hallak (2006), other authors making this connection
are Schott (2004), Khandelwal (2010), Hallak (2010), Hallak and Schott (2011), Baldwin and Harrigan
(2011), Hummels and Skiba (2004), Choi et al. (2009), Bekkers et al. (2012), and Atrianfar (2019).



                                                  1
a higher wage is associated with higher quality in both dimensions.
    First, a final consumer receiving a higher wage chooses to spend more on any variety,
and this higher spending divides into both a larger physical amount and a higher vertical
quality. A producer having to pay a higher wage seeks to equip her worker with more
intermediates. As she spends more on each variety of intermediate she also will seek both
more quantity and quality. Our model thus predicts that a buyer in a higher wage country
will spend more per unit and buy more units both for intermediate and for final uses.
    Second, we posit that a better equipped worker produces higher horizontal quality.
Hence our model implies that vertical quality rises with the wage of the buyer while
horizontal quality rises with the wage of the seller. Our model captures these relationships
very parsimoniously with two parameters that relate closely to the observed elasticities
of unit value with respect to importer and to exporter per capita income.
    A standard observation is that the ranges of products a country imports and exports
grows with its overall size. But the relationship between the extensive margin and GDP
is a nonlinear one. In particular, it dies out with importer size at quite a small level. Our
framework captures these features by introducing stochastic minimum shipping sizes.4
    We estimate the parameters of the model using data on trade flows, product varieties,
unit values, and country characteristics. We then simulate the model to show how it
can deliver decompositions of trade into the margins identified by Hummels and Klenow
(2005) (henceforth HK).
    Our conceptual framework applies to a range of situations beyond international trade.
It has implications, for example, for quantifying the role of quality improvement in eco-
nomic growth. In this paper we choose a trade context in order to exploit the United
Nations COMTRADE data. COMTRADE reports annual bilateral trade between most
countries, in terms of both value and physical quantity, using a harmonized and detailed
product classification. It thus provides unique insight into how countries across all sizes
and income levels are producing (as exporters) and absorbing (as importers) a vast array
of products. We know of no other dataset that delivers such a thorough picture.
    Our framework builds on the theoretical literature on quality differentiation in inter-
national trade. Early on, Flam and Helpman (1987) developed a two-country, two-good
general equilibrium framework that explained why a rich country might both produce
and demand a good of higher quality. More recently Fajgelbaum et al. (2011) provided a
much richer framework that allowed for many goods and countries.
    Applying these approaches to the problem at hand poses two challenges. These models
   4
    Here we build on Armenter and Koren (2014), who introduce granularity into a model of international
trade.



                                                  2
employ a discrete-choice framework in which the buyer is contemplating buying only a
single unit of the good. They thus don't allow for increased per capita spending on a good
to reflect a combination of more quantity and higher quality. Second, with only a single
dimension of quality, if rich countries both prefer higher quality goods and are better
at making them, rich countries should have larger market shares in other rich countries
than in poor ones, and vice versa. This pattern isn't one we observe in the data. Our
framework can deal with each issue.
    Other investigators have pursued different general equilibrium approaches to under-
standing the role of unit values in trade. In contrast to what we do here, these alternatives
depart from perfect competition in various directions.
    Feenstra and Romalis (2014) build on the Melitz (2003) model. Their framework
is less in keeping with standard general equilibrium modeling in that they introduce
a specific trade cost as well as the iceberg costs commonly used in the literature. It
consequently doesn't deliver the standard homothetic gravity specification for aggregate
trade implied by our approach here. While Feenstra and Romalis (2014)'s framework
provides an explanation for why unit values rise with importer per capita GDP it doesn't
speak to the effect of exporter per capita GDP.
    Atrianfar (2019) incorporates quality as well as price competition into a model of
Bertrand competition, building on Bernard et al. (2003). An intriguing implication of his
analysis is that rich and poor countries compete in different dimensions. His framework
can explain why a low-wage country might respond to increased competition from a third
party (e.g., China) by lowering price and maintaining market share, while a high-wage
country might respond by raising quality and price, allowing market share to fall. These
rich interactions preclude his framework from delivering the standard gravity specification
implied by the approach we take here.
    These two papers, like ours and much of the other literature, interpret higher unit
values to reflect higher quality. Another explanation is that variation in unit values repre-
sent different markups. Lashkaripour (2019b) develops a general equilibrium multicountry
version of the Krugman (1979) model in which different classes of goods have different
elasticities of substitution, so their producers charge different Dixit-Stiglitz markups. This
framework can also explain some of the empirical regularities we address here. Again the
approach maps less directly than ours into the standard gravity specification.
    We also build on a large literature on the intensive and extensive margins of trade. The
distinction goes back at least to Vernon (1966)'s product cycle model and the literature
that followed. More recent contributions are Evenett and Venables (2002), Besede         s and
Prusa (2006) (for U.S. imports), Besede    s and Prusa (2011) (for exports), Amiti and Freund


                                              3
(2010) (for Chinese exports), Debaere and Mostashari (2010) (looking at the effect of
tariffs on the two margins), Kehoe and Ruhl (2013) (looking at the role of the extensive
margin in growth), Baier et al. (2014) (looking at the effect of economic integration on
the two margins), and Silva et al. (2014) (who consider the role of the two margins for
gravity estimation).
    We proceed as follows. Section 2 presents our data and revisits the empirical regular-
ities pursued before. Section 3 presents our model and Section 4 our estimation of it. In
Section 5 we evaluate our model's ability to capture the margins of trade. We pursue our
analysis in Sections 2 through 5 at the level of aggregate merchandise trade. In Section
6 we probe the extent to which our results survive disaggregation into finer classes of
products. Section 7 concludes.


2       Overview of the Data
Our analysis applies to overall merchandise trade and its decomposition into various mar-
gins. Our trade data are from the United Nations COMTRADE data set. We work with
the most disaggregated product category in these data, which is HS6. We refer to an
HS6 product category as a product. We restrict our analysis to trade among the fifty
largest countries in terms of GDP in the 2007 cross section. We ignore small countries
to avoid zero bilateral trade flows and to ensure sufficient overlap in HS6 products across
importer-exporter pairs.5 We take data on GDP and population from the World De-
velopment Indicators and data on geographical characteristics from CEPII. Appendix A
provides a list of the countries and further detail on the construction of our data set.6
    We follow HK in decomposing the total value Xni of exports to each destination n from
each source i into an extensive, a quantity, and a price margin. We define the extensive
margin Eni as the fraction of HS6 products that n imports from i. We construct the price
margin Pni as
                                    1
                        log Pni =           [log(pnik ) - log(pworld,k )]
                                  |Kni | kK
                                                ni


where Kni is the set of HS6 products n imports from i, pnik is the unit value of product
k imported by n from i, and pworld,k is the average unit value of product k across all
    5
     Among these 50 countries COMTRADE reports total merchandise trade of US $11.1 trillion consisting
of 3,239,484 importer-exporter-HS6 triads. For various reasons described in Appendix A, we pare these
data down to to 2,611,700 triads constituting US $9.62 trillion.
   6
     CEPII provides a very user friendly version of the COMTRADE data which, among other things,
reconciles potentially conflicting reports from importing and exporting countries. Because of concerns
that CEPII's procedures for processing the data might influence some of the regularities we explore here,
we decided to use the raw data downloaded directly from the COMTRADE website.


                                                     4
                              Table 1: Decomposition of trade flows


                                                          extensive
                  dependent variable             value     margin      quantity    price
                  Panel A
                  exporter GDP                   1.16        0.76         0.36     0.04
                  importer GDP                   1.11        0.34         0.73     0.05
                  distance                       -0.81      -0.43        -0.39     0.02

                  Panel B
                  exporter GDP per capita        1.18        0.84         0.19      0.15
                  exporter population            1.15        0.71         0.46     -0.02
                  importer GDP per capita        1.10       0.41          0.56     0.13
                  importer population            1.12        0.30        0.82       0.00
                  distance                       -0.81      -0.37        -0.53     0.10

                  number of observations         2448       2448         2448      2448
                  All variables are in logs. We report standard errors in Appendix B.



importer-exporter pairs in our sample.7 We define the quantity margin as the residual
Xni /(Eni Pni ).8
    Following HK we apply a standard gravity analysis to relate our margins of trade to
geographical indicators and to importer and exporter characteristics. Table 1 reports the
results. The first column of Panel A shows the coefficients of the regression of total exports
to each destination from each source against distance and importer and exporter GDP.
The subsequent three columns repeat the regression for each of the three margins. By
construction, for each independent variable, the coefficients on these last three columns
sum to the coefficient in the first column.
    The results in the first column of Panel A are consistent with standard gravity results:
The coefficients on importer and exporter GDP are around one and the distance elasticity
   7
      We construct unit values from the COMTRADE data by dividing, for each importer-exporter-HS6
triad, the reported value by the reported quantity. Values are always in terms of current U.S. dollars.
The absence of quantity data forces us to drop a small number of observations. Of the remaining ones,
eighty percent of the triads report quantities in terms of weight (corresponding to 72 percent of the total
value of trade in our analysis). The remaining ones are nearly all in terms of counts. See Appendix A
for details. Lashkaripour (2019a) provides an analysis of alternative quantity measures in trade data.
    8
      These definitions differ from HK, who use a weighted definition of the extensive margin and con-
struct the price margin using the price index introduced by Sato (1976) and Vartia (1976) and discussed
extensively by Feenstra (1994). Appendix B reports results using their methodology. Our definition of
the extensive margin is simpler, and the correlation with their measure is 0.93. The correlation between
our price index and theirs is weaker, 0.76. But the simpler, unweighted price index is more tightly linked
to our product-level analysis below.


                                                    5
is around minus one. How GDP relates to the extensive margin, however, differs between
importer and exporter. Larger countries export many more products than smaller coun-
tries, but they don't import so many more. At this level of aggregation, the intensive
margin (price × quantity) is almost all dominated by quantity.
    Panel B repeats the analysis breaking GDP down into GDP per capita and population.
The first column of Panel B shows that breaking down GDP into GDP per capita and
population has no significant effect on trade values: The elasticity with respect to income
per capita and population is close to one for both importer and exporter. But for both
importers and exporters, the elasticity of the extensive margin is greater for GDP per
capita than for population, but the population effect is not far from the elasticity with
respect to total GDP. For the price margin, however, both importer and exporter GDP
per capita have distinctly positive elasticities, while population does not.9


2.1     Price Relationships
To probe further into the price margin of trade, we turn from the bilateral price index
to prices at the level of individual HS6 product categories. The aggregate results on the
elasticity of price with respect to exporter GDP per capita in the bottom panel of Table 1,
for example, could arise from selection. Say, for example, that countries charge the same
price to all destinations for a given product. The results in Table 1 could still arise if rich
countries sell their more expensive products disproportionately to rich destinations and
their relatively cheaper products to poor destinations. Table 2 shows that forces other
than selection are at work.
    In Column (1), we report the results from a regression of unit values, for each importer-
exporter-product triad, against distance, importer GDP per capita, and exporter-product
fixed effects. The coefficient on importer per capita income is 0.12, nearly as large as
in Table 1. The implication is that individual exporters sell the same product to richer
countries at systematically higher prices.
    Column (2) reports the mirror regression of unit values against distance, exporter GDP
per capita, and importer-product fixed effects. The coefficient on exporter per capita GDP
is 0.22, even larger than in Table 1. Countries systematically pay higher prices for the
same products from richer countries.10
   9
      Note that distance has a positive effect on unit value which becomes large and significant once GDP
is broken down into GDP per capita and population, the Alchian-Allen effect analysed by Hummels and
Skiba (2004).
   10
      Schott (2004) reports similar results for imports into the United States at the level of 10-digit product
categories.



                                                      6
                                                          Table 2: Descriptive price regressions

             Dependent variable is the price for each importer, exporter, and product.
                                           pooled by        pooled by       pooled     income                   Rauch (1999)     manufacturing
                                        exporter-product importer-product by product interaction                differentiated       only
                                                                                                                  productsb
             independent variable                   (1)                 (2)              (3)          (4)             (5)             (6)


             importer GDP per capita               0.117                                0.119        0.157          0.128            0.118
                                                  (0.022)                              (0.022)      (0.093)        (0.024)          (0.024)

             exporter GDP per capita                                   0.219            0.219        0.257          0.236            0.242
                                                                      (0.034)          (0.033)      (0.118)        (0.038)          (0.038)

             distance                              0.123               0.113            0.100        0.098          0.093            0.089




7
                                                  (0.015)             (0.015)          (0.014)      (0.015)        (0.016)          (0.016)

             interactiona                                                                            -0.0039
                                                                                                    (0.0097)




             product-exporter fixed effect          yes                  no               no           no             no               no
             product-importer fixed effect           no                 yes               no           no             no               no
             product fixed effect                    no                  no              yes          yes            yes              yes
             R-squared                              0.84                0.85             0.81         0.81           0.80             0.81
             number of observations              2,611,700           2,611,700        2,611,700    2,611,700      1,751,913        1,447,277



    Notes: All variables are in logs. a The interaction term equals log (importer GDP per capita) × log (exporter GDP per capita). b We use Rauch's
    liberal definition of products, which contains the smallest set of differentiated products. Results with Rauch's conservative definition are similar.
     Column (3) reports what happens if we use only product fixed effects with both ex-
porter and importer per capita income. The coefficients on these variables do not change
from columns (1) and (2).
     Column (4) includes a term that interacts exporter and importer GDP per capita.
The coefficient is negative and statistically insignificant. Hence we find no evidence that
rich countries disproportionately pay more for goods from other rich countries.
     Columns (5) and (6) consider the sensitivity of the results in column (3) to the set
of products we consider. In column (5) we restrict the sample to products classified
by Rauch (1999) as differentiated (using his liberal definition of referenced price and
organized exchange products). In column (6) we look only at manufactures. In neither
case are the results notably different.
     Going back to Flam and Helpman (1987), the literature on quality and trade has
provided an explanation for why unit values rise with both exporter and importer per
capita income: Rich countries have a comparative advantage in producing high quality,
and hence charge higher prices, and, because of nonhomotheticity in preferences, rich
countries have a greater taste for quality, so pay higher prices.11
     The assumption that rich countries have a comparative advantage in high quality
implies that, as long as quality is one dimensional, there should be no overlap in the prices
charged for a given product by a rich country and a poor country. Even if Japan sells to
Pakistan at a lower price than it sells to Norway, the price it charges in Pakistan should
still exceed the price Malaysia charges in Norway. Otherwise, why would Norwegians
prefer the high-priced Malaysian product to the low-priced product that Japan is selling
in Pakistan?
     A back-of-the-envelope calculation based on the regression coefficients in Column (3)
of Table 2 suggests, however, systematic overlap in predicted prices. We calculate, for
example, that a Malaysian product should sell in Norway at 0.3 log points more than a
Japanese product in Pakistan.
     Overlaps aren't just what's predicted by the regression. They are common in the raw
data. Figure 1 illustrates price patterns for HS6 categories HS871493 and HS845011. Code
HS871493 corresponds to hubs for motorcycles, bicycles, and vehicles for the disabled.
Code HS845011 corresponds to washing machines with capacity less than 10kg.12 The
figures plot unit values against importer per capita income for all importer-exporter pairs.
For hubs, we highlight the three major Asian exporters: China (GDP per capita US$2,708)
with a square, Malaysia (GDP per capita US$11,358) with a triangle, and Japan (GDP per
 11
      Subsequent papers in this tradition are Stokey (1991) and Fajgelbaum et al. (2011).
 12
      See hts.usitc.gov for a more complete definition.



                                                    8
                 (a) HS871493                                 (b) HS845011

                             Figure 1: Examples of Products


capita US$34,313) with a circle. Across destinations, Japan's unit values are higher than
Malaysia's, which are higher than China's. For all three exporters, unit values rise with
the importer's GDP per capita so much that Japan is selling in the poorest destination
at a price lower than China sells in the richest destination.
    For washing machines, Figure 1(b) highlights the two largest exporters, China with
squares and Germany with triangles (GDP per capita US$40,324). Note how China sells
to the richest country, Norway (GDP per capita US$82,480), at a price above that at
which Germany sells to the poorest country, Pakistan (GDP per capita US$879).


2.2    Trade Values
The literature on quality and trade discussed above also has implications for trade values
between countries of different income levels. In these models, rich countries tend to sell
to rich households in all countries while poor countries tend to sell to poor households in
all countries. Since poorer countries have a larger share of poor households, exports from
rich countries to poor would systematically decline with differences in income. At the
extreme, in Flam and Helpman's model, internal income inequality is the only reason for
international trade. Fajgelbaum et al. (2011), by introducing an idiosyncratic component
to demand, relax this strong prediction, but their model nevertheless predicts that the
average consumer in a poor country has lower demand for goods produced in rich countries.
The large coefficient on exporter per capita income in the price regression implies, through
the lens of this literature, a strong degree of specialization in income elastic quality on
the part of rich countries.
    Figure 2 shows the limited scope for internal income inequality to generate substantial

                                             9
                               Figure 2: World Income Distribution


trade between rich and poor countries. The figure plots, for 149 countries, GDP per
capita at the top and bottom deciles (on the y-axis) against average GDP per capita (on
the x-axis).13 Note how cross-country differences in GDP per capita swamp internal ones.
The poorest decile in the United States is slightly richer than the richest in India. An
implication of the literature on quality in trade is that the only buyers of U.S. goods in
India are the narrow sliver of Indians with incomes high enough to appreciate goods that
appeal to U.S. consumers.
    But do rich countries lose market share as their importing partner's GDP per capita
declines? Table 3 reports the result of a gravity regression of total bilateral trade value
against importer and exporter fixed effects, distance, and an interaction term between
exporter and importer GDP per capita. A positive coefficient on the interaction term
would confirm, in line with the Linder (1961) hypothesis, that rich countries do indeed
have a larger client base in other rich countries. The coefficient is in fact small and
statistically insignificant.14
  13
     The data are from the World Bank's World Development Indicators. GDP per capita is from 2007.
Income per capita at the top and bottom deciles is calculated from the share of income at these deciles
for the closest year to 2007 within a 10-year window.
  14
     Hallak (2010) reports the same result looking at aggregate bilateral trade. He argues that the aggre-
gate data mask a positive interaction effect at the sectoral level, showing that the effect is significantly
positive in half of 116 sectors and significantly the opposite in only 20 percent of them. We classified our
data into 97 two-digit HS product categories, performing the regression in Table 3 separately for each
category. In contrast to Hallak, we find a significantly positive interaction effect for only 19 categories
and a significantly negative interaction for 33 categories. Running these sectoral regressions as well as


                                                    10
                               Table 3: Gravity with Interaction


                Dependent variable is the log of bilateral trade flows

                distance                                       -1.148
                                                              (0.041)
                interaction                                   0.0020
                                                              (0.016)


                importer fixed effect                           yes
                exporter fixed effect                           yes
                R-squared                                      0.75
                number of observations                         2,448


Notes: Distance is in logs. As in table 2, the interaction term equals log (importer GDP per capita) ×
log (exporter GDP per capita). It captures whether rich countries disproportionately sell more to other
rich countries.


2.3     The Extensive Margin
To probe further into the extensive margin of trade, Figure 3 plots the fraction of HS6
product categories that a country imports (a) and the fraction that it exports (b) against
total GDP (both in logs). Confirming the results from Table 1 above, the extensive margin
varies much more for exporters than for importers, hence the very different scales for the
two y-axes. Not revealed by the regression is the concave relation between the extensive
margin of exports and exporter GDP: For the largest countries, the relationship between
GDP and extensive margin levels off, both for imports and for exports.
   Before turning to our model, it's useful to review what standard models say about
the extensive margin of trade for imports and exports. The EK model provides a simple
framework for breaking trade values down into the measure of varieties and spending per
variety that one country sells to another.
   A stark implication of their model is that, for a given destination, all the variation in
imports across sources is at the extensive margin. If we interpret varieties in their model
as products in the data, then the coefficient on the extensive margin of exporters would
equal the coefficient on value in Table 1. In fact, the coefficient is 0.76, substantially
the aggregate one above using pseudo Poisson maximum likelihood (PPML), as in Silva and Tenreyro
(2006), or pseudo multinomial maximum likelihood (PMML), as in Eaton et al. (2013), yields similar
results.


                                                  11
                     (a) Importer                                              (b) Exporter

                              Figure 3: Extensive Margin and GDP


less than the coefficient on value, 1.16. A modeling challenge, then, is to account for the
intensive margin of 0.38.15
    Another implication of the EK model is that the extensive margin of importers for
varieties should be negative: Larger importers should source a greater range of varieties
domestically, so import fewer. Again, interpreting varieties in their model as products in
the data poses a challenge in explaining the positive importer extensive margin elasticity
of 0.34 in Table 1.16
    As panel B of Table 1 shows, the coefficients on GDP per capita and population aren't
very different from each other, either for exporters or importers, in both the value and
extensive margin regressions.17 This result is in line with both the EK and Melitz models,
for which this breakdown doesn't matter.


3      The Model
Having reviewed regularities in the data that pose challenges for standard trade models,
we now turn to a framework that seeks to accommodate these regularities. To explain
  15
      The Melitz model breaks trade down into the firm dimension of export participation, and sales per
firm. If we equate a firm in his model with a product in the data, it, too, predicts that all the action
across exporters in a given destination is at the extensive margin.
   16
      The Melitz model does predict that larger markets will attract more firms from a given source. An
issue with equating a Melitz firm with an HS6 product is that we see many countries exporting the same
HS6 product.
   17
      Appendix B shows formally that we cannot reject the null that these coefficients are equal in all four
cases. This result is in contrast with the role of GDP per capita and population on prices and quantities,
for which this null of equality is clearly rejected.


                                                    12
why unit values rise with both importer and exporter per capita income the framework
incorporates two dimensions of quality: One captures the difference in the unit values of
different exporters across importers reflected in the vertical differences in Figure 1. The
other captures the difference in unit values in what is purchased by different importers,
reflected in the slopes in Figure 1. In our framework both dimensions of quality rise
endogenously with a country's productivity. To explain the interplay of the extensive and
intensive margins, the framework introduces granularity in shipments.
    Our model begins with basic Ricardian ingredients. The world has N countries, in-
dexed by i, n = 1, ..., N , each endowed with a measure Li of workers who are also the
households in the economy. A worker can perform different jobs within a country but
can't change countries. A worker in country i earns a wage wi determined in equilibrium.
Competition is perfect, so that unit production costs determine prices in all markets.
    Output consists of a measure one continuum  of varieties each denoted by  . A unit
of variety  has two dimensions of quality: One dimension q ( )  [0, ) complements
quantity y ( )  [0, ) while the other Q( )  [0, ) perfectly substitutes for quantity.
Examples of the first dimension of quality might be Robert Parker's rating of a wine or
the precision of a machine tool. Examples of the second dimension might be the heating
value of a ton of coal, the durability of a light bulb, or the caffeine content of a cup of
coffee. The same product might differ in both dimensions. For the washing machines,
aspects of Q might be the durability or reliability of the machine, while aspects of q
might be gentleness to clothing, cycle options, electronic controls, or an automatic bleach
dispenser.
    While the term has been used differently in different contexts, we refer to Q as "hor-
izontal quality" since, as we show below, all buyers value an increase in Q equivalently,
and to q as "vertical quality", since a buyer spending more values an increase in q dispro-
portionately. Nevertheless, all buyers value an increase in either Q or q .


3.1    Aggregation
We now turn to how individual varieties aggregate into the composite output. To simplify
notation we temporarily ignore the international dimension of the problem and suppress
country subscripts.
   Varieties combine to form a composite in amount Y according to the function:

                                                      1/
                                                 
                                 Y =        u( ) d                                     (1)
                                         




                                            13
where the variety-specific benefit is:

                                                                  1/
                                u( ) = [(Q( )y ( )) + q ( ) ]          .                           (2)

Here   1 governs the elasticity of substitution between varieties while   1 governs the
elasticity of substitution between effective quantity and the vertical dimension of quality.
This composite provides utility to a final consumer or equips an individual worker with
intermediates. These two dimensions of quality allow us to capture features of the price
data discussed in Section 2.1.
    The cost of producing y (w) physical units of vertical quality q ( ) of variety  is

                                      x( ) = y ( )q ( ) c( ).                                      (3)

Here  > 0 is a parameter reflecting the cost of producing higher vertical quality and
c( ) > 0 is the cost of creating one unit of variety  of vertical quality q ( ) = 1, which
is determined in equilibrium.18 An agent with a budget X seeks to maximize (1) subject
to:
                                         x( )d = X.                                    (4)
                                           

   We split the problem into two parts. We first ask, for a particular variety  with given
horizontal quality Q( ), how to choose q (w) and y (w) maximize the benefit u( ) given
spending x( ) on this variety. We then ask how the buyer should allocate his budget X
across spending on each variety x( ) subject to the budget constraint (4).

3.1.1    Quality versus quantity

Since we first focus on a given variety, we temporarily drop the  argument. If the buyer
has chosen to spend x on this variety, the problem is:

                                                            1/
                                        max [(Qy ) + q  ]
                                         y,q


subject to:
                                               yq  c  x.
  18
     See Bekkers et al. (2012) for a very similar formulation of preferences and the cost of what we're
calling vertical quality, the only dimension of quality in their analysis.




                                                  14
To satisfy the second-order conditions for a minimum we need to impose the condition
that  < 0.19 Taking the ratio of the two first-order conditions gives:

                                                      q =  1/ Qy,

which, upon substitution into the problem above, reduces it to:

                                              max(1 +  )1/ Qy
                                                  y


subject to:
                                                  y 1+ Q c  x.

Defining the term:
                                                  A =  /[(1+ )]

the implied quantity is:
                                                       x   1/(1+ )
                                     y = A-1                         Q-/(1+ )
                                                       c
with corresponding vertical quality:

                                                                   1/(1+ )
                                                           Qx
                                         q = A1/                             .
                                                            c

The price per unit is then:

                                                                      /(1+ )
                                                                Qx
                                       p = cq = Ac
                                                                 c

and the benefit is:
                                                                         1/(1+ )
                                             -1             1/     Qx
                                    u = A (1 +  )
                                                                    c
       Instead of working with the unit cost c of vertical quality q = 1 we introduce:

                                                             Q
                                                        v=     ,
                                                             c
  19
       Graphically, the budget constraint:
                                                       x  yq  c
has a surface that's Cobb-Douglas in q and y. For a tangency to represent a minimum requires that the
isobenefit curve:
                                                           1/
                                         ¯ = [(Qy ) + q  ]
                                         u
have an elasticity of substitution strictly below 1.




                                                           15
the effective inverse cost of variety  . We can then write these expressions more compactly
as functions of x and v :

                            y (x, v ) = A-1 Q-1 (xv )1/(1+ )
                            q (x, v ) = A1/ (xv )1/(1+ )
                            p(x, v ) = Ax/(1+ ) v -1/(1+ ) Q
                            u(x, v ) = A-1 (1 +  )1/ (xv )1/(1+ ) .                         (5)

The parameter  governs how spending x gets divided into the quantity and price margins,
with quantity having an elasticity 1/(1 +  ) and price an elasticity /(1 +  ).

3.1.2    How much of a variety?

Having solved for the benefit u[x( ), v ( )] of spending an amount x( ) on variety  we
turn to the problem of how much to spend on each variety. Specifically, we solve the
problem:
                                                                    1/
                                                          
                              max           u [x( ), v ( )] d
                               x( )    

where, from the fourth equation of (5):

                     u [x( ), v ( )] = A-1 (1 +  )1/ [x( )v ( )]1/(1+ )

subject to (4).
   The solution gives us:
                                                     /(1+ - )
                                             v ( )
                                 x( ) =                         X                           (6)
                                               V
where:
                                                             (1+ - )/
                         V =              v ( )/(1+ - ) d                  .                (7)
                                       

From (6) and its substitution into (5), we can write:

                                                                    1/(1+ )
               y ( ) = A-1 v ( )1/(1+ - ) XV -/(1+ - )                         Q( )-1
                                                                    1/(1+ )
               q ( ) = A1/ v ( )1/(1+ - ) XV -/(1+ - )
                                                                         /(1+ )
               p( ) = Av ( )-(1- )/(1+ - ) XV -/(1+ - )                           Q( )
                                                                                  1/(1+ )
               u( ) = A-1 (1 +  )1/ v ( )1/(1+ - ) XV -/(1+ - )                             (8)

where we continue to take horizontal quality Q( ) as given.


                                                16
   We can then solve for Y as a function of X and V :
                                 1/
                            
         Y   =          u( ) d
                    
                                                                                     1/
                   -1       1/        -/(1+ - ) 1/(1+ )               /(1+ - )
             = A (1 +  )         XV                               v ( )          d
                                                               
             = A-1 (1 +  )1/ (XV )1/(1+ )                                                  (9)

To obtain a closed-form solution, we have to take a stand on the distributions of the
inverse unit costs v ( ).

3.1.3   The distribution of efficiency

We now make our multicountry setting explicit by denoting a destination country by n
and an origin country by i. We assume that vertical quality Q( ), determined below,
depends only on origin. Thus, if country n buys variety  from country i, Q( ) = Qi . As
in EK, if country n buys variety  from country i then

                                                  dni Ci
                                        c( ) =
                                                  Zi ( )

where Ci is the unit cost of a bundle of inputs in country i, dni is the iceberg cost of
shipping a unit from country i to country n, and Zi ( ) is country i's efficiency producing
variety  . The probability that country i's efficiency Zi ( )  z is

                                  Fi (z ) = exp(-Ti z - ).

with the Zi ( ) drawn independently across source countries i for each variety  .
   We define
                                       ~i = Ci ,
                                       C                                                  (10)
                                             Qi
the cost of inputs in source i adjusted for source i's horizontal quality. Then we can write
effective inverse cost in destination n, taking into account iceberg transport costs:

                                                   Zi ( )
                                      vni ( ) =           .
                                                       ~i
                                                   dni C

An agent in country n sources variety  from country i if

                                 i = arg max {vni ( )} .
                                         i =1,...,N



                                              17
The corresponding effective inverse cost is

                                   vn ( ) = max {vni ( )} .
                                             i =1,...,N


Using the distribution of z , the share of varieties that country n sources from country i is

                                                        ~i )-
                                                Ti (dni C
                                         ni =                                                         (11)
                                                     n

where
                            n =                  ~i )-
                                         Ti (dni C               n = 1, ..., N.                       (12)
                                    i

     The distribution of vni ( ) conditional on i being the lowest cost supplier to country n
is

                          Gn (v ) = Pr     Vni  v | i = arg max {vni }
                                                                    k N

                                = exp(-n v - ).                                                       (13)

As in EK, the distribution Gn is independent of source i. Hence the unconditional dis-
tribution vn ( ) in equation (7) has the same cumulative distribution Gn (v ), so that ni
given in (11) is also country i's share in absorption by n. Despite the nonhomothetic intri-
cacies introduced by the quality dimensions of our model, it delivers the same trade-share
equation as the homothetic EK model.
    We can use (13) to solve:

                                   (1+ - )/                                           (1+ - )/
     Vn =       vn ( )/(1+ - ) d                =               v /(1+ - ) dGn (v )              = 0 1/
                                                                                                     n ,
                                                         0
                                                                                                      (14)
which corresponds to the inverse of the price index in EK. Here:

                                                                      (1+ - )/
                                        
                           0 =  1 -
                                    (1 +  -  )

and  is the gamma function. For reasons similar to those in EK and Melitz, for the price
index to be well-defined we require that:

                                                  
                                          >         .
                                                1+-




                                                    18
We can rearrange (9) to solve for the expenditure Xn required to achieve an aggregate Y :

                                                    Y 1+
                                     Xn (Y ) = 1                                         (15)
                                                     Vn

where
                                                           1/
                                 1 =   (1 +  )-(1+ )            .

   We introduce the term:
                                       ( ) = vn ( )/Vn                                   (16)

which has the distribution:

                            J ( )  Pr[E  ] = Pr[vn ( )  Vn ]
                                 = exp -( 0 )-                                           (17)

independent of both n and i. By introducing we can now write (6) and (8) in terms of
features Xn and Vn of the importer n, feature Qi of the exporter i, and the realization of
 , which is our structural error:

                                    /(1+ - )
                    xni ( ) = Xn
                    yni ( ) = A-1 (Vn Xn )1/(1+ ) Q-
                                                   i
                                                     1     1/(1+ - )


                    qni ( ) = A1/ (Vn Xn )1/(1+ )    1/(1+ - )


                    pni ( ) = A (Xn )/(1+ ) Vn-1/(1+ )
                                                       Qi       -(1- )/(1+ - )


                    uni ( ) = A-1 (1 +  )1/ (Vn Xn )1/(1+ )         1/(1+ - )
                                                                                .        (18)

Since spending across varieties has to integrate to Xn , from the first line of (18), /(1+ - )
has mean one.
    We now incorporate this demand system into both production with intermediates and
final consumption.


3.2     Production
                                                     ~i in equation (10), and of horizon-
We start with the determination of production costs, C
tal quality Qi . Physical output is produced with a Cobb-Douglas combination of labor
and intermediates at constant returns to scale, with intermediates combining varieties
according to (1). The horizontal-quality adjusted output o of a single worker equipped




                                               19
with an amount m of intermediates is

                                                o = Qm1-                                          (19)

where 1 -  is the elasticity of output per worker with respect to intermediate inputs,
given Q, where   (0, 1).
    A producer's problem, then, can be stated as hiring labor in amount l and inter-
mediates per worker m to minimize the cost of producing one unit of horizontal-quality
adjusted composite output. Dropping the country subscript i, the cost of hiring a worker
is the wage w and the cost of equipping her is X (m), where the function X is given in
equation (15). The producer's problem is thus:

                                        ~ = min {l(w + X (m))}
                                        C
                                               l,m


subject to providing one efficiency unit of the composite output:

                                               Qlm1- = 1.                                         (20)

   We posit that the horizontal quality Q a worker produces increases with the extent to
which she is equipped with intermediates according to:

                                                 Q = m ,                                          (21)

where  > 0 is a parameter relating intermediate use per worker to horizontal quality.
For concavity we require that  < .20 Substituting (21) into the constraint (20):

                                               lm1-+ = 1.                                         (22)

       As we show below, the share of labor in quality-adjusted production is:

                                                     +-
                                             ~=
                                                     1+
  20
       Denoting effective output by O we can write the quality-adjusted production function as:

                                         O = QLm1- = Lm1-+

where:
                                                                  1/
                                          m=             u( ) d
                                                      

and where u( ) is given by (2).



                                                     20
while the share of materials is:

                                           1-+
                                    1-~=
                                            1+

Whether the labor share in quality-adjusted production is larger or smaller than  depends
on whether  exceeds or is exceeded by /(1 - ). In the first case the increased cost of
higher vertical quality intermediates dominates the effect of intermediates in enhancing
horizontal quality, and vice-versa. Our parameter estimates below put us in the range
where the second effect dominates the first, so that the labor share in quality-adjusted
production is less than .
   Substituting X (m) from equation (15) and (22) into the objective function, the prob-
lem becomes:
                                           1 ~ (1-
                                min wl + l-/         ~)
                                                         .
                                  l         V
The solution is:
                                                    1-~
                                         ~    1
                                   l=       ·             .
                                        1- ~ wV
From the constraint lm1-+ = 1:
                                                    1/(1+ )
                                        1- ~ wV
                                   m=       ·
                                         ~    1

so that horizontal quality is:

                                                    /(1+ )
                                        1- ~ wV
                                   Q=       ·                                       (23)
                                         ~    1

which is increasing in w and V . From (15), spending on intermediates per worker is:

                                             m1+
                                    X (m) = 1
                                               V
                                            1- ~
                                          =      w.                                 (24)
                                             ~

The cost of producing an effective unit of the composite output is

                                   ~ = l(w + X (m))
                                   C
                                                  1-~
                                          ~ 1
                                        = A             w~
                                                                                    (25)
                                            V




                                           21
where:
                                      ~=
                                      A ~ -~
                                             (1 - ~ )-(1-~)


with labor share:
                                                  lw
                                                     =~
                                                  C~
and materials share:
                                           lX (m)
                                                  =1-~.
                                             C~
   We can insert X (m) from (24) and Q from (23) into (18) to derive spending, quantity,
quality, price, and benefit of variety  when used as an intermediate in n purchased from
i:

                 1- ~
  xM
   ni ( ) =                 ( )/(1+ - ) wn Ln
                  ~
                                 (1+ )/(1+ )                                                -/(1+ )
                       1- ~                                                         Vi wi
   M
  yni ( ) = A-1                                 ( )1/(1+ - ) (Vn wn )1/(1+ ) Ln
                        ~                                                            1
                                 1/(1+ )
                       1- ~
   M
  qni ( ) = A1/                            ( )1/(1+ - ) (Vn wn )1/(1+ )
                        ~
                            ( - )/(1+ )                                                         /(1+ )
                     1- ~                                                               Vi wi
  pM
   ni ( ) = A                               ( )-(1- )/(1+ - ) Vn-1/(1+ ) /(1+ )
                                                                        wn
                      ~                                                                  1
                                               1/(1+ )
                                   1- ~
  uM
   ni ( )
                -1
            = A (1 +  )     1/
                                                         ( )1/(1+ - ) (Vn wn )1/(1+ )                 (26)
                                    ~

Note that source i matters only for quantity and unit value.


3.3      Consumption
Total income in country n is wn Ln . Since we assume balanced trade and income equality
within countries, spending per worker is Xn = wn . Household utility is given by (1).
   We can then use (18) to get expressions, for variety  sourced from i, of total household
spending, total quantity demanded, vertical quality, unit value, and benefit in destination




                                                    22
n:

     xC
      ni ( ) =    ( )/(1+ - ) wn Ln
                                 /(1+ )                                                     -/(1+ )
      C            -1    1- ~                  1/(1+ - )           1/(1+ )        V i wi
     yni ( )   = A                        ( )               (Vn wn )         Ln
                          ~                                                        1
       C
      qni ( ) = A1/ ( )1/(1+ - ) (Vn wn )1/(1+ )
                               -/(1+ )                                                             /(1+ )
                        1- ~                                                               Vi wi
     pC
      ni ( ) = A                          ( )-(1- )/(1+ - ) Vn-1/(1+ ) /(1+ )
                                                                      wn
                         ~                                                                  1
     uC         -1
      ni ( ) = A (1 +  )
                         1/
                            ( )1/(1+ - ) (Vn wn )1/(1+ )                                                    (27)

Note again that source i matters only for quantity and unit value.


3.4      Unit Values in Bilateral Trade
Since our data don't distinguish between imports for final and for intermediate use, we
define the value, quantity, and unit value of a variety as

                                   xni ( ) = xC         M
                                              ni ( ) + xni ( )
                                              C         M
                                   yni ( ) = yni ( ) + yni ( )
                                                xni ( )
                                   pni ( ) =            .
                                                yni ( )

From equations in (26) and (27) we can write the value as:

                                             1
                                 xni ( ) =     wn Ln ( )/(1+ - )                                            (28)
                                             ~

and the unit value as

                                                             
                                     n wi w,X i ,X ( )-(1- )/(1+ - )
                                  w,M ,M
                     pni ( ) = 2 wn                                                                         (29)

where

                                                  
                                         w,M =       ,
                                                 1+
                                                     1
                                         ,M    =-          ,
                                                  (1 +  )
                                                  
                                         w,X   =     ,
                                                 1+
                                                    
                                         ,X    =         ,                                                  (30)
                                                 (1 +  )

                                                  23
where

                                                               -1                   /(1+ )
               ( -1)/(1+ )                        1/(1+ )                   ~
         2 =   0             ~ 1 + ((1 - 
                                         ~ )/~)                                              A,
                                                                        (1 - ~ )1

and where we have used (14) to replace V with . The model thus implies that the unit
value varies with (i) the importer wage with an elasticity w,M , (ii) the importer  with
an elasticity ,M , (iii) the exporter wage with an elasticity w,X , and (iv) the exporter 
with an elasticity ,X . Buyers in a destination with a high wage or a high price index
(low ) pay more because they demand higher vertical quality and because competition
is less intense (allowing on average a higher-priced variety to compete). Producers in
a source with a high wage or low price index (high ) equip their workers with more
intermediates, so produce goods with higher horizontal quality.
    Expression (29) provides the basis of how we use our model to connect data on unit
values in bilateral trade to importer and exporter characteristics reflecting their wages
and price indices. Before quantifying the model we show what it says about the gains
from trade.


3.5     The Gains from Trade
We can use expressions (14) and (15) to get an expression for the aggregate bundle that
                                                                    -1/
a worker in country n can achieve with a wage wn and price index n :

                                                       1/(1+ )
                                        0   wn
                                Yn =      · -1/                     .                             (31)
                                        1 n

A monotonic transformation gives us an expression for the worker's utility Un that's linear
in the wage:
                                         0     wn
                                  Un =      · -1/ .                                    (32)
                                         1 n
We can substitute equation (11), with i = n, into (32), using (25), to get:

                                            1/~                  1/~
                                        0             Tn d-
                                                          nn
                                                            
                              Un =                ·                                               (33)
                                       ~1
                                       A               nn

which is the standard ACR formula (Arkolakis et al. (2012)), taking into account inter-
mediates and domestic trade costs. The elasticity of real income with respect to the home
share is -1/ ~ .




                                             24
4        Quantification
We estimate the 's from bilateral trade flows as we describe in Section 4.1. In Section
4.2 we use our estimates of the 's to estimate the parameters  ,  , and . In Section
4.3 we use product level prices and volumes to estimate the parameter  which governs
the distribution of the structural error . We turn to how we model and quantify the
extensive margin in 4.4.


4.1        Trade Flows and Multilateral Resistance
We estimate the 's exploiting equation (11) using data on trade flows, GDP, and distance.
We parameterize the effect of iceberg costs on trade share as

                                                             g
                                            d-    0    
                                             ni =  distni                                        (34)

for i = n, where distni is the distance between i and n. Here  0 is a constant and  g
is a parameter that relates trade share to distance, taking into account both the effect
of distance on trade costs and the role of  in relating trade costs to trade share. We
estimate the dnn individually as country fixed effects.
    We construct trade shares as:
                                              Xni
                                       ni =
                                              Xn
for i = n and:
                                                Xn -     i =n    Xni
                                         nn =                          ,
                                                        Xn
where Xn is country n's total absorption.21 For all i = n, we regress:

                                    ni
                             log          = An + Bi +  g log distni + X
                                                                      ni ,                       (35)
                                    nn

where An is an importer fixed effect, Bi is an exporter fixed effect, and X ni is the residual.
                                                                                               22

Equivalent to Waugh (2010), and in contrast to EK, we attribute country-level differences
in openness to differences in internal trade costs (dnn ). Under this interpretation, equation
  21
       Our absorption measure is:
                                                     GDPn
                                           Xn =               + Dn ,
                                                        ~
where GDPn is country n's GDP (corresponding to wn Ln in our model) and Dn is country n's trade
deficit. While we've assumed balanced trade elsewhere our trade share measures takes deficits into
account. The term    ~ , set equal to 0.5 for all countries, is to account for intermediate demand.
  22
     The discussion in Anderson and Van Wincoop (2004) on assumptions on the residual term holds here.



                                                   25
(11) implies that fixed effects correspond to:

                                                   ~n
                                     An = - log Tn C -
                                                       - log(d- 
                                                              nn )

                                                  ~ - .
                                      Bi = log Ti C i


A consistent estimate of n is then

                             ^ n = exp(-A
                                        ^n ) +                 ^i + 
                                                           exp(B    ^g log distni ),                      (36)
                                                    i= n


where x
      ^ denotes the estimate of x.


4.2        Unit Values
We think of a variety  in our model as a very finely defined product. If a variety in
our model corresponded to 6-digit HS categories in the data, our model would incorrectly
predict that, for any product, an importer would buy from only one source. We reconcile
this discrepancy between theory and data by thinking of a 6-digit product category in
the COMTRADE data as corresponding to a finite set of varieties  in our model, with
varieties within a product measured in the same units.
    Taking logs of equation (29), for each product category k :

         log pnik = k + w,M log wn + ,M log n + w,X log wi + ,X log i + P
                                                                        nik .                             (37)

Here the product fixed effect k incorporates 2 and accounts for the units in which product
k is measured and P nik is a residual.
                                       23
                                          We use per capita GDP to measure importer and
exporter wages w.
    The top panel of Table 4 shows the results of estimating equation (37). Column (1)
reports the simple OLS estimates. The estimates satisfy the model's restrictions, from
equation (30), that w,M  (0, 1), ,M < 0, w,X  (0, 1), and ,X > 0.
    Column (2) reports the results of replacing wn , n , wi and i with importer-exporter
fixed effects. Column (3) then reports the results of regressing the importer-exporter fixed
  23
       If we attribute the residual to variation across realizations of ( ) in equation (29), it corresponds to:

                                                1-
                                     P
                                     nik = -                    snik ( ) ln ( )
                                               1+-
                                                            k


where k is the set of varieties constituting product k and snik ( ) is the share of variety  in i's exports
to n of product k .



                                                       26
                                                        Table 4: Results from Price Regression


                                                                            importer-exporter             same as                     same as
                                                pnik            pnik         fixed effect from       specification (3)           specification (3)
      dependent variable                                                     specification (2)      restricting n = i            restricting  = 4
      independent variable                      (1)              (2)                (3)                      (4)                        (5)

      importer per capita income (wn )         0.101                               0.101                    0.105                       0.117
                                              (0.023)                            (0.023)                  (0.023)                     (0.010)
      ^n                                       -0.073                             -0.072                   -0.080                      -0.163
                                              (0.044)                            (0.045)                  (0.045)                     (0.002)
      exporter per capita income (wi )          0.182                              0.181                   0.194                       0.190
                                              (0.027)                            (0.027)                  (0.031)                     (0.029)
      ^i                                       0.088                               0.090                    0.017                       0.035
                                              (0.041)                            (0.043)                  (0.010)                     (0.005)

      importer-exporter fixed effect       no        yes                           no                        no                         no
      product category fixed effect        yes       yes                           no                        no                         no
      R-squared                           0.81       0.82                         0.50                      0.49                       0.49
      number of observations           2,611,700  2,611,700                       2,448                    2,448                       2,448




27
      parameters implied by importer coefficients
                                          0.11                                     0.11                     0.12                        0.13
                                         (0.03)                                   (0.03)                   (0.03)                     (0.013)
      n not adjusted                      12.3                                     12.5                     11.2
                                          (7.4)                                    (7.8)                    (6.4)
      n adjusted for attenuation           9.1                                      9.2                      8.2                        4.0
                                          (5.5)                                    (5.8)                    (4.7)                        -
      parameters implied by exporter coefficients
                                          0.20                                     0.20                     0.22                       0.22
                                         (0.03)                                   (0.03)                   (0.04)                     (0.03)
      i not adjusted                       2.1                                     2.0                      11.2
                                         (0.94)                                   (0.92)                   (6.36)
      i adjusted for attenuation           1.5                                     1.5                      8.2                         4.0
                                         (0.70)                                   (0.68)                   (4.70)                        -
      Hypothesis testing (t-statistic)
      n = i                               1.39                                     1.35
      n = i = 4                                                                                             0.90

     All variables are in logs. Observations in the regressions reported in columns (3), (4), and (5) are weighted by the number of products that the
     country pair trades in column (2). Standard errors are clustered by importer and exporter. See Cameron et al. (2011) for multiway clustering.
effects from the regression in column (2) on the corresponding importer and exporter
characteristics in column (1). Note that, comparing columns (1) and (3), the coefficients
and their standard errors are almost identical.
    Our model implies that three parameters  ,  , and  determine the four coefficients
w,M , ,M , w,X , and ,X . Hence the regression coefficients overdetermine these pa-
rameters. Each column in the bottom panel of Table 4 reports the implications of the
corresponding coefficients in the top panel for the parameters  ,  , and .
    Since the coefficients overdetermine the parameters we report their implications for 
based first on the coefficient ,M on n and then on the coefficient ,X on i . Since the
variables n and i were constructed as described in subsection 4.1, their estimated coef-
ficients suffer from potential attenuation bias. The bottom panel reports the implications
of correcting this bias, as described in Appendix C, for the two estimates of . Adjusting
for attenuation lowers the implied values of  in each case. Whether we adjust or not, the
 implied by the importer coefficient is much larger than the  implied by the exporter
coefficient. Still, because the importer  is imprecisely estimated, we cannot reject the
model's restriction that the two 's are the same at the 5 percent confidence level from
either the one-stage (column (1)) or two-stage (column (3)) procedures.
    Column (4) reports the results of performing the regression reported in column (3)
imposing the restriction that the 's implied by the importer and exporter coefficients are
equal. The point estimate of  of 8.2 remains imprecisely estimated. We conclude that
our price data do not nail  precisely.
    A number of authors have pointed to a value of around 4 based on various sources of
evidence.24 This value is not rejected at the 5 percent confidence level by the procedure
reported in column (4). Column (5) reports the results of the same regression as column
(4) with the additional restriction that  = 4. The implied values of  and  barely
change.


4.3     Estimating 
Solving for ( ) in the price equation (29) and substituting it into the expression for value
(28), we can write the relationship between value and price in log-linear form:

                                                       
                            log xni ( ) = n + i -        log pni ( )
                                                      1-
  24
    See, for example, Bernard et al. (2003), Costinot et al. (2011), Simonovska and Waugh (2014), and
Caliendo and Parro (2015) .




                                                 28
              Table 5: Estimate of elasticity of spending with respect to prices


        independent var              unit pricenik                          valuenik     valuenik
        dependent var                    OLS          dependent var           OLS           IV
        instrument                      0.412         unit pricenik          -0.252       -1.828
                                       (0.031)                              (0.038)      (0.019)

        importer fixed effect             yes                                 yes          yes
        exporter fixed effect             yes                                 yes          yes
        product fixed effect              yes                                 yes          yes
        R-squared                         0.70                                0.25         0.10
        number of observations         2,585,111                           2,585,111    2,585,111

The table shows the results from estimating the price elasticity of spending on a product. Observations
are specific to importer n, exporter i, and product k . The instrument is the average price of exporter i's
exports of product k to importers other than n. All variables are in logs. The first column reports the
first-stage regression of the price on the instrument. The second column reports the OLS regression of
spending on price and the third column reports the second-stage IV regression. All regressions include
exporter, importer, and product fixed effects.


Aggregating across varieties within a product k we get a product level expression:

                                                           
                          log xnik = n + i + k -             log pnik + X
                                                                        nik
                                                          1-

where n , i , and k are, respectively, importer, exporter, and product fixed effects, and
Xnik is a residual. To account for potential demand shifts in country n for product k, we
instrument the price pnik with the average price of exporter i in product k to destinations
different from n.
    Table 5 shows the results. The first column shows that the instrument has power:
It's highly correlated with prices even after controlling for all fixed effects. In the last
two columns, the estimated coefficient on price is -0.25 with OLS and -1.83 with IV. The
small coefficient in the OLS regression suggests large simultaneity or measurement error
in prices. The coefficient on price in the IV regression implies an elasticity of demand
with respect to prices of -2.83.25 The implied  is 0.65.
    Our model has allowed us to decompose the intensive margin of trade into unit values
and quantities. Estimating the model with data on values and unit values in bilateral
trade has given us estimates of the parameter values  ,  , , and  . We now turn to the
extensive margin.
  25
    This figure compares with the median elasticity of 2.7 reported in Broda and Weinstein (2006) for
U.S. imports at the SITC-5 level.


                                                     29
4.4    The Extensive Margin
We interpret equation (28) as determining destination n's annual absorption of variety
 , which is sourced from i. We think of this flow, however, as provided through discrete
shipments that come in size x( ). If xni ( )  x( ), then a shipment is observed every
year. Otherwise, it's observed with probability xni ( )/x( ). Assuming that x has a
cumulative distribution function H , the probability of observing the shipment of a variety
 with trade flow xni ( ) in any given year is
                                                         
                            H (xni ( )) + xni ( )                 (1/x)dH (x).                 (38)
                                                        xni ( )


Trade flow xni is given by equation (28) with the distribution J of ( ) given in (17).
Assuming H and J are independent from each other and across varieties, the share of
varieties that country n sources from i in a given year is
                            
             ~ni =ni               -1 wn Ln
                               H (~            /(1+ - )
                                                              )
                        0
                                                  
                   +~ -1 wn Ln    /(1+ - )
                                                                         (1/x)dH (x) dJ ( ).
                                                 ~ -1 wn Ln
                                                              /(1+ - )



To translate the extensive margin at the variety level into the corresponding margin at
the product level, we need to take a stance on the partition of varieties into products. We
think of a product as containing an integer number of varieties. Letting f (M ) denote the
fraction of products with M varieties, the share of products that country n buys from i
in a given year is
                                        
                               Eni =          f (M ) 1 - (1 - ~ni )M                           (39)
                                       M =1


We map this extensive margin in the model to the data. To do so, we parameterize H as
exponential:
                               H (x) = 1 - exp(-1 x)                             (40)

and the probability mass function f as:

                       f (M ) = exp(-2 (M - 1)3 ) - exp(-2 M 3 ),                              (41)




                                                   30
a discretized Weibull density. We estimate the parameters 1 , 2 , and 3 to minimize:

                                         N
                                                           data 2
                                                   (Eni - Eni  )
                                         i=1 n=i


        data
where Eni    is the share of HS6 product categories n buys from i in the 2007 cross section.
The estimated parameters are 1 = 2.26e - 7 (standard error 1.21e-7), 2 = 0.042 (0.020),
and 3 = 0.48 (0.10). The R-squared is 0.79. Hence these three parameters explain the
extensive margin quite parsimoniously.26


5      Simulating World Trade
Now that we've quantified the key parameters of our model we can turn to how well it
captures the three margins of trade discussed in Section 2. Since the margins of trade
in the data are at the HS6 product level while our model is about trade in varieties, our
simulation has two stages. The first stage simulates trade among our 50 countries in five
million varieties. The second stage aggregates the simulated varieties into products.


5.1     Simulating Varieties
Continuing to index a variety by  , our simulation for each  has three components:

    1. Trade in varieties with gravity For this component of the simulation we use the
       model's prediction that the probability that country i is the cheapest (horizontal-
       quality-adjusted) source of variety  in country n is:

                                              ^ ^ -1     ^g
                                         
                                                         
                                          exp(Bi ) n distni
                                                                        n=i
                                 ^ni =                                                                (42)
                                                 ^n ) ^ -1
                                         
                                             exp(A                      n=i
                                         
                                                        n


       where distni is the distance between destination n and source i and B   ^i , A
                                                                                    ^n , ^g ,
       and ^ n are taken from the estimation of the bilateral resistance terms reported in
       Subsection 4.1.
  26
     The point estimates imply a mean shipment size of $4.42 million (median $3.07 million) and a mean
number of varities per product of 1597 (median 344). The frequency of zeros requires a large shipment
size while the frequency of multiple sources per product-destination requires the large number of varieties
per product.




                                                     31
   (a) For each  we draw i ( ) from the unit Fr´
                                               echet distribution:

                                      H ( ) = exp(- -1 )

       for each source i.
   (b) For each bilateral trade pair we calculate:

                                       ni ( ) = ^ni i ( )                             (43)

       which is proportional to the cheapest (horizontal-quality-adjusted) cost of va-
       riety  in destination n from source i.
    (c) For each destination n we determine the best source in ( ) for variety  :


                                    in ( ) = arg max ni ( )                           (44)
                                                     i


       establishing the source of variety  for each destination n. The combinations of
       n and i n ( ) constitute the set of bilateral trading pairs for variety  . Since we
       are modeling only international trade we drop observations for which i    n ( ) = n.


2. Bilateral trade values and prices For this component of the simulation we
   calibrate, as above,  = 4 and  ~ = 0.5. Based on the estimation of unit values in
   Subsection 4.2, we set  = 0.13 and  = 0.22 and, based on the results in Subsection
   4.3, we set  = 0.65.

   (a) For each nontrading pair (for which i = in ( )) we set xni ( ) = 0.

   (b) For each bilateral trading pair, using (17) and (43), we calculate:

                                                            1/
                                   ni ( )   = nin ( )
                                                      ( )        -
                                                                 0
                                                                   1
                                                                                      (45)

    (c) For each bilateral trading pair we substitute (45) into equation (28) to solve
        for xni ( ) and into equation (29) to solve for pni ( ).
   (d) For each bilateral trading pair we set quantity yni ( ) = xni ( )/pni ( ).

3. Censoring due to shipment sizes We draw a shipment size x( ) from the distri-
   bution (40) using the value of 1 reported in Section 4.4. For any xni ( ) from the
   previous component of the simulation we set the reported trade flow x  ~ni ( ) from




                                            32
      exporter in ( ) to importer n in variety  as:


                             x
                             ~ni ( ) = xni ( )   if xni ( ) > x( )

      Otherwise, if xni ( )  x( ) then the reported trade flow x
                                                               ~ni ( ) is randomly drawn
      as                           
                                   x( )     with probability xni /x
                         x
                         ~ni ( ) =
                                   0        with probability 1 - xni /x

We now have, for each variety  and for each destination n and foreign source i =
in ( ) = n, a reported purchase x  ~ni ( ) and unit value pni ( ). The simulated quantity
is y~ni ( ) = x
              ~ni ( )/pni ( ). We may not report destination n importing variety  either
because it purchases it domestically or because its simulated purchase from a foreign
source is less than the shipment size for that variety.


5.2    Simulating Products
Having now simulated varieties  = 1, 2, ..., 5, 000, 000 we simulate K products indexed
by k = 1, 2, ..., K . We partition varieties into products as follows:

  1. For product k = 1 we draw its number of varieties M1 from the probability mass
     function f (M ) given in (41) and assign this product varieties 1 through M1 .

  2. For product k > 1 we draw its number of varieties Mk from the probability mass
     function f (M ) and assign it varieties k through k + Mk where

                                      k = k-1 + Mk-1 .

      with 1 = 1.

  3. Sequentially repeating step 2 we continue until we arrive at product K such that
     wK + MK  5, 000, 000 and assign this product varieties K through 5,000,000.

This procedure yields 3842 simulated products. Of these, 35 products contain only va-
rieties that are not traded between any importer-exporter pair, either because they are
sourced domestically or because the trade value falls below the shipment size. The re-
maining 3807 traded products in our simulated dataset compares with 4973 in the COM-
TRADE data.



                                            33
   For each importer-exporter pair ni with positive trade in product k we construct value,
quantity, and price as:

                                              k +Mk
                                    xk
                                     ni   =           x
                                                      ~ni ( )
                                               =k
                                              k +Mk
                                      k
                                     yni =            y
                                                      ~ni ( )
                                               = k

                                              xk
                                               ni
                                     pk
                                      ni =     k
                                                  .
                                              yni

The results deliver our model's analog to COMTRADE's HS6 bilateral trade data. We
now ask how well our model captures the margins of trade in the actual data described
in Section 2.


5.3    Capturing the Margins of Trade
Table 6 compares the results of regressing bilateral trade value, extensive margin, quantity,
and price on exporter and importer characteristics and distance using the simulated trade
data, in the right panel, compared with the results using the actual data (repeating the
results from Section 2), in the left.
    The coefficients based on the simulated data generally mimic those from the actual
data with a couple of exceptions. The model understates the effects of both importer and
exporter per capita income on the extensive margin, shifting their effects toward quantity.
The model also understates the effect of distance on price, the Allen-Archian effect. The
second discrepancy is not surprising given that the model doesn't incorporate any reason
for such an effect. We repeat, however, that the effect is significant only when exporter
and importer GDP are broken down into per capita GDP and population.
    As we pointed out in our discussion of the extensive margin in Section 2.3, the effect of
total GDP on the extensive margin appears to be nonlinear: The range of products both
exported and imported expands rapidly with GDP for small countries, but then appears
to die out as countries get large.
    Figure 4 adds observations from the simulated data to those from the actual data
reported in Figure 3. Note how the model picks up the concavity of the relationship
between GDP and the extensive margin.
    To summerize, our model, taken to data, captures essential features of the extensive
and intensive margins of trade, and of how the intensive margin in turn breaks down into
quantity and unit value. It does so quite parsimoniously, with just seven parameters:  ,

                                                34
                          Table 6: Decomposition of trade flows in the data and model


                                               data                                      model
                                        extensive                                  extensive
     dependent variable         value    margin quantity price             value    margin quantity price
     Panel A
     exporter GDP                1.16     0.76       0.36     0.04          1.16    0.67      0.45   0.04
     importer GDP                1.11     0.34       0.73     0.05          1.07    0.28      0.73   0.06
     distance                   -0.81     -0.43      -0.39    0.02         -0.80    -0.42    -0.35   -0.03




35
     Panel B
     exporter GDP per capita    1.18       0.84      0.19     0.15          1.18    0.70      0.31    0.17
     exporter population        1.15      0.71       0.46     -0.02        1.15      0.65    0.53    -0.03
     importer GDP per capita    1.10       0.41      0.56     0.13          1.04    0.27      0.64    0.13
     importer population        1.12      0.30       0.82     0.00          1.08    0.28      0.77    0.03
     distance                   -0.81     -0.37      -0.53     0.10        -0.80    -0.42    -0.43    0.05

     num. observations            2448      2448      2448     2448        2448     2448     2448    2448
     All variables are in logs. We report standard errors in appendix B.
                  (a) Importer                                     (b) Exporter

          Figure 4: Extensive Margin and GDP in the Data and in the Model


 , ,  , 1 , 2 , and 3 .
    Our specifications of the price equation in Section 4.2 and demand equation in Section
4.3 are at the level of variety in our model. Our estimation uses data at the level of
HS6 products in the COMTRADE data. We've reconciled the two levels by treating HS6
products as collections of varieties. To what extent does aggregation of varieties into
products impede identification of the model's underlying seven parameters? To address
this question we performed a Monte Carlo analysis, applying our estimation procedure to
the simulated data described in this section to see if we can recover parameter values close
to those used to generate the data. The two sets of parameters are, with the exception of
 when product fixed effects are included, close. Appendix D reports the details.


6    Disaggregation
Our analysis so far, both descriptive and analytic, has been at the level of total mer-
chandise trade: In estimating the effects of importer and exporter per capita income on
unit values we pooled observations across all importer-exporter-HS6-product triads in
the COMTRADE data. In estimating our model we imposed common elasticities  and
 across all merchandise. We now assess how much damage this (audacious?) level of
aggregation inflicts.
   As discussed in Section 2, COMTRADE's finest level of product categorization is
the 6-digit HS6 classification. COMTRADE also provides three courser partition tiers:
the 4-digit HS4 level, the 2-digit HS2 level, and the partition of HS2 categories into 15


                                            36
                                Table 7: Summary of Sections

                                                     HS2     importer-exporter        importer-exporter
                           1
    Section   Section Name                        categories  -product triads              dyads
    1         Animal and Animal Products            01-05          49,819                  2,062
    2         Vegetable Products                    06-15         111,340                  2,296
    3         Food Items                            16-24          97,394                  2,296
    4         Mineral Products                      25-27          35,813                  2,177
    5         Chemicals and Allied Industries       28-38         325,045                  2,374
    6         Plastics, Rubbers                     39-40         157,993                  2,382
    7         Raw Hides, Skins, Leather, Furs       41-43          34,028                  2,173
    8         Wood and Wood Products                44-49         126,612                  2,362
    9         Textiles                              50-63         431,606                  2,354
    10        Footwear, Headgear                    64-67          37,225                  2,100
    11        Stone, Glass                          68-71         102,628                  2,302
    12        Metals                                72-83         335,950                  2,375
    13        Machinery, Electrical                 84-85         471,941                  2,409
    14        Transportation                        86-89          67,927                  2,305
    15        Miscellaneous                         90-97         226,379                  2,358
    total                                                       2,611,700                  2,448

1
 Section names on the table are the authors' own abbreviations of the official names, listed on the
UNCOMTRADE website.


sections. Table 7 lists the sections along with their component HS2 categories, the number
of importer-exporter-HS6 product triads in each, and the number of importer-exporter
dyads in each.


6.1      Heterogeneity in the Effects of Income per Capita on Prices
Our first exercise examines variation in the effects of importer and exporter per capita
income across product categories at the HS6 level. For each of the 4,786 HS6 products
with more than 20 importer-exporter pairs we run the regression:

                         log pnik = 0k + 1k log wn + 2k log wi +      nik                     (46)

where pnik is the unit value of the imports of country n from country i of product k , wn
is the income per capita of importer n, wi is the income per capita of exporter i, and
0k , 1k , and 2k are parameters estimated for each product k . The products represented
account for 96% of the total number of HS6 products and nearly all of international trade
flows in terms of value.
    Overall, 80 percent of the coefficients 1k on importer per capita income and 94 percent

                                                37
of the coefficients 2k on exporter per capita income are positive. To summarize the results
further, Table 8 reports, for each section, the mean coefficient for that section, the fraction
that are positive, and the fraction that are significantly positive. With the exception of
Mineral Products (Section 4) on the importer side, positive coefficients on importer and
exporter per capita income are pervasive within individual sections. Textiles (Section 9)
and Footwear, Headgear (Section 10), sections where we might expect a high degree of
quality differentiation, display particularly large shares of positive coefficients.
     How much of the heterogeneity in the coefficients on income per capita at the HS6
level can we attribute to courser levels of classification? To answer this question we
decompose the variances in our estimates      ^1k and  ^2k at the HS6 level into within and
between industry classifications for the three courser tiers of classification. Table 9 reports
the share of the variance that is between industry categories for each of the three. The
fifteen sections account for only 10% of the variance across estimates      ^1k and 13% of the
variance across estimates   ^2k . Although the number of HS4 product categories, 1,231, is
not much smaller than the 4,786 HS6 categories, HS4 categories account for less than half
of the variance. In sum, broader industry categories account for relatively small variation
in the income elasticities across HS6 product categories. Analysis that focuses on broader
industry classifications leaves a lot of within-industry heterogeneity on the table.


6.2     The Model with Sectional Heterogeneity
The model we develop in Section 3 admits a classification of varieties into different cate-
gories s with individual elasticities  s and  s , while maintaining trade barriers dni , tech-
nology parameters Ti , and Fr´ echet parameter  that are common across all categories.
This extension of the model allows us to reestimate equation (37) as:

          s(k)    s(k)      s(k)        s(k)           s( k )       s(k)
      log pnik = 0       + w,M log wn + ,M log n + w,X log wi + ,X log i + P
                                                                           nik            (47)

category by category, where s(k ) is product k 's category, and:

                                     s          s
                                     w,M =          ,
                                              1 + s
                                     s             1
                                       ,M   =-            ,
                                                (1 +  s )
                                     s          s
                                     w,X    =       ,
                                              1 + s
                                     s           s
                                       ,X   =           .                                 (48)
                                              (1 +  s )


                                               38
                                         Table 8: Summary of Coefficients of Regressions (46)

                                                            importer per capita GDP (1k )       exporter per capita GDP (2k )
                                              number of                     percentage                          percentage
          section                              products       mean      positive sig 10%        mean      positive    sig 10%
     1    Animal, Animal Products                189          0.11        75         60          0.12        87          66
     2    Vegetable Products                     294          0.11         84        70         0.12        90         78
     3    Food Items                             176          0.09         88        73         0.17        97         89
     4    Mineral Products                       142         -0.001        46        22         0.12        83         65
     5    Chemicals, Allied Industries           728          0.04         65        43         0.15        92         77
     6    Plastics, Rubbers                      189          0.09         90        81         0.17        97         94
     7    Raw Hides, Skins, Leather, Furs         61          0.13         93        82         0.11        77         67




39
     8    Wood, Wood Products                    212          0.08         83        68         0.11        88         70
     9    Textiles                               777          0.14         95        86         0.23        98         95
     10   Footwear, Headgear                      53          0.19         96        91         0.20        100        96
     11   Stone, Glass                           182          0.11         80        62         0.20        92         84
     12   Metals                                 541          0.07         78        58         0.19        97         91
     13   Machinery, Electrical                  747          0.06         73        55         0.24        97         90
     14   Transportation                         124          0.09         79        56         0.19        88         79
     15   Miscellaneous                          371          0.15         88        78         0.24        98         91
          All                                   4786         0.090        80         64         0.186       94         85
  Table 9: Share of the variance in ^1k and in ^2k that is between industry categories

                                                        section    HS2     HS4      HS6
              importer per capita income (^1k )           0.10     0.18    0.39       1
              exporter per capita income (^2k )           0.13     0.25    0.45       1
              number of categories                         15       96     1,231    4,786


Here the log i 's are those from expression (36) above.27
    We implement this disaggregation using COMTRADE's sections as our categories.
Table 10 reports what results from estimating equation (47) separately by section, im-
posing (48) and  = 4. The conditions           ^ s > 0 and   ^s > 0 are satisfied by all sections
(significantly so except for ^ M ineral P roducts ). For many sections, estimates  ^ s and ^s are
not far from the pooled regression estimates         ^ = 0.13 and ^ = 0.22.28
    We conduct a quasi-likelihood ratio test of whether the  s and  s are equal across
sections as follows. We first run an unrestricted version of (47) imposing only that  = 4
but with  s and  s estimated separately for each section. We denote the resulting sum of
squared residuals as RSSU and calculate the average squared residual           ^U = RSSU /Obs,
where Obs = 34, 325 is the number of observations (one for each importer-exporter-section
triad). We then run a restricted version of (47) imposing  = 4 and restricting  s = 
and  s =  . We denote the resulting sum of squared residuals as RSSR and calculate the
average squared residual   ^R = RSSR /Obs. We then calculate:

                                                    ^U - 
                                                          ^R
                                           = Obs             .
                                                       ^U

Under the null hypothesis,  is distributed chi-squared with 28 degrees of freedom, where
28 is the number of restrictions  s =  and  s =  for s = 1, ..., 15. Our estimated
test statistic is 1249, well above the critical cutoff 41 for a 5% significance level. The
formal rejection of the null is not surprising given the large number of observations,
Obs = 34, 325. But the change in squared residuals, (^    U -   ^R )/^U is only 3.6 percent.
After extracting the sector fixed effects, the R-squared increases from 0.353 to only 0.376.
  27
     Treating the parameters dni , Ti , and  as common across sections justifies our using these same
estimates of the log i 's. Otherwise we would have to reestimate the gravity equation (35) category
by category to obtain category-specific estimates log s  i . The paucity of nonzero trade flows at more
disaggregate levels discouraged us from pursuing this alternative approach.
  28
     We also considered the cases (not consistent with our employing the price equation (36)) (i) in which
the  backed out from (48) can vary by section, importer, and exporter and (ii) in which  can vary by
section but is restricted to be the same for importer and exporter. The story is much as at the aggregate
level:  is poorly identified and we can't reject  = 4 at the 5% significance level for any section.


                                                   40
            Table 10: Results of Price Regression by Section (47) with  = 4

                                                                         
         Section                            par             se     par       se
         1 Animal and Animal Products      0.23            0.05   0.12      0.02
         2 Vegetable Products              0.18            0.04   0.16      0.02
         3 Food Items                      0.16            0.04   0.19      0.02
         4 Mineral Products                0.03            0.03   0.13      0.02
         5 Chemicals and Allied Industries 0.10            0.03   0.16      0.02
         6 Plastics, Rubbers               0.12            0.03   0.20      0.02
         7 Raw Hides, Skins, Leather, Furs 0.24            0.04   0.20      0.03
         8 Wood and Wood Products          0.16            0.03   0.14      0.02
         9 Textiles                        0.21            0.04   0.28      0.03
         10 Footwear, Headgear             0.29            0.06   0.25      0.04
         11 Stone, Glass                   0.16            0.04   0.24      0.04
         12 Metals                         0.12            0.04   0.23      0.03
         13 Machinery, Electrical          0.11            0.03   0.24      0.04
         14 Transportation                 0.15            0.04   0.24      0.03
         15 Miscellaneous                  0.21            0.03   0.27      0.04
              Pooled (from Table 4)        0.13            0.01   0.22      0.03



While the data do imply some statistically significant variation across sections, we find
the similarities so pronounced as to vindicate our aggregate approach, leaving further
exploration of heterogeneity across industries for future research.


7    Conclusion
The COMTRADE data on bilateral trade reveal striking patterns about the range of
products that countries buy and sell as well as about the quantities and prices at which
these products are exchanged. Because the data report these magnitudes only for mer-
chandise that crosses borders, we've applied our analysis to international trade. But the
framework has implications for a wide range of additional issues, such as the roles of dif-
ferent margins in economic growth. Without a domestic equivalent of the COMTRADE
data we have only a much cloudier picture of how these different margins operate. We
leave this issue for future research.
    Our approach has accommodated the HK facts, as they apply both to intermediate and
to final goods, into the perfectly competitive EK framework. As discussed in the intro-
duction, several studies have interpreted these facts using very different approaches that
identify different mechanisms, most notably Feenstra and Romalis (2014), Lashkaripour

                                            41
(2019b), and Atrianfar (2019). A challenge for future research is to assessing the relative
quantitative contributions of these different mechanisms.


References
Amiti, M. and C. Freund (2010). The anatomy of China's export growth. In R. Feenstra
 and S.-J. Wei (Eds.), China's Growing Role in World Trade, pp. 35­56. University of
 Chicago Press.

Anderson, J. E. and E. Van Wincoop (2003). Gravity with gravitas: A solution to the
 border puzzle. The American Economic Review 93 (1), 170­192.

Anderson, J. E. and E. Van Wincoop (2004). Trade costs. The Journal of Economic
 Literature 42 (3), 691­751.

Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2012). New trade models, same old
  gains? The American Economic Review 102 (1), 94­130.

Armenter, R. and M. Koren (2014). A balls-and-bins model of trade. The American
  Economic Review 104 (7), 2127­51.

Atrianfar, H. (2019). Competing on price and quality: Theory and evidence from
  trade data. https://atrianfar.weebly.com/uploads/1/2/2/6/122697364/hamed_
  atrianfar_jmp.pdf.

Baier, S. L., J. H. Bergstrand, and M. Feng (2014). Economic integration agreements and
  the margins of international trade. Journal of International Economics 93 (2), 339­350.

Baldwin, R. and J. Harrigan (2011). Zeros, quality, and space: Trade theory and trade
  evidence. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 3 (2), 60­88.

Bekkers, E., J. Francois, and M. Manchin (2012). Import prices, income, and inequality.
  European Economic Review 56 (4), 848­869.

Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003). Plants and productivity
  in international trade. The American Economic Review 93 (4), 1268­1290.

Besedes, T. and T. J. Prusa (2006). Ins, outs, and the duration of trade. Canadian
  Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne d'´
                                          economique 39 (1), 266­295.




                                            42
Besedes, T. and T. J. Prusa (2011). The role of extensive and intensive margins and
  export growth. Journal of Development Economics 96 (2), 371­379.

Broda, C. and D. E. Weinstein (2006). Globalization and the gains from variety. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (2), 541­585.

Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2015). Estimates of the trade and welfare effects of NAFTA.
  The Review of Economic Studies 82 (1), 1­44.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2011). Robust inference with multiway
  clustering. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 29 (2), 238­249.

Chaney, T. (2008). Distorted gravity: The intensive and extensive margins of international
 trade. The American Economic Review 98 (4), 1707­21.

Choi, Y. C., D. Hummels, and C. Xiang (2009). Explaining import quality: The role of
 the income distribution. Journal of International Economics 77 (2), 265­275.

Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, and I. Komunjer (2011). What goods do countries trade?
  A quantitative exploration of Ricardo's ideas. The Review of Economic Studies 79 (2),
  581­608.

Debaere, P. and S. Mostashari (2010). Do tariffs matter for the extensive margin of
  international trade? An empirical analysis. Journal of International Economics 81 (2),
  163­169.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, geography, and trade. Econometrica 70 (5),
  1741­1779.

Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz (2011). An anatomy of international trade: Evi-
  dence from French firms. Econometrica 79 (5), 1453­1498.

Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and S. Sotelo (2013). International trade: Linking micro and
  macro. In D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano, and E. Dekel (Eds.), Advances in Economics and
  Econometrics: Tenth World Congress, Volume 2, pp. 329­370. Cambridge University
  Press.

Evenett, S. J. and A. Venables (2002). Export growth by developing economies: Market
  entry and bilateral trade. https://www.alexandria.unisg.ch/22177/.

Fajgelbaum, P., G. M. Grossman, and E. Helpman (2011). Income distribution, product
  quality, and international trade. The Journal of Political Economy 119 (4), 721­765.

                                           43
Feenstra, R. C. (1994). New product varieties and the measurement of international
  prices. The American Economic Review 84 (1), 157­177.

Feenstra, R. C. and J. Romalis (2014). International prices and endogenous quality. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2), 477­527.

Flam, H. and E. Helpman (1987). Vertical product differentiation and North-South trade.
  The American Economic Review 77 (5), 810­822.

Hallak, J. C. (2006). Product quality and the direction of trade. Journal of International
  Economics 68 (1), 238­265.

Hallak, J. C. (2010). A product-quality view of the Linder hypothesis. The Review of
  Economics and Statistics 92 (3), 453­466.

Hallak, J. C. and P. K. Schott (2011). Estimating cross-country differences in product
  quality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 417­474.

Hummels, D. and P. J. Klenow (2005). The variety and quality of a nation's exports. The
 American Economic Review 95 (3), 704­723.

Hummels, D. and A. Skiba (2004). Shipping the good apples out? An empirical con-
 firmation of the Alchian-Allen conjecture. The Journal of Political Economy 112 (6),
 1384­1402.

Kehoe, T. J. and K. J. Ruhl (2013). How important is the new goods margin in interna-
  tional trade? The Journal of Political Economy 121 (2), 358­392.

Khandelwal, A. (2010). The long and short (of) quality ladders. The Review of Economic
 Studies 77 (4), 1450­1476.

Krugman, P. R. (1979). Increasing returns, monopolistic competition, and international
  trade. Journal of International Economics 9 (4), 469­479.

Lashkaripour, A. (2019a). Weight-based quality specialization. http://pages.iu.edu/
  ~alashkar/Lashkaripour_Weight.pdf.

Lashkaripour, A. (2019b). Within-industry specialization and global market power. Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Micro, forthcoming.

Linder, S. B. (1961). An Essay on Trade and Transformation. Almqvist & Wiksell
  Stockholm.

                                           44
Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate
 industry productivity. Econometrica 71 (6), 1695­1725.

Rauch, J. E. (1999). Networks versus markets in international trade. Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 48 (1), 7­35.

Sato, K. (1976). The ideal log-change index number. The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 58 (2), 223­228.

Schott, P. K. (2004). Across-product versus within-product specialization in international
  trade. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2), 647­678.

Silva, J. S. and S. Tenreyro (2006). The log of gravity. The Review of Economics and
   Statistics 88 (4), 641­658.

Silva, J. S., S. Tenreyro, and K. Wei (2014). Estimating the extensive margin of trade.
   Journal of International Economics 93 (1), 67­75.

Simonovska, I. and M. E. Waugh (2014). The elasticity of trade: Estimates and evidence.
  Journal of International Economics 92 (1), 34­50.

Stokey, N. L. (1991). The volume and composition of trade between rich and poor coun-
  tries. The Review of Economic Studies 58 (1), 63­80.

Vartia, Y. O. (1976). Ideal log-change index numbers. Scandinavian Journal of Statis-
  tics 3 (3), 121­126.

Vernon, R. (1966). International trade and international investment in the product cycle.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 80 (2), 190­207.

Waugh, M. E. (2010). International trade and income differences. The American Economic
 Review 100 (5), 2093­2124.




                                           45
