                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   SOUTHERN (AMERICAN) HOSPITALITY:
  ITALIANS IN ARGENTINA AND THE US DURING THE AGE OF MASS MIGRATION

                                       Santiago Pérez

                                     Working Paper 26127
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26127


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2019




I thank Enrique Pérez and María Fabiana Vaccaro for their help collecting the data. I have
benefitted from feedback from Ran Abramitzky, Leah Boustan, Federico Curci, Herbert S. Klein,
Giovanni Peri, Mateo Uribe-Castro and Alejandra Irigoin, and from seminar participants at the
NBER Summer Institute; Migration and Development Conference; Statistics Norway Workshop
on Intergenerational Mobility, Gender and Family Formation in the Long Run; UC Davis
Migration Research Cluster; Universidad de San Andrés and Universidad de los Andes. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Santiago Pérez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Southern (American) Hospitality: Italians in Argentina and the US during the Age of Mass
Migration
Santiago Pérez
NBER Working Paper No. 26127
July 2019
JEL No. J15,J61,N30,N31,N36

                                         ABSTRACT

I study the selection and economic outcomes of Italians in Argentina and the US, the two largest
destinations during the age of mass migration. Prior cross-sectional work finds that Italians had
faster assimilation in Argentina, but it is inconclusive on whether this was due to differences in
selection or host-country conditions. I assemble data following Italians from passenger lists to
censuses, enabling me to compare migrants with similar pre-migration characteristics. Italians
had better economic outcomes in Argentina, and this advantage was unlikely to be due to
selection. Migration path dependence can rationalize these differences in an era of open borders.


Santiago Pérez
Department of Economics
University of California at Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
seperez@ucdavis.edu
1        Introduction

At the turn of the 20th century, the shift in migrants' regional origin toward Southern and Eastern

Europe fueled the rise of anti-immigrant sentiments in the US. In 1907, the US Congress convened

a special commission to analyze the social and economic life of immigrants. The Immigration

Commission painted a dismal picture of Italians, the largest contributors to the surge of southern

European immigration: Italians were consistently at the bottom in terms of family income, rates

of home ownership and job skills (Dillingham, 1911). The conclusions of the Commission served as

the basis for the imposition of country-of-origin quotas, which in 1924 limited the number of new

Italian immigrants to just 4,000 per year.1

        The situation of Italians in the US contrasts with their situation in Argentina, the second

largest destination for Italians during the age of mass migration. For instance, in 1909 Italians

owned 38 percent of the 28,632 commercial establishments in Buenos Aires, despite them being

just 22 percent of the city's population (Mart´
                                              inez, 1910). According to Klein (1983, p. 306), "the

sharp differences in the Italian immigrant experience within Argentina and the United States were

fully perceived by both the immigrants themselves and virtually all contemporary observers."

        The reasons for these differences are, however, less clear: Were the Italians who went to Ar-

gentina better prepared for the migration experience than those who went to the US? Or did they

encounter a more welcoming host society?2 Existing comparative studies on the economic assim-

ilation of Italians in the Americas are based on cross-sectional data from the receiving countries,

such as population censuses. These data make it difficult to tease out these different explanations.

For instance, a well-known difference between Italians in Argentina and the US is that Argentina

attracted a higher fraction of northern Italians (Klein, 1983). However, neither Argentine nor US

censuses include information on the regional origins of Italians.

        I study the selection and economic outcomes of Italians in Argentina and the US during the age

of mass migration. To do so, I assembled data following Italian immigrants from passenger lists to

population censuses. In these data, I observe the year of entry, port of origin and pre-migration
    1
     For perspective, an average of 200,000 Italians per year entered the US in the decade following the country-of-
origin quotas (Ferenczi, 1929).
   2
     Here I paraphrase Baily (1983, p. 295), who asked: "Were the Italians in Buenos Aires in some way better
prepared for the immigration experience than those who went to New York? Did they encounter a more receptive
host society?".



                                                         2
occupation of a sample of Italians who resided in Argentina or the US by the late 19th century.

These data enable me to assess, to a far greater extent than with the existing data, if the differences

in economic outcomes at the destination countries can be explained by selection.

   Beyond its historical significance, studying migrants' destination choices and their subsequent

assimilation in this era can inform broader issues on the economics of immigration. Neoclassical

models of migration predict destination choices to depend mainly on wage differentials between

the origin and the potential destinations (Sjaastad, 1962; Todaro, 1969). On the other hand,

network theories of migration emphasize the strength of migrants' networks abroad as the key

driver of destination choices (Massey, Arango, Hugo, Kouaouci, Pellegrino, and Taylor, 1993).

Distinguishing these theories in modern datasets is complicated because migration policy interferes

with migrants' decisions (Beine et al., 2011). For instance, current US migration policy explicitly

favors "network" migration through family reunification visas. In contrast, in this period, both

Argentina and the US maintained nearly open borders for European immigration.

   I start by comparing Italians in the census cross-sections of 1895 Argentina and 1900 US. I focus

on two main economic outcomes throughout the analysis: A person's occupation and whether he

owned his home in the destination country. Consistent with the historical literature (Baily, 1983;

Klein, 1983; Baily, 2004), I document that Italians in Argentina had higher rates of home ownership

and were more likely to hold skilled occupations than Italians in the US.

   The advantage of Italians in Argentina might have been driven by differences in the charac-

teristics of those moving to each of the destinations. I use individual-level passenger-list data to

compare the pre-migration characteristics of Italians moving to Argentina or the US before 1900.

The main difference between both groups was the higher fraction of Italians departing from north-

ern ports among those going to Argentina. However, I find small or no differences in pre-migration

occupations or other demographic characteristics: Italians who moved to Argentina or the US

were similar with respect to their age and gender, and were employed in similar (predominantly

unskilled) occupations prior to migrating.

   I next compare the outcomes of Italians in Argentina and the US using the passenger lists

linked to census data. Here, I am able to narrow the comparison to immigrants who left Italy in

the same year, from the same port, and who had the same pre-migration occupation and literacy

level. The advantage of Italian migrants in Argentina is, in most cases, similar to that in the

                                                  3
cross-section. This similarity suggests a limited role for observable pre-migration characteristics

(including regional origins within Italy) in explaining the advantage of Italians in Argentina.

   As a last exercise, I further narrow the comparison to Italian immigrants who shared a surname

but moved to different destinations. This comparison serves two purposes. First, Italian surnames

are informative of regional origins (Guglielmino and De Silvestri, 1995; Spitzer and Zimran, 2018).

Hence, surnames enable me to absorb a finer regional variation than the one captured by ports of

origin. Second, Clark, Cummins, Hao, and Vidal (2015) and G¨
                                                           uell, Rodr´
                                                                     iguez Mora, and Telmer

(2014) show that there is substantial persistence in economic outcomes across family lines, an

effect that a within-surname comparison would absorb. These results show a similar pattern, again

suggesting a limited role for pre-migration characteristics in explaining the different outcomes of

Italians across the Americas.

   I next investigate the extent to which these advantages persisted into the second generation.

To do so, I compare the outcomes of native-born children of Italian immigrants in Argentina and

the US. Second-generation Italians in the US continued to be less likely to own property and hold a

skilled occupation than children of Italian immigrants in Argentina. However, I find a smaller gap

in the likelihood of holding a skilled occupation, suggesting some convergence in this dimension.

   Which host-country conditions explain the differences in economic outcomes? First, I show

that although Italian immigrants in Argentina and the US had similar levels of human capital (as

proxied by literacy and numeracy rates), Italians in Argentina had higher levels of human capital

relative to the native-born population. Second, I find evidence consistent with the closer linguistic

distance between Italian and Spanish enabling Italians to enter a broader range of occupations in

Argentina than in the US. Finally, I provide qualitative and historical survey evidence showing the

widespread prejudice against Italians in the US during this period.

   While my data enable me to account for selection into destinations to a far greater extent than

with cross-sectional data, I cannot fully rule out that the relative success of Italians in Argentina

was driven by unobserved differences between those who went to Argentina and those who went

to the US. To assess the likely role of unobserved characteristics in explaining the differences in

outcomes, I compare the stability of the coefficient estimates when expanding the set of control

variables, as suggested in Altonji et al. (2005). The results of this exercise suggest that the degree

of selection on unobservables would have needed to be as much as 11 times larger to rationalize

                                                  4
the differences in home ownership rates, and 37 times larger to rationalize the differences in the

likelihood of being employed in an unskilled occupation.

       The analysis is based on a sample of individuals who chose to stay in the Americas (at least

until the time of the censuses). However, a substantial fraction of Italians (both in Argentina

and the US) eventually returned to Italy during this era (Bandiera, Rasul, and Viarengo, 2013).

One hypothesis for the better performance of Italians in Argentina is that Italian migrations to

the US were less likely to be permanent, thus reducing the incentives to invest in host-country

specific human capital. Indeed, the US Immigration Commission pointed to the high rates of return

migration among southern Europeans as one of the main reasons for their lack of assimilation and

even recommended restricting temporary migrations.3 My results provide evidence against this

explanation, as the advantage of Italians in Argentina was present even by the second generation.

Moreover, rates of return migration were actually similar for these cohorts of Italians in Argentina

and the US.

       The large differences in economic outcomes and the likely limited role of pre-migration charac-

teristics pose a puzzle: Why did (in an era of open borders) some Italians choose a country that

offered them limited prospects for upward mobility? One potential explanation is that, although

upward mobility was lower, wages for unskilled workers were higher in the US than in Argentina.

Hence, Italians deciding between Argentina and the US might have faced a trade-off between higher

wages in the short-term and better long-term prospects for upward mobility. However, the fact

that Italians in Argentina and the US had similar arrival ages and rates of return migration is not

entirely consistent with this explanation.

       An alternative explanation is that immigrant networks generated path dependence in destination

choices: For Italians choosing where to migrate, having relatives or friends in one of the destinations

might have been the decisive factor. In the last part of the paper, I use the passenger lists to test

whether migrants were more likely to move to the destination where their "family and friends"

had migrated in the past. Because I do not directly observe family or friend relationships among

immigrants, I use the surnames of previous migrants to Argentina and the US to construct a proxy

for the size of a migrant's network at each potential destination. I find that this measure is a strong
   3
    "As far as possible, the aliens excluded should be those who come to this country with no intention to become
American citizens or even to maintain a permanent residence here, but merely to save enough, by the adoption, if
necessary, of low standards of living, to return permanently to their home country." (Dillingham, 1911)


                                                       5
predictor of where Italians moved, suggesting a role for path dependence in explaining destination

choices. Consistent with network effects, the measure has stronger predictive power for women,

children, and relatively unskilled migrants.

        This paper is related to the literature on immigrant assimilation during the Age of Mass Mi-

gration. Several papers have studied the economic assimilation of immigrants in specific receiving

countries. For instance, Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2014), Catron (2016) and Ferrie (1994,

1997) study the assimilation of immigrants in the US, whereas Inwood et al. (2016) and Green and

MacKinnon (2001) study the case of Canada.4 In previous work (P´
                                                               erez, 2017), I studied the eco-

nomic assimilation of European immigrants in 19th-century Argentina. However, no quantitative

studies have looked at the comparative performance of immigrant groups across different receiving

countries. The case of Italian migration to Argentina and the US is especially relevant, as it deals

with the main sending country and the two largest destinations during this period. Italians are

also an ideal case study because they migrated in large numbers to both North and South America

and because of the availability of individual-level data with information on pre- and post-migration

outcomes.5



2        Italian Mass Emigration

From 1876 to 1915, more than 14 million Italians emigrated to other countries in Europe and to

the Americas: Italians represented the largest flow in absolute numbers during the age of mass

migration. In per capita terms, Italian emigration rates were second only to the Irish (Taylor and

Williamson, 1997).

        The Italian case was distinct from that of other European countries in that Italians emigrated

in large numbers to multiple destinations: About 60% moved to South and North America, and

the rest moved to other countries within Europe. Argentina and the US were the two destinations

with the largest transcontinental flow, receiving 2.5 and 4.5 million Italians, respectively, from 1857

to 1924 (Ferenczi, 1929). Figure 1 shows the yearly number of Italian arrivals in Argentina and the
    4
     Other examples include Hatton (1997) and Minns (2000) for the US, and Moya (1998) for Argentina.
    5
     Italians are the only immigrant group for which there was significant overlap between Argentina and the US. The
second largest sending country for Argentina was Spain: Combined, Italy and Spain account for more than 80% of
all the immigrants who went to Argentina. However, there were only about 7,000 Spanish immigrants in 1900 US
(Gibson and Jung, 1999).



                                                         6
US in this period. While Italians were more likely to migrate to Argentina than to the US from

1860 to 1880, both countries attracted similar numbers during the last two decades of the 19th

century. After 1900, however, the majority of Italian migration was to the US.

        The increase in migration to the US relative to Argentina coincided with a change in the regional

origins of Italian migrants. During the second half of the 19th century, Italian emigration was more

predominant in the relatively more developed northern Italy. By the turn of the 20th century,

southern Italian migration took off (Gomellini and O'Grada, 2011).6



3        Data

I use two sources of individual-level data for Argentina and the US: passenger lists of immigrant

arrivals and population censuses. The Argentine passenger lists were originally collected by Ar-

gentina's National Direction of Immigration and have been digitized by Centro de Estudios Migra-

torios Latinoamericanos and Fondazione Rodolfo Agnelli. The data include about 1,020,000 records

of Italians who arrived in Argentina through the port of Buenos Aires between 1882 and 1920.7

Each record contains the name, age, sex, civil status, literacy, occupation, date of arrival and port

of origin of each passenger. Unfortunately, other than the port of origin, the data do not include

any systematic information on the last place of residence within Italy.

        The US passenger lists come from the National Archives ("Italians to America" passenger data

file) and are based on information collected by the US Customs Service. The data include about

845,000 passengers who arrived in the US between 1855 and 1900 and who identified their country

of origin as Italy or one of the following regions: Lombardy, Piedmont, Sardinia, Sicily, or Tuscany.

Most of the records are of passengers arriving to New York, although other US ports are also

included. Each record contains information on the name, age, sex, literacy, occupation, town of

last residence, destination within the US, date of arrival, port of origin and entry and class of travel

of each passenger.

        I linked males in these passenger lists to national population censuses of Argentina and the US.

In the case of Argentina, the 1895 census is the only census for which such linking is possible, since
    6
     Northern Italians were also overrepresented among those going to Brazil. Klein (1989) shows that the economic
outcomes of Italians in Brazil were similar to those of Italians in Argentina.
   7
     About 75% of immigrants entered Argentina through the port of Buenos Aires in this period (de Inmigraci´  on,
1925). I discuss the coverage and representativeness of the passenger list data in Online Appendix section 7.


                                                        7
the previous national census (which took place in 1869) was conducted before the passenger list

data started being systematically collected, and there are no surviving individual-level records for

the next census (which took place in 1914). For the US, I linked the passenger lists to the 1900

census, as this is the closest in time to the 1895 Argentine census (there are no surviving individual-

level records of the 1890 US Census). To improve the comparability between the Argentine and US

data, I restricted the US sample to arrivals on or after 1882. As a result of these data limitations,

my analysis excludes Italians who arrived during the peak of Italian immigration to the US (after

1900).

    The linking is based on country of birth, first and last name, and reported age. A challenge

in linking these data is that some Italians declared their original name (in Italian) upon arrival

but later adopted a Spanish/English version of it (see Biavaschi et al. (2017) and Carneiro et al.

(2017) for these names changes in the context of the US). For instance, the Giuseppes were likely

to become Jos´
             es in Argentina and Josephs in the US. To deal with this challenge, I first used a

dictionary of names to translate Italian names into their Spanish or English counterparts. Then,

I used these translated names as an additional input in the linking procedure, following a similar

procedure in Alexander et al. (2018) and P´
                                          erez (2017).

    To link individuals from the passenger lists to the censuses, I implemented the following pro-

cedure (described in detail in Abramitzky et al. (2019)). In the first step, I identified a group of

individuals in the passenger lists that I would attempt to match to the census. Then, I searched

the census for a set of potential matches for each individual. I identified potential matches as indi-

viduals who: (1) reported Italy as their place of birth, (2) had a predicted age difference of no more

than five years in absolute value, and (3) had first and last names starting with the same letter.

Based on the similarity of their reported names and predicted years of birth, I calculated a linking

score ranging from 0 to 1 for each pair of potential matches, with higher scores corresponding to

pairs of records that were more similar to each other.8

    To be considered a unique match for an individual in the passenger lists, a record in the census

had to satisfy three conditions: (1) be the record with the highest linking score p1 among all the

potential matches for that individual, (2) have a linking score above a threshold (p1 > p, with
  8
    To measure similarity in first and last names, I used the Jaro-Winkler string distance function (Winkler, 1990),
whereas to measure similarity in ages I used the absolute value of the predicted years of birth.



                                                         8
p  (0, 1)), and (3) have a linking score sufficiently higher than the second highest linking score

(p2 < l, with l  [0, p)). In the baseline analysis, I only kept observations with a linking score of at

least 0.7 and a second highest linking score of at most 0.5. In section 4.4, I show the robustness of

the results to using more conservative choices of the linking parameters.

       An important concern with using such data is that some of the links might be incorrect (Bailey

et al., 2017). To address this concern, I chose a relatively conservative set of linking parameters.

While this choice implies that I am able to uniquely match a relatively small fraction of records

(due to a standard trade-off between type I and type II errors), it also implies that the quality

of matches is likely higher. Indeed, Abramitzky et al. (2018) show that this method achieves low

rates of false positives (below 5%), although at the expense of matching relatively few observations.

Using my baseline parameters, I uniquely link around 6% of the Argentine observations and 4% of

the US observations. Lower matching rates for the US are expected given slightly higher return

migration and the fact that Italian names in the US were probably more likely to be misspelled

than in Argentina (given the similarity between Italian and Spanish).9 In the robustness section of

the paper, I show that the results are robust to imposing an even higher threshold for considering

an observation as a match.

       An additional concern is whether this linking procedure generates representative samples. Ta-

bles A1 and A2 compare immigrants in the passenger lists who were uniquely linked to the census

to those who were not. To do so, I estimate a probit model of the likelihood of being linked as a

function of observable characteristics upon arrival, separately for the Argentina and the US data.

The tables report the probit marginal effects for each of the included characteristics.

       There are some statistically significant differences between Italians in the passenger lists and

those in the linked data, although the differences are, in all cases, quite small. In both the Argentina

and US samples, I am less likely to match individuals who report an unskilled occupation upon

arrival. There is also a small correlation between age upon arrival (positive for Argentina, negative

for the US) and the likelihood of matching. In section 4.4, I show that the results are similar

when I reweight the data to account for selection with respect to these observable characteristics.

Also, whenever possible, I show results based on the cross-sectional data (which do not rely upon
   9
      When comparing two independent transcriptions of the 1940 US census, Abramitzky et al. (2018) show that
Italian surnames have very high rates of discrepancies: 32% of the surnames have at least a one character difference.



                                                         9
linking).10

         Both the US passenger lists and the US 1900 census are fully digitized, including the information

on occupations and other economic outcomes. The Argentine passenger lists are also fully digitized,

but only the indexes of the 1895 census are. Hence, after linking the data, I manually digitized the

economic information in the 1895 Argentine census (using the original manuscripts available in the

genealogy website familysearch.org). The baseline linked samples include about 15,000 observations

for Argentina and about 15,000 for the US.



4         Results

4.1        Differences in the cross section

I start by comparing Italian immigrants in the census cross-sections of 1895 Argentina (Somoza,

1967) and 1900 US (Ruggles et al., 1997).11 To do so, I restrict both samples to Italians and

estimate:

                                     yic =  + Argentinaic + Xic +               ic                                  (1)

where yic is an outcome of individual i in destination country c. Throughout the analysis, I focus on

two outcomes that can be consistently measured in the Argentine and US censuses: The likelihood of

home ownership and the likelihood of holding an unskilled occupation.12 The coefficient of interest

is  , which measures the economic advantage/disadvantage of Italians in Argentina relative to

Italians in the US. The sample is restricted to males aged 18 to 60 years old at the time of the

census. In all specifications, I control for an individual's age using fixed effects (captured by the

vector Xic ).

         One issue with this model is that the Italian advantage/disadvantage in Argentina might re-
    10
       It is also worth noting that immigrants in the linked sample might differ from immigrants in the passenger lists
data for reasons unrelated to the linking procedure (for instance, selective mortality or return migration).
   11
      Specifically, I use the 1900 full count censuses for Italians (available through the NBER server) pooled with a 1%
random sample for the rest of the US population.
   12
      To maximize the consistency of the occupational classifications, I first assigned each occupation a code from the
Historical International Standard Classification of Occupations (HISCO), which I then mapped into occupational
categories using the Historical International Social Class Scheme (HISCLASS) (Leeuwen et al., 2002). This classifica-
tion is based on the International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) and has been adapted to work with
historical data. Unskilled jobs are those in HISCLASS categories 10 to 12. The 1895 Argentine census asked "¿Posee
propiedad ra´   iz?" ("Do you own real estate property?"). The 1900 US census asked "Is the person's home owned
or rented?". Neither the 1895 Argentine nor the 1900 US census contains information on individual-level earnings,
which prevents me from looking at earnings as an outcome variable.


                                                          10
flect aggregate differences between the Argentine and US economies rather than Italian-specific

differences. Indeed, Klein (1983) argues that the preponderance of small artisan shops in Argen-

tine manufacturing offered more opportunities for skilled blue-collar and white-collar jobs than the

more industrialized US economy. Hence, I also estimate a model measuring whether Italians in

Argentina did better/worse than Italians in the US relative to natives or other immigrants in their

respective destination countries:


           yic = 0 + 1 Italianic + 2 Argentina + 3 Italianic × Argentinaic + Xic +                     ic        (2)


Here, the coefficient of interest is 3 which measures the advantage/disadvantage of Italians in

Argentina relative to Italians in the US, net of aggregate differences between both destination

countries.

    Table 1 shows that first-generation Italians in Argentina were four percentage points more likely

to own their home, relative to a baseline of 14.4 percent among Italians in the US. The relative

advantage of Italians in terms of home ownership is much larger (above 25 percentage points) when

including the native-born of both countries in the sample (column 2), or when comparing Italians

to other immigrant groups (column 3) or to everyone in the working-age population (column 4).

    Italians in Argentina were also 28 percentage points less likely to be employed in an unskilled

occupation, relative to a baseline of about 50 percent among Italians in the US. This gap is very

similar when including the native born in the sample (column 2), and smaller but still large when

comparing Italians to other immigrant groups (column 3) or to everyone in the working-age popu-

lation (column 4).

    Table B1 in the Online Appendix shows that these results are not driven by Italians in the

US being disproportionately more likely to locate in urban areas: There is a similar pattern when

restricting the sample to urban areas (panel (a)).13 The relatively few Italians who lived in rural

areas in the US were more likely to own property than the Italians in rural areas of Argentina.

However, panel (b) show that this pattern reverses when I compare Italians to the other groups in

the respective countries (reflecting that, in the US, home ownership rates were on average higher

than in Argentina).
  13
     Table B2 shows similar results when restricting the sample to just the cities of Buenos Aires and New York, the
two largest Italian destinations in Argentina and the US and the original focus of the studies of Baily (1983, 2004).


                                                         11
4.2   Differences in selection

The above results confirm the relative economic success of Italians in Argentina documented in Klein

(1983) and Baily (1983, 2004). However, this advantage might have just reflected differences in the

pre-migration characteristics of those who went to each of the countries. For instance, Argentina

received relatively more migration from northern Italy (which was already more developed than the

South at the time (Federico et al., 2019)) than did the US. Figure 2 shows the ten largest ports of

origin of Italian arrivals in Argentina and the US in the 1882-1900 period. Genoa and Naples were

the two largest ports of departure of Italian migrants, both for Argentina and the US. However,

while close to 80% of the Italians entering Argentina departed from the port of Genoa (a northern

port), less than 20% of those moving to the US did so. In contrast, Naples (a southern port)

accounted for more than half of arrivals in the US but for only 10% of the arrivals in Argentina.

   Whether Argentina received relatively more skilled migrants than the US is controversial in the

historical literature. On the one hand, Baily (1983, p. 295) argues that "Those who migrated to

Buenos Aires included more workers with higher levels of skill and of literacy, more individuals

with experience in organization, and more people who intended to stay." On the other hand, Klein

(1983, p. 329) argues that: "No significant factors in the Italian origin of the immigrants, or in

their cultural make-up, can as fully explain the social and economic history of the Italians in the

Americas."

   I next use the passenger lists data to compare the pre-migration characteristics of Italians

arriving in Argentina and the US. For this analysis, I use the data on the 1882 to 1900 arrivals, as

these are the years for which the Argentine and US passenger lists overlap. Specifically, I estimate:



                                 xit =  + Argentinait + Zit +         it                             (3)

where xict represents a pre-migration characteristic of immigrant i arriving in year t.

   Table 2 shows the results of these regressions, where each row represents a different individual-

level characteristic. In the first column, I report the average value of each of these variables in

the US data. In the remaining columns, I report the value of  (the Argentina-US difference) as I

progressively control for year of arrival and port of origin fixed effects (captured by the vector Zit ).

   The top panel compares Italian migrants in Argentina and the US with respect to demographic


                                                   12
characteristics: the fraction of males, average age and the fraction of children (defined as those

aged 16 or less). These variables are important because a higher fraction of women and children is

indicative of the prevalence of family migration and hence, of the intended permanence of migra-

tions. In the raw data, Italians moving to Argentina were on average younger, more likely to be

aged less than 16 years, and less likely to be male. However, this pattern reverses once I include

year of entry and port of origin fixed effects, thus comparing Italians moving to the Americas on the

same year and from the same port. Overall, even in the raw data, there were no large differences

in the age structure and gender ratios of Italians moving to Argentina or the US: Both groups were

largely comprised of working-age males, with males aged 18 to 60 years old accounting for close to

60% of the flow in both cases.14

    I next look at differences in pre-migration occupations. Here, I focus on the sample of males

aged 18 to 60 years old upon arrival. Italians who went to Argentina were overrepresented among

those holding white-collar jobs (although the proportion of workers in this category was fairly small

in both flows at around 3%), and underrepresented among those holding skilled/semi-skilled jobs.

The differences in this regard are of similar magnitude when including the various fixed effects.

    The most salient difference in terms of pre-migration occupations is that Italians who migrated

to Argentina were more likely to report farming and less likely to report unskilled occupations.

Part of this difference captures differences across regions of origin: Including port of origin fixed

effects reduces the Argentina-US difference in the likelihood of holding a farming occupation from

20 to 13 percentage points.

    However, the distinction between farm and general laborers is unlikely to have been very in-

formative in this context: As late as 1911, about 60% of the Italian workforce was still employed

in agriculture.15 Indeed, the linked data enable me to explicitly test the informativeness of the

distinction between general and farm laborers. Specifically, if this distinction captured some rele-

vant information, we should observe differences in the outcomes at the destination of both types
  14
     Figure B1 in the Online Appendix shows that the overall age structure of both groups (and not just the average
age) was also very similar. This figure uses the pooled 1882-1900 data to plot a histogram of the ages of Italians
arriving in Argentina or the US.
  15
     For instance, Klein (1983, p. 313) writes that "the entire distinction between non-farm unskilled laborers and
farm workers may have been rather artificial." Coletti (1912) declared that he and all other analysts of Italian
emigration have found that "laborers, day laborers, and the like come in large part from the rural classes and for
that reason should be added to the category of agricultural laborers in order to account fully for the rural contingent
in the emigrant stream."



                                                          13
of workers. However, when using the linked data in section 4.3, I find that whether an individ-

ual declared a farming or an unskilled occupation upon arrival has little predictive power on his

outcomes at the destination.16

       Literacy is another measure of skills that was collected in the passenger lists. Unfortunately,

this variable is missing for about 60% of the individuals in the US data. One way to deal with

this limitation is to measure literacy in the census cross-sections of 1895 Argentina and 1900 US.

A concern with such approach is that differences in the cross-sectional data might exaggerate

differences upon arrival if Italians were more likely to accumulate skills in one of the countries. Yet,

the data show a relatively small difference between Italians in Argentina and the US with respect

to literacy: 64% of the Italians aged 18 to 60 in 1895 Argentina were literate, compared to 59% in

1900 US% (own calculation based on Somoza (1967) and Ruggles et al. (1997)). This difference is

much smaller than the difference between southern and northern Italians who remained in Italy:

By 1901 only 30% of southerners were literate, compared to 65% of northerners (Klein, 1983).

       In settings in which other measures are unavailable, age heaping ­the tendency of individuals

to report "attractive" numbers as their age, typically multiples of five­ has been used as a proxy

for quantitative skills. A'Hearn et al. (2009) show that, when age heaping and literacy are both ob-

served, there is a high correlation between the two.17 To test whether Italians moving to Argentina

had higher numeracy, I define an indicator that takes a value of one if an individual reported an

age with a multiple of five as its last digit. The table shows that Italians in Argentina were less

likely to report a multiple of five as their age but that this difference is very small in magnitude.18

       Overall, the above analysis indicates that the main difference between Italians who moved to

Argentina and those who moved to the US was their region of origin, with smaller or no differences
  16
      Ferrie (1997) makes a similar point regarding the distinction between farmers, farm tenants, and unskilled workers
in the US passenger lists of the mid 19th century. He writes: "Farmers are more problematic. This is probably less
the result of carelessness on the part of those compiling the lists than it is the result of the presence of large numbers
of farm tenants in Europe and the absence of the term `tenant' in the ship lists. An individual who was a farm tenant
in Europe would thus have been described as either a farmer or a laborer in the ship lists. Since there were no clear
guidelines by which farm tenants were assigned to either group in the ship lists, we cannot separate those who were
farm tenants in Europe (who were probably more akin to laborers in the amount of capital they possessed and the
amount of supervision they received) from independent farmers. The same problem applies to a lesser degree for
those reported as unskilled in the ship lists."
   17
      In the census data described above, there is also a negative correlation between being literate and the likelihood
of reporting a multiple of five as age.
   18
      A number of studies use this measure in the context of immigration. Mokyr and Grada (1982) and Collins and
Zimran (2018) use this measure to analyze the selection of Irish famine migrants, and Stolz and Baten (2012) use
this measure to test whether immigrant selection responded to relative inequality.



                                                           14
in other pre-migration characteristics. However, one limitation of the analysis is that the available

measures of skills are all relatively coarse. Spitzer and Zimran (2018) use the heights of Italians

entering the US to study immigrant selectivity.19 Unfortunately, there is no systematic data on

heights for Argentina that would allow me to compare Italians in Argentina and the US with respect

to this characteristic.20


4.3    Differences in the linked data

Italians who moved to Argentina were more likely to be northerners, but there were no large

differences in other observable characteristics, including pre-migration occupations, literacy, and

proxies for numeracy. How much of the relative advantage of Italians in Argentina can be explained

by these differences in pre-migration characteristics?

    I start by constructing occupational transition matrices in which rows represent an immigrant's

occupation in Italy, and columns represent his occupation in Argentina or the US. Panel (a) in Table

3 shows this transition matrix for Argentina, whereas panel (b) shows the corresponding matrix

for the US. Despite the fact that Italian migrants were predominantly from rural backgrounds,

they concentrated in urban areas in both Argentina and the US, particularly in the port of entry

cities of Buenos Aires and New York. Indeed, a relatively small fraction (about 20%) of Italians

in Argentina and the US worked as farmers (last row of each transition matrix). The majority of

Italians in the US were employed as unskilled workers, whereas the largest category for Italians

in Argentina was that of skilled/semi-skilled workers. Relative to Italians in the US, Italians in

Argentina were also more likely to be employed in white-collar jobs.

    Turning to the occupational transitions, I find that Italians in Argentina were less likely to

experience occupational downgrading than Italians in the US. For instance, among Italians with a

white-collar job in Europe, only 12% held an unskilled occupation in Argentina. In contrast, among

Italians in the US, the chances of landing an unskilled job were substantial (36%) even for those

previously employed as white-collar workers. Moreover, the likelihood of moving out of unskilled
  19
     They find that migrants moving to the US were positively selected within their provinces of origin, but negatively
selected overall.This pattern is consistent with the fact that, despite there were large differences in literacy rates
between the South and the North and that Argentina attracted more Northerners, the literacy rates of Italians in
Argentina and the US were close to each other.
  20
     Kosack and Ward (2014) use heights to measure the selectivity of Mexican migration to the US in the early 20th
century.



                                                          15
occupations was lower in the US (42%) than in Argentina (77%).

       In the last row of the table, I simulate the occupational distribution of Italians in the US

had they been exposed to the transition matrix of Italians in Argentina (following the approach

in Collins and Wanamaker (2017)). This counterfactual distribution is quite different from the

observed one for Italians in the US. For instance, while more than half of the Italians in the US

worked in unskilled jobs, the counterfactual fraction of unskilled workers is just 20%. In addition,

the counterfactual distribution for Italians in the US is very close to the observed one in Argentina,

which is consistent with the fact that the occupations upon arrival were similar for both groups (as

documented above).

       I next estimate versions of equation 1 in which I include pre-migration characteristics as control

variables. Table 4 shows the results of this exercise. In panel (a), I focus on the likelihood of home

ownership, whereas in panel (b) I focus on the likelihood of holding an unskilled job. The first

column of each panel (which does not include any controls other than age fixed effects) shows a

similar pattern to the cross-sectional results in Table 1: Italians in Argentina were 5.6 percentage

points more likely to own their home and 25 percentage points less likely to hold an unskilled

occupation.

       In the second column, I add indicator variables based on the number of years spent in each

of the countries. Adding this variable slightly reduces both coefficients in magnitude (reflecting

that Italians in Argentina had on average spent more years at the destination by the time of the

censuses). Figure 3 shows the relationship between time spent in each of the countries and outcomes

at the destination, net of age fixed effects. With just one cross-section of data, I cannot disentangle

cohort effects from years since migration.21 However, the data suggest that, in both countries, a

longer stay was associated with a higher likelihood of home ownership and a lower likelihood of

holding an unskilled job. Also, the figure suggests little convergence between Italians in Argentina

and those in the US.

       In the third column, I further absorb the port of origin of each migrant. This specification

enables me to test if the different mix between northern and southern Italians in Argentina and

the US could explain their different outcomes at each of the destinations. This variable makes
  21
    An added difficulty is that the census data are from two different points in time in the two countries (1895 and
1900).



                                                        16
a difference in the home ownership results (where the coefficient declines by about a third), but

makes little difference in the likelihood of holding an unskilled job. The results are nearly identical

if I restrict the sample to include only immigrants who departed from Italian ports (Table B3 in

the Online Appendix). In Table B4 in the Online Appendix, I split Italians into four mutually

excluding groups based on whether they departed from a southern or a northern port and whether

they migrated to Argentina or the US. The table indicates that both Northern and Southern Italians

did better in Argentina than in the US with respect to home ownership and the likelihood of holding

an unskilled occupation. In addition the results indicate an advantage of Northern over Southern

Italians in both Argentina and the US.

       In column 4 of Table 4, I include indicators for the occupational category declared upon arrival

and for literacy (as reported in the census). Adding these variables increases the predictive power

of the regressions (as reflected by the R-squared) but has relatively little impact on the estimated

coefficients on both outcome variables. This pattern is not surprising given the balancing in these

characteristics documented above.22

       In column 5, I include surname fixed effects, thus comparing immigrants with the same sur-

name but who moved to different destinations. Because of errors in transcribed surnames, I use a

phonetically equivalent version of surnames based on NYSIIS, although preserving the last letter

of the original surname (as the last letter of a surname is a strong predictor of regional origins in

the Italian case).23 There are two reasons why surnames might provide information beyond the

one contained in the other observable characteristics. First, Italian surnames are informative of

regional origins within Italy (Spitzer and Zimran, 2018). Hence, exploiting within-surname varia-

tion enables me to net out differences in the region of origin of migrants beyond those captured by

ports of origin. A further advantage of surnames is that they provide a measure of the region of

origin that does not depend on accurately linking the passenger lists to the census. Second, Clark

et al. (2015) and G¨
                   uell et al. (2014) highlight the persistence in a variety of outcomes across family

lines. The findings of these studies suggest that surnames might also capture differences in broadly
  22
     One concern with this exercise is that, as discussed above, the passenger lists data is likely not entirely accurate
in distinguishing farmers from unskilled workers. To address this issue, in Table B5 I re-estimate this specification
while excluding from the sample everyone who reported either farming or an unskilled occupation.
  23
     Not doing so would result, for instance, in assigning the same surname to migrants whose original surnames were
"Russo" or "Rossi".




                                                           17
defined social status beyond those captured by occupations.24

       This specification requires overlap between the surnames of immigrants who moved to Argentina

and those who moved to the US. As I will show in section 6, there was strong regional and family

path dependence in destination choices, implying that migrants with the same surname tended to

go to the same destination country. However, Figure B2 in the Online Appendix shows that there

is still some overlap between the surnames of Italians going to Argentina and of those going to the

US. In this figure, each dot represents a different surname. The y-axis represents the frequency of

a given surname in the Argentine data and the x-axis represents such frequency in the US data.

       The results using surname fixed effects (column 5) also indicate a higher likelihood of home

ownership and a lower likelihood of being employed in an unskilled occupation for Italians in

Argentina. This pattern is confirmed in column 6, where I estimate a regression including surname

fixed effects but not including port of origin effects.25 Note that, conditional on surname fixed

effects, ports of origin do not add much predictive power to the regression, as indicated by the

very similar R-squared in columns 5 and 6 of both panels. Table B6 in the Online Appendix also

shows that the results are similar if I instead include surname times port-of-origin fixed effects,

thus enabling the informational content of surnames to depend on the port of origin.26

       One limitation of this exercise is that individuals with common surnames are unlikely to be

related to each other, making surnames less informative. Hence, in Figure 4 I re-estimate equation

1 while progressively excluding individuals with common surnames from the sample. To do so, I

focus on surnames that show up at least once in both the Argentine and US datasets, and then

rank them in terms of frequency. In the last row, I just include surnames that are in the bottom

10% in terms of frequency (which corresponds to surnames that show up at most three times in the

combined Argentina-US linked samples). The results show a similar pattern than in the baseline

exercise.

       While these results enable me to account for selection to a much larger degree than with the

cross-sectional data, I cannot rule out that the difference between Italians in Argentina and those
  24
      This strategy is used in Bleakley and Ferrie (2016).
  25
      I estimate this model because the regional clustering of Italian surnames implies that conditional on a surname,
there is little variation in ports of origin.
   26
      Olivetti and Paserman (2015) instead use the informational content of first names to measure social status. Table
B7 in the Online Appendix shows that the results are similar when I simultaneously include both first and last name
fixed effects.



                                                          18
in the US was driven by differences in unobserved characteristics of those moving to each of the

countries. To assess the likely role of unobserved characteristics in explaining the differences in

outcomes, I compare the stability of the coefficient estimates when expanding the set of control

variables as suggested in Altonji et al. (2005). Specifically, I estimate the models that include port

of origin fixed effects and assess the sensitivity of the results to adding controls for the skills of

immigrants: occupational category fixed effects and literacy. Table B8 shows the results of this

exercise: The amount of selection on unobservables would have needed to be as much as 11 times

larger than the selection on observables to rationalize the differences in home ownership rates and

37 times larger to rationalize the differences in the likelihood of being employed in an unskilled

occupation.27


4.4    Robustness to linking

One concern with the results is that incorrect links will result in pre-migration characteristics being

measured with error. To address this possibility, Figure 5 progressively excludes relatively lower

quality matches from the Argentina and US samples. In the second to last row of the figure, I only

include observations with a linking score above the 75th percentile of the distribution of linking

scores within the Argentine and US samples. The figure shows a similar pattern regardless of the

sample that is used.

    Another concern is that the results might be driven by selection into the linked samples. First,

note that the results in the cross section (which do not rely upon linking) are consistent with the

results that use the linked data. Yet, to further alleviate this concern, in the last row of Figure 5 I

reweight the data to account for selection into the linked sample based on observable characteristics

upon arrival.28 The results are similar to those in the baseline sample, suggesting that selection into

the linked samples (at least with respect to observable characteristics) is not driving the results.
  27
     Collins and Wanamaker (2014) use a similar approach when estimating the gains from internal migration in the
context of the Great Migration out of the American South.
  28
     To estimate the weights, I use the estimates from tables A1 and A2 to predict the likelihood of a match for each
individual. I then use the inverse of that estimated probability as the weight.




                                                         19
4.5   Second-generation Italians in Argentina and the US

First-generation Italians in Argentina outperformed those who moved to the US. How persistent

was this advantage? To answer this question, I estimate a version of equations 1 and 2, focusing

on second-generation Italian immigrants.

   A challenge in estimating this equation is that the 1895 Argentine census did not include

information on parental place of birth. To obtain this information, I link males from the 1895

census to their childhood household in 1869, where they can be observed living with their parents.

As a result, the sample is restricted to native-born males who were 26 to 44 years old in the 1895

census. That is, those who were old enough to be born by 1869 but young enough to still be in

their parent's household by that year. Using these data, I am able to distinguish those with Italian

parents from those with native-born parents. Further details on the construction of this sample are

provided in P´
             erez (2017).

   For the US, it is possible to identify the children of Italian immigrants without linking individuals

across censuses, as the 1900 census included a question on parental place of birth. To improve the

comparability with the Argentine data, I focus on US-born individuals who were at least 26 and at

most 44 years old in 1900. Both in the Argentine and US cases, I define the sample based on the

place of birth of the father.

   Table 5 shows that the advantage of Italians in Argentina persisted into the second generation.

Similar to the results in Table 1, this table shows the differences between children of Italian immi-

grants in Argentina and the US relative to different groups: the children of the native-born and the

children of non-Italian immigrants. The advantage of second-generation Italians in Argentina with

respect to home ownership is close to that of the first generation. In contrast, there is a smaller

gap in the likelihood of holding unskilled occupations, suggesting some convergence at least in this

dimension.

   There are two limitations of this exercise. First, second-generation Italians in this sample are

not the children of Italian migrants in the linked passenger lists to census data: To enter the

passenger lists sample, a migrant had to arrive to the Americas by 1882 or later, but to enter the

second-generation sample, a person had to be in Argentina by 1869 or in the US by 1874. Second,

because there was little Italian migration to the US before 1880, there are not many children of



                                                  20
Italians in the US that satisfy this condition. Moreover, the Italians who had migrated to the US

by 1874 might have represented a relatively selected group of "pioneer" migrants.



5         Mechanisms

The analysis above suggests a limited role for pre-migration characteristics in explaining the dif-

ferences in economic outcomes between Italians in Argentina and the US. Why were Italians in

Argentina relatively more successful?


5.1        Return migration

Research in history argues that differences in the "expected length of stay" of Italians in Argentina

and the US might explain the different pattern of assimilation between the two countries.29 Specif-

ically, if Italians who migrated to Argentina (perhaps because of its closer cultural proximity with

Italy) did so with a higher expectation of staying permanently, they might have had stronger

incentives to invest in host-country specific capital.

         There are four reasons why this mechanism is unlikely to explain the results fully. First, rates

of return migration were actually similar in Argentina and the US for migrants in these arrival

cohorts. Combining data on population stocks, arrivals, and mortality (following the approach in

Bandiera et al. (2013)), I estimate the rate of return migration for the cohorts who entered the

Americas in the last three decades of the 19th-century to be about 30% for Argentina and 37% for

the US.30 Second, as shown in section 4.2, gender ratios and the fraction of children upon arrival

were remarkably close for both groups, indicating a similar predominance of family migration in

both flows (at least for these cohorts). Third, there were also differences between both groups by

the second generation, which is inconsistent with the differences being driven only by a shorter-term

orientation of Italians moving to the US. Fourth, the results are similar when restricting the sample

to Italians who had spent at least five years in the Americas (Table B9 in the Online Appendix).
    29
     For instance, (Baily, 1983, p. 295) states that "Those who migrated to Buenos Aires included [..] more people
who intended to stay."
  30
     To perform this calculation, I use the fact that Emigrantst = Immigrant Stockt-1 - Immigrant Stockt +
Arrivalst - M ortalityt . The information on population stocks is from the censuses. The information on arrivals
to both countries is from Ferenczi (1929) and the information on mortality rates is from Somoza (1973). The rate
of return migration that I estimate for Italians is lower than the one in Bandiera et al. (2013). However, note that
Bandiera et al. (2013) focus their analysis in later cohorts of Italian immigrants and that there was an upward trend
in rates of return migration in this period.


                                                         21
5.2      Competition from natives and other immigrant groups

Italians in the US likely faced more competition from other previously established immigrant groups

than Italians in Argentina. By 1870, there were only 17,000 Italians in the US compared to more

than 2.5 million migrants from the British Isles and 1.7 million migrants from Germany (Gibson

and Jung, 1999). In 1869 Argentina, the 70,000 Italians were the largest immigrant group and

constituted 40% of all the European migrants in the country. As a result, Italians who arrived in

Argentina likely benefitted from a denser and more established network. In contrast, newly arrived

Italians to the US might have only been able to obtain "those jobs scorned by the native born and

the second-generation children of immigrants" (Klein, 1983, p. 318).

       Moreover, Italians in the US tended to settle in the older regions of the US and predominantly

in cities. By 1900, 72% of Italians lived in the Northeast region and 75% lived in urban areas. Klein

(1983) argues that the concentration of Italians in Northeastern cities hampered their prospects for

long-term social mobility, as upward mobility in the US tended to be higher in younger and smaller

places. This argument is consistent with recent quantitative evidence on historical differences in

mobility across US regions.31

       There are, however, two caveats to the plausibility of this argument. First, standard models of

the labor market impacts of immigration predict that the labor market outcomes of Italian migrants

should have actually been hurt by a larger Italian population at the destination. Moreover, the size

of the Italian flow to Argentina was much larger than the flow to the US when considered relative

to the size of the native-born population. Second, several studies (for instance, Beine et al. (2011)

and Spitzer and Zimran (2018)) show that a larger immigrant stock at the destination is usually

associated with a more negatively selected migration flow.

       One way to offer some evidence on this issue is to analyze the extent to which Italians were

relatively more successful in more recently settled places within the US. To do so, I estimate versions

of equations 1 and 2 in which I split the US into four regions (Northeast, Midwest, South and West)

and estimate a separate interaction term for each of them. Table B10 shows that there was a similar

gap across US regions relative to Argentina in the likelihood that Italians would be employed in an
  31
    For instance, Feigenbaum (2017) shows that there was higher mobility in rural areas than in cities in the early
20th century. Similarly, P´
                          erez (2019) finds higher rates of mobility in the Midwest than in the Northeast in the mid
19th century.




                                                        22
unskilled occupation, ranging from 32 percentage points in the Northeast to 22 percentage points

in the South. The results are similar regardless of whether I include natives or not in the sample.

   Italians in the US Midwest and West had a higher likelihood of home ownership than Italians

in Argentina. However, this advantage disappears when comparing Italians in Argentina and the

US to the native-born population. Relative to the native born, Italians in all US regions were less

likely to own property than Italians in Argentina. The smallest gap corresponds to the comparison

between Argentina and the US West, while all the remaining gaps are of similar size.

   In addition to competition from other immigrant groups, Italians in Argentina and the US also

faced labor market competition from natives. While Italians in Argentina and the US had similar

levels of human capital upon arrival (at least as captured by their occupational structure, literacy,

and numeracy levels), Italians in Argentina had higher levels of human capital relative to the native

born. For instance, among native males aged 18 to 60 years old, 89% were literate in 1900 US but

only 54% were literate in 1895 Argentina.

   To test whether the advantage of Italians in Argentina was driven by their higher human capital

relative to natives, I estimate a version of equation 2, comparing Italians to natives in Argentina

and the US in which I add literacy as a control variable. Adding this variable reduces the gap in

the likelihood of home ownership by 5 percentage points and the gap in the likelihood of holding

an unskilled occupation by 10 percentage points. Hence, these results suggest a quantitatively

important role for differences in relative human capital in accounting for the advantage of Italians

in Argentina. However, the remaining differences between the outcomes of Italians in Argentina

and the US are still large in size.


5.3   Linguistic distance

The next hypothesis is that the closer linguistic distance between Italian and Spanish enabled Ital-

ians in Argentina to sort into a broader range of occupations. The main implication of this hypoth-

esis is that Italians in Argentina must have had an advantage in accessing communication-intensive

occupations compared to Italians in the US (Peri and Sparber, 2009). To test this hypothesis,

I classify occupations into "manual" and "non-manual" using the information from HISCLASS.

I then estimate versions of equations 1 and 2 with an indicator that takes a value of one if the

individual held a "manual" job as the dependent variable.

                                                 23
       Panel (a) of Table 6 shows evidence consistent with this hypothesis. Italians in the US were

overrepresented among those employed in manual occupations, both when compared to Italians

in Argentina and when including the native-born in the sample. However, compared to Italians

in Argentina, Italians in the US were not overrepresented in manual occupations relative to other

immigrant groups (column 3), probably reflecting the fact that about 25% of the immigrants in

Argentina (representing about half of the non-Italian migrants) were from another Spanish-speaking

country (Spain).

       The US census contains a question on English proficiency, which allows me to investigate the

relationship between language proficiency and occupational attainment further. In the US, Italians

were less likely to speak English than the average immigrant: About 60% of Italian males aged 18 to

60 spoke English in 1900, compared to 86% among the remaining immigrant groups. How important

were these language barriers in preventing Italians from accessing non-manual occupations in the

US? To investigate this issue, I use the 1900 US census to estimate:



                                M anualic = c + 1 Speaks Englishic +            ic                             (4)

where M anualic takes a value of one if migrant i from sending country c was employed in a manual

occupation in 1900 US, c are country of origin fixed effects, and Speaks Englishic takes a value

of one if the migrant reported being able to speak English.32

       Panel (b) of Table 6 shows that there is an association between English proficiency and the

likelihood of being employed in a manual occupation. In column 1, I only include Italians in the

sample, whereas in column 2 I include all immigrant groups and control for country of origin fixed

effects. Speaking English reduces the likelihood of being employed in a manual occupation by about

8.5 percentage points, relative to a baseline of 90%. This coefficient probably overestimates the

true causal effect of English ability on occupational attainment since this ability is likely positively

correlated with other unobserved dimensions of human capital.33

       A back of the envelope calculation suggests that language ability cannot fully explain the over-

representation of Italians in manual occupations in the US relative to Argentina. Taking the above
  32
     Specifically, the 1900 Census asked "Can the person speak English?".
  33
     The coefficients are similar in size to those in Ward (2018), who uses within-worker variation to estimate the
effects of English ability on labor market outcomes during the age of mass migration.



                                                        24
estimates at face value, if all Italians had been proficient in English, their proportion in manual

occupations in the US would have decreased from 90 to 88%. In Argentina, however, only 80% of

Italians were employed in a manual occupation. Hence, these calculations suggest that up to 20%
  90 - 88
(         ) of the overrepresentation of Italians in manual occupations in the US can be accounted
     10
for by their lower language ability.

       The results on the second generation also suggest that linguistic distance cannot fully explain

the disadvantage of Italians in the US: In 1900 US, more than 90% of US-born males aged 26 to 44

with an Italian father spoke English. However, the results in section 4.5 show that this group was

also at a disadvantage relative to second-generation Italians in Argentina. Overall, while there is

evidence in favor of this hypothesis, it seems unlikely to be the only explanation for the observed

outcomes of Italians in the Americas.


5.4      Prejudice against Italians

A final hypothesis is that Italians in the US suffered more nativist prejudice and discrimination

than Italians in Argentina. While it is hard to prove such a hypothesis empirically, it is certainly

consistent with the existing qualitative evidence. First, it is clear that Italians were culturally

closer to the native born in Argentina than in the US: Argentina and Italy are both predominantly

Catholic countries that speak a Romance language and share a common Latin culture. In addition,

the elites that governed Argentina during this period had a very positive of European immigration,

which they considered a source of "civilization" for the country.34

       In the US, in contrast, Italians and other "new immigrants" were the focus of renewed anti-

immigrant sentiments by the turn of the 20th century. Indeed, the 1921 and 1924 quota acts were

written with the explicit goal of reducing the number of these migrants, among which Italians were

the largest national group (Goldin, 1994). Nativist prejudice against Italians was also associated

with anti-Catholicism (Higham, 2002).

       The reports of the Immigration Commission, a bipartisan Congressional Commission devoted to

the study of European mass migration to the US, contain several instances of discriminatory remarks
  34
    For instance, Article 25 of the 1853 Constitution of Argentina stated that "The Federal Government shall en-
courage European immigration, and it may not restrict, limit, or burden with any tax whatsoever the entry into
Argentine territory of foreigners whose purpose is tilling the soil, improving industries, and introducing and teaching
the sciences and the arts."



                                                          25
against Italians, particularly southerners.35 For instance, the reports argue that northern Italians

would be more desirable immigrants because they "..are more easily assimilated than their southern

countrymen, who, because of their ignorance, low standards of living, and the supposedly great

criminal tendencies among them are regarded by many as racially undesirable" (Dillingham, 1911,

p. 177). As this quote makes clear, Italians were also portrayed as having high rates of criminality:

The reports even warn about the mass emigration of Italian criminals to the US.36 Overall, the

Commission describes Italians as less desirable for the US than other immigrant groups.37

       Italians in the US were even the subjects of nativist violence, particularly in the US South. In

the 1890s, more than 20 Italians were lynched in the US (LaGumina, 1999). The worst episode

of violence took place in New Orleans in 1891, where a mob killed 11 Italians after a jury found

them to be innocent of a killing. Another famous example is the 1927 execution of two Italian

immigrants, Sacco and Vanzetti, who were accused of robbery and murder. This execution resulted

in international protests due to the perceived bias of the judge and the prosecution.

       This evidence can be complemented with historical survey data collected with the aim of measur-

ing the prejudice of Americans against various nationalities and races. Bogardus (1928) conducted a

survey in which 1725 (predominantly white) American college students were asked to express their

preferences over 40 different races and nationalities.38 The survey asked students several ques-

tions, including whether they would be willing to accept someone from a given group as a marriage

partner, a friend, or a neighbor. Figure B3 shows that Italians fared similarly to other Southern

Europeans in terms of the students' preferences but consistently below Northern Europeans. For

example, only 15.4% of the students declared to be willing to marry an Italian, 25% to be willing

to accept an Italian as member of one's social club, and 35% to be willing to accept an Italian
  35
      Southern Italians were considered to be of a different "race" than northern Italians in the writings of the Commis-
sion. "The Bureau of Immigration, following the general practice of ethnologists, divides the people of Italy into two
races North Italians and South Italians" (Dillingham, 1911, p. 141). Southern Italians were not considered completely
white by Anglo-Saxon standards. "Sardinians have a considerable infusion of Spanish blood, while the Neopolitans
are said to incline slightly toward the African or negro type." (Dillingham, 1911, p. 177)
   36
      "It is certain that many Italian criminals, both those who had served sentences and others who had escaped
punishment, have come to the United States during the past 30 years. It was frequently stated to members of the
Commission in southern Italy and Sicily that crime had greatly diminished in many communities because most of
the criminals had gone to America." (Dillingham, 1911, p. 209)
   37
      "Treating an Italian from that standpoint, you will find the Italian as good as any of the other races from farther
north, with the possible exception of those from Scandinavia and the British Isles." (Dillingham, 1911, p. 181).
"As to the comparative value of the German and Italian emigrants to the south, I would say that the German has
desirable qualities which the Italian has not. That is, the German is very solid; very solid; he does not get angry
quickly." (Dillingham, 1911, p. 182)
   38
      These data were recently used by Hilger (2016).


                                                           26
as a neighbor. For reference, the comparable figures for Germans are 54, 67 and 78.7%, and for

Scottish are 78.1, 89.1 and 91.3%, respectively. It is worth noting that while Southern Europeans

were ranked consistently below Northern Europeans, they were still ranked above groups such as

African Americans, Asians and Mexicans.



6         Understanding destination choices

Italian migrants and their children had higher rates of home ownership and were less likely to

be employed in unskilled occupations when they migrated to Argentina. Why did (in an era of

open borders) some Italians choose a destination that offered them limited prospects for upward

mobility?

         One potential explanation is that migrants deciding between Argentina and the US faced a

trade-off between higher wages in the short term (when they moved to the US) and higher chances

of upward mobility in the long run (when they moved to Argentina). Hence, for migrants who

only wished to stay temporarily, migration to the US constituted a more attractive option due to

its higher wages for unskilled jobs.39 However, as discussed above, rates of return migration were

actually similar in both destination countries, and the differences between Italians in Argentina

and the US were also present by the second generation. Moreover, if the only reason why some

immigrants chose Argentina is that the country offered longer-run payoffs than the US, Italians

who moved to Argentina should have been on average younger than those who went to the US.

Yet, the age structure upon arrival was very similar for both groups, Overall, it seems unlikely that

the differences in outcomes were driven by a shorter-term orientation of Italians who moved to the

US.40

         Another potential explanation is that immigrant networks (by reducing costs and mitigating
    39
     Williamson (1995) compares average real wages of unskilled workers across a number of countries, including
Argentina and the US. By 1900, the ratio between US and Argentine wages was 1.27. Note that this ratio does
not take into account that the gap between average wages and wages received by Italian workers might have been
different in Argentina and the US. Both Argentina and the US had much higher wages than Italy: The ratio between
US and Italian wages was 3.8 by 1900.
  40
     Another potential explanation is that the cost of the passage to the US was lower than the cost to Argentina,
which resulted in Argentina attracting more positively selected migrants and more migrants with the intention of
staying. However, while the trip from Genoa or Naples to Buenos Aires was about twice as long as the trip to New
York, there were no large differences in the monetary costs of going to each of these destinations. Baily (2004) reports
that, in 1902, the average cost of the trip was 173.8 lire from Genoa or Naples to New York and 174.6 lire to Buenos
Aires. According to Baily (2004), "the cost of passage was of marginal significance in the choice between the two
destinations."


                                                          27
the risks associated with migration) generated path dependence in destination choices within the

Americas. In other words, for Italians deciding where to migrate, having relatives or friends in

one of the destinations might have been the primary consideration.41 Indeed, a number of scholars

point to path dependence as the key driver of Italian migrants' destination choices within the

Americas. For instance, Moretti (1999) writes that "In other words, neither wage differentials nor

the probability of employment nor transportation costs can explain the choice of the destination

country."42 Moreover, the US Immigration Commission reported that more than 90% of Italians

who entered the US were joining either friends or relatives (Baily, 2004).

       I next use the passenger lists data to test whether Italian migrants were more likely to migrate

to the destination to which their "friends and relatives" had migrated in the past. Because I do not

directly observe family or friend relationships among immigrants, I use the surnames of previous

migrants to Argentina and the US to compute a proxy measure of the strength of a migrant's

network at each potential destination. Specifically, for each immigrant i with surname s arriving

at time t, I compute the "Argentina Surname Index" (ASI ) as

                                   #Italians with surname s in Argentina
                                          #Italians in Argentina
       ASIist   =                                                                                               (5)
                  #Italians with surname s in Argentina #Italians with surname s in U S
                                                        +
                         #Italians in Argentina                   #Italians in U S

where the number of Italians in each of the sending countries is computed based on the number of

arrivals up to year t - 1.

       This measure is based on Fryer Jr and Levitt (2004) and has been more recently used in

economic history by Abramitzky et al. (2016).43 It takes a value of one if the immigrant has a

surname that, up to year t - 1, can only be found among arrivals to Argentina and takes a value

of zero if the migrant has a surname that can only be found among arrivals to the US.44 Because
  41
     Arroyo Abad and S´   anschez-Alonso (2015) show that ethnic networks were an important consideration in the
occupational choices of Italians in late 19th century Buenos Aires.
  42
     Hatton and Williamson (1998) shows that the stock of emigrants from a given Italian province across different
destination countries had a strong association with subsequent province-level migration flows. A similar argument is
made by Gould (1980), who describes the process of spatial diffusion through which emigration spread across Italian
regions.Spitzer (2013) studies spatial diffusion in the context of Jewish emigration from Russia.
  43
     Connor (2018) and Wegge (1998) also use surnames to measure immigrant's networks in historical data. My
measure is close in spirit to that in Connor (2018).
  44
     For Argentina, the stock of Italian surnames in 1882 is constructed using data on Italian surnames in the 1869
census of population. For the US, the stock of Italian surnames in 1882 is measured using the surnames of immigrants
arriving from 1855 to 1881 in the passenger lists data.



                                                        28
ASIist is undefined for immigrants whose surnames show up for the first time at time t, in the main

analysis, I assign a value of zero.5 to these surnames (reflecting that they are "neutral" surnames).

However, the results are similar if I instead drop these observations from the sample.

   This index is an imperfect proxy of the relative network strength of a migrant. For instance,

it does not capture connections to friends or relatives with a different surname. In addition,

it introduces noise because some individuals that share a surname might not know each other

(although due to the regional clustering of Italian surnames, ASI will also capture past migrations

of individuals with similar regional origins).

   Figure 6 shows the average value of ASI , computed separately for immigrants in the Argentine

and US passenger lists, and by year of arrival. The figure clearly shows that Italians arriving

in Argentina had surnames that were distinctively associated with previous Italian migrants to

Argentina. To formally test for the role of relative network strength in explaining migration choices,

I estimate the following model:


                             Argentinaist = t +  ASIist + Xist +         ist                          (6)


   where Argentinaist is an indicator that takes a value of one if the observation belongs to the

Argentine passenger lists, t represent arrival year fixed effects and Xist is a vector of individual-level

characteristics. The coefficient of interest is  , which measures the association between migration

decisions and the relative network strength of a migrant at each of the destinations (as captured

by ASIist ). I emphasize that  does not necessarily capture a causal relationship, as there might

be persistent characteristics that attracted immigrants to certain destinations within the Americas

and which were also correlated with surnames, a common issue when measuring network effects

using observational data (Manski, 1993).

   Table 7 shows that ASIist is a strong predictor of whether an individual moved to Argentina or

the US. Going from a distinctively "Argentine" to a distinctively "American" surname is associated

with an increase in the probability of moving to Argentina of almost 50 percentage points. Column 2

shows that the results are very similar when I control for a vector of individual-level characteristics:

gender, age, and the occupational category declared upon arrival. Indeed, there is little increase in

the predictive power of the regression from adding these variables, which is unsurprising given the


                                                   29
limited amount of selection on observables documented above.45

         Table 7 also shows some heterogeneous effects consistent with a path dependence interpretation

of the results. Columns 3 and 4 show that the association is stronger for women and for migrants

who were less than 16 years old at the time of arrival. This pattern is consistent with adult

males migrating first and then being followed by their families. The last column (where I focus

on working-age males) shows that the association is stronger for those employed as either farmers

or unskilled workers prior to migrating. This pattern is consistent with the migration decisions of

the unskilled being more sensitive to the presence of networks, perhaps due to liquidity constraints

(McKenzie and Rapoport, 2007, 2010; Moraga, 2013; Wegge, 1998). Note, however, that in all cases

the baseline effects are still large in size, suggesting that networks were important for migrants in

general and not only for certain subgroups.46



7         Conclusions

During the age of mass migration, seven million Italians moved to either Argentina or the US. Prior

work shows that Italians had faster assimilation in Argentina than in the US, but is inconclusive

on whether this was due to differences in selection or to differences in host-country conditions.

Using data linking Italian immigrants from passenger lists to population censuses, I showed that

differences in observable pre-migration characteristics cannot explain the relative economic success

of Italians in Argentina.

         Although Argentina and the US both had open borders for European immigration and attracted

Italians with comparable characteristics, their assimilation experiences were quite different in each

of the countries. This finding raises doubts about the importance of immigration policy as a deter-

minant of assimilation. Moreover, the fact that Italians moved in large numbers to both countries

despite these different assimilation experiences highlights the importance of path dependence in
    45
     This exercise raises a concern about the within-surname comparisons in section 4.3. Specifically, that individuals
who moved to one destination despite having a surname strongly associated with the other destination (that is, a
value of ASI close to either zero or one) might have been selected in an idiosyncratic way. To address this concern, in
Figure B4 in the Online Appendix I show that the results are similar when restricting the within-surname comparisons
to individuals with relatively "neutral" surnames (that is, surnames which are not indicative of a preference for either
Argentina or the US).
  46
     One concern with these results is that they might be driven by common misspellings of Italian surnames in
the Argentine and US datasets. Table B11 in the online appendix shows that the results are nearly identical when
computing ASIist based on a NYSIIS standardized version of the surname.



                                                          30
shaping migrants' destination choices.



References

Abramitzky, R., L. P. Boustan, and K. Eriksson (2014): "A Nation of Immigrants: Assimila-

  tion and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration A Nation of Immigrants: Assimilation

  and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration," Journal of Political Economy, 122.

------ (2016): "Cultural assimilation during the age of mass migration," Tech. rep., National

  Bureau of Economic Research.

                                                                            ´rez
Abramitzky, R., L. P. Boustan, K. Eriksson, and S. Feigenbaum, James J.and Pe

  (2018): "Automated Linking of Historical Data," Tech. rep., NBER WP 25825.

                                 ´rez (2019): "Linking individuals across historical sources:
Abramitzky, R., R. Mill, and S. Pe

  A fully automated approach*," Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisci-

  plinary History, 0, 1­18.

A'Hearn, B., J. Baten, and D. Crayen (2009): "Quantifying quantitative literacy: Age heaping

  and the history of human capital," The Journal of Economic History, 69, 783­808.

Alexander, R., Z. Ward, et al. (2018): "Age at Arrival and Assimilation during the Age of

  Mass Migration," Journal of Economic History.

Altonji, J. G., T. E. Elder, and C. R. Taber (2005): "Selection on observed and unobserved

  variables: Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools," Journal of political economy, 113,

  151­184.

                        ´ nschez-Alonso (2015): "A city of trades: Spanish and Italian Im-
Arroyo Abad, L. and B. Sa

  migrants in Late Nineteenth Century Buenos Aires. Argentina," Tech. rep., European Historical

  Economics Society (EHES).

Bailey, M., C. Cole, M. Henderson, and C. Massey (2017): "How Well Do Automated

  Linking Methods Perform in Historical Samples? Evidence from New Ground Truth," Tech. rep.,

  Working Paper.


                                               31
Baily, S. L. (1983): "The Adjustment of Italian Immigrants in Buenos Aires and New York,

  1870-1914," The American Historical Review, 281­305.

------ (2004): Immigrants in the lands of promise: Italians in Buenos Aires and New York City,

  1870-1914, Cornell University Press.

Bandiera, O., I. Rasul, and M. Viarengo (2013): "The making of modern America: Migratory

  flows in the age of mass migration," Journal of Development Economics, 102, 23­47.

Beine, M., F. Docquier, and c. Ozden (2011): "Diasporas," Journal of Development Eco-

  nomics, 95, 30­41.

Biavaschi, C., C. Giulietti, and Z. Siddique (2017): "The economic payoff of name Ameri-

  canization," Journal of Labor Economics, 35, 1089­1116.

Bleakley, H. and J. Ferrie (2016): "Shocking behavior: Random wealth in antebellum Georgia

  and human capital across generations," The quarterly journal of economics, 131, 1455­1495.

Bogardus, E. S. (1928): "Immigration and race attitudes." .

Carneiro, P., S. Lee, and H. Reis (2017): "Please call me John: name choice and the assimi-

  lation of immigrants in the United States, 1900-1930," .

Catron, P. (2016): "Made in America? Immigrant Occupational Mobility in the First Half of the

  Twentieth Century," American Journal of Sociology, 122, 325­378.

Clark, G., N. Cummins, Y. Hao, and D. D. Vidal (2015): "Surnames: A new source for the

  history of social mobility," Explorations in Economic History, 55, 3­24.

Coletti, F. (1912): Dell'emigrazione italiana, U. Hoepli.

Collins, W. J. and M. H. Wanamaker (2014): "Selection and Economic Gains in the Great

  Migration of African Americans: New Evidence from Linked Census Data," American Economic

  Journal: Applied Economics, 6, 220­252.

------ (2017): "Up from Slavery? African American Intergenerational Economic Mobility Since

  1880," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                               32
Collins, W. J. and A. Zimran (2018): "The Economic Assimilation of Irish Famine Migrants

  to the United States," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Connor, D. S. (2018): "The cream of the crop? Inequality and migrant selectivity in Ireland

  during the age of mass migration," .

            ´ n, D. G. (1925): "Resumen Estad´
de Inmigracio                                istico del Movimiento Migratorio en la Rep´
                                                                                       ublica

  Argentina. A~
              nos 1857­1924," .

Dillingham, W. P. (1911): Emigration conditions in Europe, vol. 4, US Government Printing

  Office.

Federico, G., A. Nuvolari, and M. Vasta (2019): "The origins of the Italian regional divide:

  Evidence from real wages, 1861­1913," The Journal of Economic History, 79, 63­98.

Feigenbaum, J. J. (2017): "Multiple Measures of Historical Intergenerational Mobility: Iowa 1915

  to 1940," mimeo.

Ferenczi, I. (1929): "International Migration Statistics," in International Migrations, Volume I:

  Statistics, NBER, 47­76.

Ferrie, J. P. (1994): "The wealth accumulation of antebellum European immigrants to the US,

  1840­60," The Journal of Economic History, 54, 1­33.

------ (1997): "The entry into the US labor market of antebellum European immigrants, 1840­

  1860," Explorations in Economic History, 34, 295­330.

Fryer Jr, R. G. and S. D. Levitt (2004): "The causes and consequences of distinctively black

  names," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 767­805.

Gibson, C. and K. Jung (1999): "Historical Census Statistics on the Foreign-born Population

  of the United States: 1850-1990." Population Division Working Paper," .

Goldin, C. (1994): "The political economy of immigration restriction in the United States, 1890

  to 1921," in The regulated economy: A historical approach to political economy, University of

  Chicago Press, 223­258.


                                               33
Gomellini, M. and C. O'Grada (2011): "Outward and inward migrations in Italy: a historical

  perspective," .

Gould, J. D. (1980): "European International Emigration: The Role of Diffusion and Feedback,"

  Journal of European Economic History, 9, 267.

Green, A. and M. MacKinnon (2001): "The slow assimilation of British immigrants in Canada:

  evidence from Montreal and Toronto, 1901," Explorations in Economic History, 38, 315­338.

                      iguez Mora, and C. I. Telmer (2014): "The informational content
 ¨ ell, M., J. V. Rodr´
Gu

  of surnames, the evolution of intergenerational mobility, and assortative mating," The Review of

  Economic Studies, 82, 693­735.

Guglielmino, C. and A. De Silvestri (1995): "Surname sampling for the study of the genetic

  structure of an Italian province," Human biology, 613­628.

Hatton, T. J. (1997): "The Immigrant Assimilation Puzzle in Late Nineteenth-Centuty America,"

  The journal of economic history, 57, 34­62.

Hatton, T. J. and J. G. Williamson (1998): The age of mass migration: Causes and economic

  impact, Oxford University Press on Demand.

Higham, J. (2002): Strangers in the land: Patterns of American nativism, 1860-1925, Rutgers

  University Press.

Hilger, N. (2016): "Upward mobility and discrimination: The case of Asian Americans," Tech.

  rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Inwood, K., C. Minns, and F. Summerfield (2016): "Reverse assimilation? Immigrants in the

  Canadian labour market during the Great Depression," European Review of Economic History,

  20, 299­321.

Klein, H. S. (1983): "The Integration of Italian Immigrants into the United States and Argentina:

  A Comparative Analysis," The American Historical Review, 306­329.

------ (1989): "A integra¸
                         ca
                          ~o dos imigrantes italianos no Brasil, na Argentina e Estados Unidos,"

  Novos Estudos CEBRAP, 25, 95­117.

                                                34
Kosack, E. and Z. Ward (2014): "Who Crossed the Border? Self-Selection of Mexican Migrants

  in the Early Twentieth Century," The Journal of Economic History, 74, 1015­1044.

LaGumina, S. J. (1999): Wop!: A Documentary History of Anti-Italian Discrimination in the

  United States, 32, Guernica Editions.

Leeuwen, M. v., I. Maas, and A. Miles (2002): HISCO: Historical international standard

  classification of occupations, Leuven: Leuven University Press.

Manski, C. F. (1993): "Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem," The

  review of economic studies, 60, 531­542.

    inez, A. B. (1910): Censo general de poblaci´
Mart´                                           on, edificaci´
                                                             on, comercio ´
                                                                          e industrial de la ciu-

  dad de Buenos Aires, conmemorativo del primer centenario de la revoluci´
                                                                         on de mayo 1810-1910,

  levantado en los d´
                    ias 16 al 24 de octubre de 1909, bajo la administraci´
                                                                         on del Se~
                                                                                  nor intendente

  don Manuel J. G¨
                 uiraldes, vol. 2, Compa~
                                        n´ia sud-americana de billetes de banco.

Massey, D. S., J. Arango, G. Hugo, A. Kouaouci, A. Pellegrino, and J. E. Taylor

  (1993): "Theories of international migration: A review and appraisal," Population and develop-

  ment review, 431­466.

McKenzie, D. and H. Rapoport (2007): "Network effects and the dynamics of migration and

  inequality: theory and evidence from Mexico," Journal of development Economics, 84, 1­24.

------ (2010): "Self-selection patterns in Mexico-US migration: the role of migration networks,"

  The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92, 811­821.

Minns, C. (2000): "Income, cohort effects, and occupational mobility: a new look at immigration

  to the United States at the turn of the 20th century," Explorations in economic history, 37,

  326­350.

                 ´ Grada (1982): "Emigration and Poverty in Prefamine Ireland," Explo-
Mokyr, J. and C. O.

  rations in Economic History, 19, 360.

Moraga, J. F.-H. (2013): "Understanding different migrant selection patterns in rural and urban

  Mexico," Journal of Development Economics, 103, 182­201.

                                               35
Moretti, E. (1999): "Social networks and migrations: Italy 1876­1913," International Migration

  Review, 33, 640­657.

Moya, J. C. (1998): Cousins and strangers: Spanish immigrants in Buenos Aires, 1850-1930,

  Univ of California Press.

Olivetti, C. and M. D. Paserman (2015): "In the name of the son (and the daughter): Inter-

  generational mobility in the United States, 1850­1940," The American Economic Review, 105,

  2695­2724.

 ´rez, S. (2017): "The (South) American Dream: Mobility and Economic Outcomes of First-and
Pe

  Second-Generation Immigrants in Nineteenth-Century Argentina," The Journal of Economic

  History, 77, 971­1006.

 ´rez, S. (2019): "Intergenerational Occupational Mobility Across Three Continents," The Jour-
Pe

  nal of Economic History, 79, 383­416.

Peri, G. and C. Sparber (2009): "Task specialization, immigration, and wages," American

  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1, 135­69.

Ruggles, S., M. Sobek, C. A. Fitch, P. K. Hall, and C. Ronnander (1997): Integrated

  public use microdata series: Version 2.0, Historical Census Projects, Department of History,

  University of Minnesota.

Sjaastad, L. A. (1962): "The costs and returns of human migration," Journal of political Econ-

  omy, 70, 80­93.

Somoza, J. L. (1967): Muestras de los dos primeros censos nacionales de poblaci´
                                                                               on, 1869 y 1895,

  46, Instituto Torcuato Di Tella, Centro de Investigaciones Sociales.

------ (1973): "La mortalidad en la Argentina entre 1869 y 1960," Desarrollo Econ´
                                                                                 omico, 12,

  807­826.

Spitzer, Y. (2013): "The Dynamics of Mass Migration: Estimating the Effect of Income Differences

  on Migration in a Dynamic Model of Discrete Choice with Diffusion," .



                                                36
Spitzer, Y. and A. Zimran (2018): "Migrant self-selection: Anthropometric evidence from the

  mass migration of Italians to the United States, 1907­1925," Journal of Development Economics,

  134, 226­247.

Stolz, Y. and J. Baten (2012): "Brain drain in the age of mass migration: Does relative in-

  equality explain migrant selectivity?" Explorations in Economic History, 49, 205­220.

Taylor, A. M. and J. G. Williamson (1997): "Convergence in the age of mass migration,"

  European review of economic history, 1, 27­63.

Todaro, M. P. (1969): "A model of labor migration and urban unemployment in less developed

  countries," The American economic review, 59, 138­148.

Ward, Z. (2018): "Have language skills always been so valuable? The low return to English fluency

  during the Age of Mass Migration," Unpublished paper, Australian National University.

Wegge, S. A. (1998): "Chain migration and information networks: Evidence from nineteenth-

  century Hesse-Cassel," The Journal of Economic History, 58, 957­986.

Williamson, J. G. (1995): "The evolution of global labor markets since 1830: background evidence

  and hypotheses," Explorations in Economic History, 32, 141­196.

Winkler, W. E. (1990): "String Comparator Metrics and Enhanced Decision Rules in the Fellegi-

  Sunter Model of Record Linkage." .




                                               37
                             Figure 1: Number of yearly Italian arrivals in Argentina and the US



                                                        300
              Number of Italian arrivals (in thousands)
                       100            0  200




                                                                1860               1880                          1900                 1920
                                                                                               Year

                                                                                          Argentina                     US



Notes: This figure shows the number of yearly Italian arrivals to Argentina and the US from 1857 to 1924.
Source: Ferenczi (1929).




                                                               Figure 2: Ports of departure of Italian migrants (1882-1900)

                                                              (a) Argentina                                                  (b) US
   1




                                                                                                      1
   .8




                                                                                                      .8
  .6




                                                                                                   .6
 %




                                                                                                  %
   .4




                                                                                                      .4
   .2




                                                                                                      .2
                      0




                                                                                                      0
        M les
                  oa



        Le ille

       Bo vre

                    x

                    a

         An m

         Br rp

         Pa en

                    o




                                                                                                                             s

                                                                                                                 Le oa

                                                                                                                  Pa re

                                                                                                                 M mo

                                                                                                                   An lle
                                                                                                                 Bo erp

                                                                                                                  ot ux
                                                                                                                          am


                                                                                                                   Br ar
                                                                                                                           en
      Ba au




                                                                                                            le
                  n




                rm
                 o

                 e




                                                                                                                        av




                                                                                                                          lt
                                                                                                                           i


                                                                                                                       ea
              en




               lo




            em




                                                                                                                       en




                                                                                                                      em
              se




                                                                                                                       se
             ap




                                                                                                           ap
               a




              pt




                                                                                                                         r




                                                                                                                       rd

                                                                                                                       ra
             tw




                                                                                                                      tw
              e




            le




                                                                                                                      le
   So ce
            H




                                                                                                                     H
           rd




                                                                                                                    rd
           G




           m




                                                                                                                    G
          ar




                                                                                                                    ar




                                                                                                                    te

                                                                                                                    ib
           N




                                                                                                      N
          r
        ha




                                                                                                                  G
                                                                                                                R
     ut




Notes: This figure shows the ten largest ports of departure of Italian immigrants to Argentina and the US.
Source: Passenger lists data as described in the main text.




                                                                                             38
                         Figure 3: Main economic outcomes, by years since migration

                     (a) Home ownership                                            (b) Unskilled occupation
    .3




                                                                       .6
    .25




                                                                       .5
                                                                       .4
 %




                                                                      %
 .2




                                                                       .3
    .15




                                                                       .2
    .1




            0              5                10         15                     0                5                 10         15
                         Years since migration                                               Years since migration
                           Argentina     US                                                    Argentina     US

Notes: This figure shows a binned scatterplot of the main economic outcomes (y-axis) on years since migration (x-
axis), net of age fixed effects, by country of destination.
Source: Data are from the samples linking passenger lists to the census as described in the main text.




                         Figure 4: Surname fixed effects, excluding common surnames

                     (a) Home ownership                                            (b) Unskilled occupation


          Baseline                                                          Baseline
   Excl. top 10%                                                      Excl. top 10%
   Excl. top 20%                                                      Excl. top 20%
   Excl. top 30%                                                      Excl. top 30%
   Excl. top 40%                                                      Excl. top 40%
   Excl. top 50%                                                      Excl. top 50%
   Excl. top 60%                                                      Excl. top 60%
   Excl. top 70%                                                      Excl. top 70%
   Excl. top 80%                                                      Excl. top 80%
   Excl. top 90%                                                      Excl. top 90%
                     0         .05     .1        .15        .2                         -.4         -.3     -.2        -.1        0

Notes: This figure shows the results of the specification using surname fixed effects after progressively excluding
individuals with common surnames from the sample. In the last row, I only include those with a surname in the
bottom 10% of frequency among those surnames that show up at least once in both the Argentine and US datasets.
The specification corresponds to the one with the largest set of controls in Table 4 (including surname fixed effects).
Source: Data are from the samples linking passenger lists to the census as described in the main text.




                                                                 39
                                  Figure 5: Robustness to linking procedure

                (a) Home ownership                                             (b) Unskilled occupation


             Baseline                                                         Baseline



     Excl. bottom 25%                                                 Excl. bottom 25%



     Excl. bottom 50%                                                 Excl. bottom 50%



     Excl. bottom 75%                                                 Excl. bottom 75%



   Reweighted sample                                                 Reweighted sample
                        0   .01   .02   .03   .04   .05   .06                            -.25   -.2   -.15   -.1   -.05   0

Notes: This figure shows the robustness of the results to progressively increasing the quality of matches, and to
selection into the linked samples. In rows 2 to 4, I progressively exclude observations with a linking score in the
bottom 25, 50 and 75% within the Argentina and US samples. In the last row, I reweight the sample to account for
selection into the linked sample based on observable characteristics. The weights are based on the probit estimates
from tables A1 and A2.
Sources: Data are from the samples linking passenger lists to the census as described in the main text.




                                                                40
         Figure 6: Argentine Surname Index, by destination country and year of arrival
                                        .6
              Argentine Surname Index
                                        .55
                                        .5
                                        .45
                                        .4
                                        .35




                                              1885    1890                 1895                  1900
                                                     Year of arrival
                                                     Argentina        US


Notes: This figure shows the average value of the Argentine Surname Index (ASI) among arrivals to Argentina and
the US. This index is computed based on the relative frequency of the surnames of all previous arrivals to Argentina
and the US. A value of one indicates a surname that is only held by Italians who previously moved to Argentina,
whereas a value of zero indicates a surname that is only held by Italians who moved to the US.
Source: Passenger lists data as described in the main text.




                                                         41
                                   Table 1: First-generation immigrants in Argentina and the US, cross-sectional data


                                                                 Home ownership                                        Unskilled occupation
                                                    (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
             Italian in Argentina                0.0442        0.258         0.232          0.261        -0.280        -0.278         -0.186       -0.251
                                                (0.00436)      (0.00686)     (0.00715)     (0.00658)     (0.00619)     (0.00671)     (0.00835)     (0.00639)
             Including natives                      No            Yes            No           Yes            No            Yes           No            Yes
42




             Including other immigrants             No            No            Yes           Yes            No            No            Yes           Yes
             Observations                         283250       1118624        506363        1341737       283250        1118624        506363       1341737
             Mean of dep. var.                     0.144        0.144          0.144         0.144         0.491         0.491          0.491        0.491

     Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table reports differences between Italians in Argentina and the US with respect to rates of home ownership and
     the likelihood of holding an unskilled occupation. The mean of the dependent variable is computed among Italians in the United States. In columns 1 and 5, the
     sample is restricted to first-generation Italian migrants. In columns 2 and 6, I also include native-born individuals in Argentina and the US. I columns 3 and 7, I
     compare Italians to other immigrant groups in Argentina and the US. In columns 5 and 8, I compare Italians to the rest of the working-age population.
     Sources: Argentine data are from Somoza (1967) and US data are from Ruggles et al. (1997) and the 1900 full count census available though the NBER server.
                  Table 2: Selection of Italian immigrants in Argentina and the US


                                                       Mean (US)         Argentina-US difference
              Variable                                    (1)             (2)      (3)       (4)
              i. Demographic (N=1,350,461)
              Age                                         27.001        -0.286a    -0.178a     0.319a
              Age less than 16                            0.198         0.009a      0.015a     -0.009a
              Male                                        0.743         -0.020a    -0.032a     0.012a
              ii. Skills (N=1,350,461)
              Age heaping                                  0.220        -0.001     -0.006a     -0.010a
              iii. Occupation (N= 755,764)
              White-collar                                 0.028        0.007a      0.015a      0.011a
              Farmer                                       0.221        0.208a      0.206a      0.133a
              Skilled/Semi-skilled                         0.148        -0.039a    -0.023a     -0.023a
              Unskilled                                    0.603        -0.176a    -0.199a     -0.121a
              Year of entry FE                               .            No         Yes         Yes
              Port of origin FE                              .            No          No         Yes

Notes: a : p < 0.01, b : p < 0.05, c : p < 0.1. This table compares Italian migrants who moved to Argentina and the
US with respect to observable characteristics upon arrival. In column 1, I report the average value of each of these
characteristics in the US data. Columns 2 to 4 report the coefficient of a regression of each of these variables on an
indicator that takes a value of one if the observation belongs to the Argentine data. Sample is restricted to 1882-1900
arrivals.
Source: Passenger lists data as described in the main text.




                                                          43
                Table 3: Occupational mobility from arrival and until the next census

                                                                Occupation in destination
 Occupation in Italy                          White          Farmer Skilled/semi-        Un-           Row
                                              collar                     skilled        skilled        total
 Argentina
   White Collar                                0.50           0.10           0.28             0.12     1
                                              (188)           (39)          (105)             (46)     (378)
    Farmer                                      0.18          0.25           0.33             0.25     1
                                               (939)         (1307)        (1742)           (1307)     (5295)
    Skilled/semi-skilled                        0.16          0.11          0.57              0.15     1
                                               (223)         (148)         (783)             (209)     (1363)
    Unskilled                                   0.18          0.22           0.37            0.23      1
                                              (1013)         (1209)        (2028)           (1301)     (5551)
    Column total                                0.19          0.21           0.37             0.23     1
                                              (2363)         (2703)        (4658)           (2863)     (12587)
 US
  White Collar                                 0.30           0.13           0.22             0.36     1
                                              (136)           (58)           (99)            (167)     (460)
    Farmer                                      0.11          0.12           0.19             0.57     1
                                               (379)         (413)          (645)           (1930)     (3367)
    Skilled/semi-skilled                        0.11          0.26          0.21              0.42     1
                                               (298)         (717)         (587)            (1144)     (2746)
    Unskilled                                   0.11          0.14           0.16            0.58      1
                                               (957)         (1187)        (1406)           (4987)     (8537)
    Column total                                0.12          0.16           0.18             0.54     1
                                              (1770)         (2375)        (2737)           (8228)     (15110)
 Counterfactual Italians in the US
                                               0.19          0.20           0.39             0.22      100
Notes: Each cell in the table shows the percentage and the number (between brackets) of individuals in each occupa-
tional category upon arrival to Argentina or the US (rows) and in the 1895 or 1900 censuses (columns). Occupations
were classified based on the HISCLASS scheme. White-collar (HISCLASS 1-5), farmer (HISCLASS 8), skilled/semi-
skilled (HISCLASS 6-7,9) and unskilled (HISCLASS 10-12). In the last row, I report a counterfactual occupational
distribution of Italians in the US had they been exposed to the transition matrix of Italians in Argentina.
Sources: Data are from the samples linking passenger lists to the census as described in the main text.




                                                        44
             Table 4: First-generation immigrants in Argentina and the US, linked data

                                             (a) Home ownership


                               (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
  Italian in Argentina     0.0564***      0.0487***     0.0345***     0.0315***     0.0323***     0.0389***
                           (0.00455)      (0.00526)     (0.00750)     (0.00752)      (0.0105)     (0.00803)
  Years since arrival          No            Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
  Port of origin               No             No             Yes          Yes           Yes           No
  Literacy                     No             No             No           Yes           Yes           Yes
  Occupation                   No             No             No           Yes           Yes           Yes
  Surname                      No             No             No           No            Yes           Yes
  Observations               30922          30922           30922       30922         30922          30922
  Mean of dep. var.          0.145          0.145           0.145       0.145         0.145          0.145
  R2                         0.0219         0.0280          0.0339      0.0401        0.438          0.435

                                           (b) Unskilled occupation


                                (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
   Italian in Argentina      -0.252***    -0.237***     -0.222***     -0.216***     -0.214***    -0.223***
                             (0.00561)    (0.00647)     (0.00921)     (0.00902)      (0.0127)    (0.00967)
   Years since arrival           No           Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
   Port of origin                No           No             Yes         Yes           Yes           No
   Literacy                      No           No             No          Yes           Yes           Yes
   Occupation                    No           No             No          Yes           Yes           Yes
   Surname                       No           No             No           No           Yes           Yes
   Observations                30922        30922           30922       30922         30922        30922
   Mean of dep. var.            0.476        0.476           0.476      0.476         0.476        0.476
   R2                          0.0762       0.0813          0.0916      0.139         0.492        0.489

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table compares Italians in Argentina and the US with respect to
the likelihood of owning their home and the likelihood of being employed in an unskilled occupation. The mean of
the dependent variable is computed among Italians in the United States. Column 1 just includes age fixed effects.
Columns 2 to 6 include additional fixed effects as indicated by the table.
Sources: Data are from the samples linking passenger lists to the census as described in the main text.




                                                       45
                                                Table 5: Second-generation Italians in Argentina and the US


                                                              Home ownership                                    Unskilled occupation
                                                   (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)
                   Italian in Argentina        0.0398        0.100        0.141       0.106        -0.100       -0.142       -0.0711        -0.140
                                                (0.0146)     (0.0153)    (0.0180)     (0.0153)     (0.0120)     (0.0132)      (0.0146)      (0.0130)
                   Including natives               No           Yes          No          Yes          No           Yes           No            Yes
46




                   Including immigrants            No           No          Yes          Yes          No           No            Yes           Yes
                   Observations                  7032         340846      114606       448420        7032        340846        114606        448420
                   Mean of dep. var.             0.329         0.402       0.405        0.404        0.186        0.234         0.199         0.225

     Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table compares children of Italian migrants in Argentina to children of Italians in the US. In columns 1 and 5,
     the sample is restricted to children of Italian migrants. In columns 2 and 6, I also include the children of the native born in Argentina and the US. I columns 3
     and 7, I compare children of Italians to the children of other immigrants in Argentina and the US. In columns 5 and 8, I compare children of Italians to the rest
     of the working-age population.
     Sources: Data for Argentina are from P´   erez (2017) and data for the US are from Ruggles et al. (1997).
                                Table 6: The role of language similarity

             (a) Likelihood of entering a manual occupation, Italians in Argentina and the US


                                                                   Manual job
                                                   (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)
            Italian in Argentina               -0.0894        -0.0811       0.0467        -0.0598
                                               (0.00315)      (0.00327)     (0.00473)     (0.00332)
            Including natives                      No            Yes            No           Yes
            Including other immigrants             No            No            Yes           Yes
            Observations                         340031        2026057       618640        2304666
            Mean of dep. var.                     0.916         0.916         0.916         0.916

     (b) Likelihood of entering a manual occupation and English ability among immigrants in the US


                                                                   Manual job
                                                                 (1)            (2)
                          Speaks English                      -0.0857       -0.0838
                                                              (0.00112)     (0.00104)
                          Including other immigrants             No            Yes
                          Country of birth FE                    No            Yes
                          Observations                         276640        492948
                          Mean of dep. var.                     0.906         0.892

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. Panel (a) uses the data from Argentina and the US to estimate the
likelihood that Italians would be employed in manual occupations. In column 1, the sample is restricted to first-
generation Italian migrants. In column 2, I also include native-born individuals in Argentina and the US. In column
3, I compare Italians to other immigrant groups in Argentina and the US. In column 4, I compare Italians to the
rest of the working-age population. Panel (b) uses the US data to estimate the likelihood that an individual would
be employed in a manual occupation as a function of his ability to speak English.
Sources: Argentine data are from Somoza (1967) and US data are from Ruggles et al. (1997) and the 1900 full count
census available though the NBER server.




                                                         47
       Table 7: Argentine Surname Frequency (ASI) and likelihood of moving to Argentina


                                          (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
         ASI                           0.492         0.478         0.460         0.464          0.410
                                      (0.00129)     (0.00128)     (0.00148)     (0.00143)      (0.00367)
         ASI X female                                             0.0704
                                                                  (0.00284)
         ASI X child                                                            0.0700
                                                                                (0.00306)
         ASI X unskilled/farm                                                                  0.0327
                                                                                               (0.00407)
         Individual controls              No            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
         Observations                  1308843       1308843       1308843       1308843        778318
         Mean of dep. var.              0.396         0.396         0.396         0.396          0.385
         R2                             0.302         0.318         0.319         0.319          0.337

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. The dependent variable is an indicator that takes a value of one if the
observation belongs to the Argentine data. The Argentine Surname Index (ASI) measures the relative frequency of
an individual's surname in the Argentine and US data based on the surnames of previous Italian arrivals to Argentina
and the US. The regressions with individual controls include indicators for age, gender, and occupational category
upon arrival. The sample is restricted to arrivals from 1882 to 1900. Columns 1 to 4 include the full sample of
immigrant arrivals to Argentina and the US. In column 5, the sample is restricted to working age (18 to 60 years old)
males.
Source: Passenger lists data as described in the main text.




                                                         48
Data Appendix (Not for Publication)

Coverage of passenger lists data

Figure A1 compares the number of yearly arrivals as computed with the passenger lists data and

according to Ferenczi (1929). In the US data, the number of Italian arrivals in the passenger lists

closely tracks the figures in the official statistics. In the 1882-1900 period, there were 940,000 Italian

arrivals according to Ferenczi (1929), and there are 820,000 records in the passenger lists data in

this period.

   The Argentine passenger lists data are less complete than the US data. There were 900,000

Italian arrivals to Argentina from 1882 to 1900 according to Ferenczi (1929), but there are 530,000

records in the passenger lists data. There are a number of reasons for this incomplete coverage.

First, only migrants arriving through the port of Buenos Aires are included in the data (about

75% of arrivals). Second, the digitization effort prioritized those lists that were in the worst state

of preservation. Third, some of the original lists were impossible to digitize due to their state of

preservation. For instance, there are no data corresponding to the years 1891 and 1894 (a total

of 87,000 records). Similarly, when collapsing the data at the year-month of entry, there are no

observations for about 30% of the months.

   One concern is the extent to which the digitized data for Argentina is representative of Italian

arrivals in this period. Figure A2 compares the fraction of males among Italians in the passenger

lists and the fraction of males among all immigrants (including non-Italians) according to Ferenczi

(1929). The fraction in the passenger lists data tracks closely that in the official statistics. Similarly,

Figure A3 shows that the age structure by arrival decade (1881-1890 and 1891-1900) of Italians in

the passenger lists data and the age structure of all migrants according to Ferenczi (1929) are also

close to each other. Finally, note that the cross-sectional results (which do not use the passenger

lists) yield similar results as those using the linked data.




                                                    49
        Table A1: Which factors predict linking? Argentine data, probit marginal effects


                                                                 (1)
                                                      1 if in linked sample
                              Demographic
                              Age                            0.000
                                                             (0.0001)
                              Literacy                        -0.001
                                                             (0.0012)
                              Occupation
                              White-collar                   0.014
                                                             (0.0033)
                              Farmer                         0.004
                                                             (0.0011)
                              Skilled/semi-skilled           0.006
                                                             (0.0018)
                              Observations                    216249
                              Mean of dep. var.                .0623

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table reports the probit marginal effects of a regression on the
likelihood of being on the linked sample on observable characteristics upon arrival.
Sources: Passenger lists data as described in the main text.




                                                     50
            Table A2: Which factors predict linking? US data, probit marginal effects


                                                                 (1)
                                                      1 if in linked sample
                              Demographic
                              Age                            -0.001
                                                             (0.0000)
                              Literate                       0.009
                                                             (0.0009)
                              No literacy data               0.005
                                                             (0.0012)
                              Occupation
                              White-collar                   0.007
                                                             (0.0017)
                              Farmer                         0.002
                                                             (0.0007)
                              Skilled/semi-skilled           0.008
                                                             (0.0008)
                              Observations                    442446
                              Mean of dep. var.                .0378

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table reports the probit marginal effects of a regression on the
likelihood of being on the linked sample on observable characteristics upon arrival.
Sources: Passenger lists data as described in the main text.




                                                     51
                                                    Figure A1: Coverage of passenger lists data, Argentina and the US

                                                           (a) Argentina                                                                                              (b) US
 Number of Italian arrivals (000s)




                                                                                                                                        100
                                     80




                                                                                                            Number of arrivals (000s)
                                                                                                                                        80
                                     60




                                                                                                                                        60
                                     40




                                                                                                                                        40
                                     20




                                                                                                                                        20
                                     0




                                          1880      1885           1890         1895            1900                                          1880             1885        1890     1895            1900
                                                                   Year                                                                                                    Year

                                                 Official statistics          Passenger lists                                                            Official statistics      Passenger lists

Notes: This figure shows the annual number of Italian arrivals according to the passenger lists data and the overall
gender ratio (including non-Italians) according to official immigration statistics for Argentina and the US based on
the data in Ferenczi (1929).




                                                     Figure A2: Fraction of males among Italian arrivals to Argentina
                                                               .7.8
                                                                 .75
                                                               %
                                                                 .65
                                                                 .6




                                                                       1880            1885             1890                                            1895              1900
                                                                                                        Year

                                                                                  Official statistics                                                Passenger lists


Notes: This figure shows the gender ratio of Italian arrivals according to the passenger lists data and according to
official immigration statistics for Argentina based on the data in Ferenczi (1929).




                                                                                                       52
                                   Figure A3: Age structure of Italians in Argentine data

                            (a) 1881-1890                                                             (b) 1891-1900
 .4




                                                                           .4
 .3




                                                                           .3
 .2




                                                                           .2
 .1




                                                                           .1
 0




                                                                           0
          7

                  12


                        20


                                 30


                                          40


                                                   50


                                                          60


                                                                 +




                                                                                    7

                                                                                            12


                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                           30


                                                                                                                    40


                                                                                                                             50


                                                                                                                                    60


                                                                                                                                           +
                                                               60




                                                                                                                                         60
      to




                                                                                to
              to


                       to


                              to


                                         to


                                               to


                                                        to




                                                                                        to


                                                                                                 to


                                                                                                        to


                                                                                                                   to


                                                                                                                         to


                                                                                                                                  to
      1




                                                                                1
              8

                   13


                            21


                                    31


                                              41


                                                     51




                                                                                        8

                                                                                             13


                                                                                                      21


                                                                                                             31


                                                                                                                        41


                                                                                                                               51
                   Official statistics              Passenger lists                          Official statistics              Passenger lists

Notes: This figure shows the age structure of iItalian arrivals according to the passenger lists data and according to
official immigration statistics for Argentina based on the data in Ferenczi (1929).




                                                                      53
Additional Results (Not for Publication)

          Figure B1: Age structure, Italian arrivals to Argentina and the US (1882-1900)

                 .04
                 .03
              Density
               .02
                 .01
                 0




                        0            20             40              60              80             100

                                                     US               Argentina



Notes: This figure plots the age distribution among Italian arrivals to Argentina and the US in the 1882-1900 period.
Source: Passenger lists data as described in the main text.




                                                          54
              Figure B2: Overlap between Italian surnames in Argentina and the US
                               40
              Last name frequency in Argentina
                10          20 0         30




                                                 0   10         20          30            40    50
                                                          Last name frequency in the US


Notes: This figure shows the overlap between surnames of Italians arriving to Argentina and Italians arriving to the
US. Each dot corresponds to a different surname.
Source: Data are from the samples linking passenger lists to the census as described in the main text.




                                                                    55
            Figure B3: Prejudice against Italian Immigrants: % of respondents who would:

            (a) Marry someone from this group                                        (b) Be friends with someone from this group


      100                                                                                100
                                                                                                                                                           English
                                                                      English                                                                           Canadians
                                                                                                                                                      Americans
                                                                    Americans                                                                          Scotch
                                                                   Canadians                                                                        French
                                                                                                                                                     Irish
                                                                                                                                                Scotch-Irish
       80                                                           Scotch                80
                                                                Scotch-Irish                                                                  Welsh
                                                                  Irish
                                                                French                                                                     Germans
                                                                                                                                      French-Canadians
       60                                                 Welsh                           60                                             Swedes
                                                       Germans                                                                         Norwegians
                                                                                                                                        Dutch
                                                                                                                                       Danes
  %




                                                                                     %
                                                  French-Canadians                                                                  Spaniards
                                                      Swedes
                                                     Dutch
       40                                         Norwegians                              40
                                                   Danes
                                                Spaniards                                                                           Indians
                                                                                                                                 Russians
                                                                                                                                  Finns
                                                                                                                                     Italians
                                                                                                                               Italians
       20                                                                                 20                               Portuguese
                                                                                                                         Roumanians
                                                                                                                      Jews,   Russian
                                                                                                                          Greeks
                                                                                                                     Hungarians
                                                 Finns
                                            Russians
                                                  Italians
                                            Italians                                                              Czecho-Slovaks
                                                                                                                    Filipinos
                                                                                                                  Armenians
                                                                                                                 Bulgarians
                                                                                                                 Syrians
                                                                                                               Japanese
                                                                                                              Chinese
                                                                                                              Poles
                                         Portuguese
                                           Poles
                                      Hungarians                                                African    Mexicans
                                                                                                          Korean
                                                                                                     Serbo-Croatians
                                                                                                         Turks
                                                                                                      Mulattoes
                                                                                                        Americans
                              Jews,  Roumanians
                                    Armenians
                                Czecho-Slovaks
                                   Indians
                                     German
                               Bulgarians                                                            Hindus
                            Jews, Russian
                              Greeks
                             Syrians
                      Serbo-Croatians
               Hindus  Japanese
                      Filipinos
                African Mexicans
                        Americans
                     Turks
                Korean
                Mulattoes
                  Chinese                                                                      Jews, German
        0                                                                                  0

  (c) Be neighbors with someone from this group                                                   (d) Be in the same occupation


      100                                                                                100
                                                                      English
                                                                   Canadians                                                                          Canadians
                                                                                                                                                       English
                                                                  Americans
                                                                   Scotch                                                                             Scotch
                                                                                                                                                 Americans
                                                                 French                                                                          French
                                                                                                                                                  Irish
                                                                                                                                             Scotch-Irish
                                                             Scotch-Irish
                                                               Irish
                                                                                                                                             Germans
                                                                                                                                             Welsh
       80                                                  Welsh
                                                        Germans                           80                                          French-Canadians
                                                                                                                                         Swedes
                                                   French-Canadians
                                                      Swedes                                                                            Mexicans
                                                                                                                                        Dutch
                                                      Dutch                                                                          Norwegians
                                                                                                                                      Danes
                                                    Danes
                                                 Norwegians
       60                                                                                 60                                      Spaniards
                                                Spaniards                                                                                Italians
                                                                                                                                   Italians
                                                                                                                                 Indians
  %




                                                                                     %




                                                                                                                                Finns
                                                                                                                            Portuguese
                                                                                                                           Armenians
                                                                                                                          Russians
                                                                                                                           Poles
                                                                                                                       Hungarians
       40                                                                                 40                       Jews,
                                                                                                                African   German
                                                                                                                        Americans
                                                                                                                 Roumanians
                                                  Finns
                                                     Italians
                                               Italians                                                           Filipinos
                                                                                                            Czecho-Slovaks
                                                                                                                Greeks
                                             Indians                                                         Mulattoes
                                          Russians                                                      Jews,Syrians
                                                                                                               Russian
                                           Poles
                                       Portuguese
                                      Armenians                                                          Japanese
                                                                                                        Chinese
                                     Hungarians
                                 Jews,  German
                                Roumanians
       20                    Czecho-Slovaks
                                Filipinos                                                 20            Hindus
                                                                                                      Korean
                                                                                                    Bulgarians
                              Syrians
                               Greeks                                                                Turks
                           Bulgarians
                           Chinese
                       Jews, Russian
                     Mexicans
                Serbo-Croatians
                  Korean
              African Americans
                  Turks Hindus
                        Japanese
              Mulattoes                                                                        Serbo-Croatians

        0                                                                                  0

       (e) Allow as citizen of my own country                                        (f ) Only allow as visitors to my own country


      100                                                                                100
                                                                 Canadians
                                                                  English
                                                                 Scotch
                                                               French
                                                           Scotch-Irish
                                                             Irish
                                                         Americans
                                                        Germans
                                                   French-Canadians
                                                       Swedes
                                                      Dutch
                                                     Welsh
                                                   Indians
                                                Spaniards
       80                                      Norwegians
                                                Danes                                     80
                                                   Italians
                                             Italians
                                           Hungarians

       60                                   Finns                                         60
                                           Poles
                                        Armenians
                                      Portuguese
                                African  Americans
                                    Russians
                               Jews,   German
                                  Greeks
                                Filipinos
                            Roumanians
  %




                                                                                     %




                         Czecho-Slovaks
                           Mulattoes
                          Mexicans
                      Jews, Russian                                                                                                                      Hindus
                                                                                                                                                      Chinese
                       Bulgarians
                       Syrians                                                                                                                         Turks
       40                                                                                 40                                                       Japanese
                                                                                                                                                   Korean
                Serbo-Croatians
                  Japanese                                                                                                                     Mexicans
                                                                                                                                               Filipinos
                  Korean
                 Chinese
                 Turks                                                                                                                   Czecho-Slovaks
                                                                                                                                        Jews,
                                                                                                                                            Greeks
                                                                                                                                              German
               Hindus                                                                                                                    Mulattoes
                                                                                                                                     Jews, Russian
                                                                                                                                      Russians
                                                                                                                                   Roumanians
                                                                                                                                   Bulgarians
                                                                                                                                   Syrians
       20                                                                                 20                                    Hungarians
                                                                                                                                  Poles
                                                                                                                             Portuguese
                                                                                                                        Serbo-Croatians
                                                                                                                          Armenians
                                                                                                                    African   Americans
                                                                                                                      Scotch-Irish
                                                                                                                             Italians
                                                                                                                       Italians
                                                                                                                       Finns
                                                                                                                   Spaniards
                                                                                                                 Norwegians
                                                                                                                  Indians
                                                                                                                Germans
                                                                                                              Swedes
                                                                                                                Welsh
                                                                                                             Danes
                                                                                                     French-Canadians
                                                                                                           Irish
                                                                                                        French
                                                                                                       Dutch
                                                                                                  Canadians
                                                                                                    Scotch
                                                                                                     English
                                                                                                 Americans
        0                                                                                  0

Notes: Each of the figures shows the percentage of individuals who reported being willing to accept someone from a
given group as: (a) marriage partners, (b) friends, (c) neighbors, (d) workers in their same occupation, (e) citizens
of their own country, and (f) only as visitors to their own country.
Source: Data are from a sample of 1725 American college students compiled by Bogardus (1928).




                                                                                56
              Figure B4: Surname fixed effects results using only "neutral" surnames

                   (a) Home ownership                                      (b) Unskilled occupation


       Baseline                                                    Baseline



  ASI 0.10-0.90                                                ASI 0.10-0.90



  ASI 0.15-0.85                                                ASI 0.15-0.85



  ASI 0.20-0.80                                                ASI 0.20-0.80



  ASI 0.25-0.75                                                ASI 0.25-0.75
                  -.02   0       .02      .04       .06                        -.25   -.2   -.15   -.1   -.05    0

Notes: This figure shows the results after progressively excluding individuals with "distinctive" surnames from the
sample (that is, surnames with values of the ASI either close to zero or close to one. The specification corresponds
to the one with the largest set of controls in Table 4 (including surname fixed effects).
Sources: Data are from the samples linking passenger lists to the census as described in the main text.




                                                          57
                    Table B1: First-generation immigrants in Argentina and the US, cross-sectional data, by urban/rural areas

                                                                             (a) Urban areas


                                                                  Home ownership                                       Unskilled occupation
                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
             Italian in Argentina                0.0843         0.171         0.177         0.185        -0.301        -0.298         -0.175       -0.256
                                                 (0.00512)     (0.00914)     (0.00853)     (0.00820)     (0.00798)     (0.00968)      (0.0109)     (0.00863)
             Including natives                       No           Yes            No            Yes           No            Yes           No            Yes
             Including other immigrants              No            No            Yes           Yes           No            No            Yes           Yes
             Observations                         193616        494994        330191         631569        193616        494994        330191       631569
             Mean of dep. var.                     0.114         0.114         0.114          0.114         0.476         0.476         0.476        0.476

                                                                             (b) Rural areas
58




                                                                  Home ownership                                     Unskilled occupation
                                                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)
               Italian in Argentina               -0.0386        0.250        0.305        0.264        -0.262        -0.254        -0.205       -0.244
                                                   (0.00793)     (0.0105)     (0.0121)     (0.0103)     (0.00977)     (0.00982)     (0.0128)     (0.00960)
               Including natives                       No           Yes          No           Yes          No            Yes           No            Yes
               Including other immigrants              No           No           Yes          Yes          No             No           Yes           Yes
               Observations                          89634        623630       176172       710168        89634        623630        176172        710168
               Mean of dep. var.                     0.210         0.210        0.210        0.210        0.524         0.524         0.524         0.524

     Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table reports differences between Italians in Argentina and the US with respect to rates of home ownership and
     the likelihood of holding an unskilled occupation. The mean of the dependent variable is computed among Italians in the United States. In columns 1 and 5, the
     sample is restricted to first-generation Italian migrants. In columns 2 and 6, I also include native-born individuals in Argentina and the US. I columns 3 and 7, I
     compare Italians to other immigrant groups in Argentina and the US. In columns 4 and 8, I compare Italians to the rest of the working-age population. In panel
     (a), I restrict the sample to urban areas in Argentina and the US. In panel (b), I restrict the sample to rural areas.
     Sources: Argentine data are from Somoza (1967) and US data are from Ruggles et al. (1997) and the 1900 full count census available though the NBER server.
            Table B2: First-generation immigrants in Argentina and the US, cross-sectional data of Buenos Aires and New York city


                                                                  Home ownership                                      Unskilled occupation
                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)
              Italian in Argentina               0.0828        0.0498        0.0702        0.0758        -0.258       -0.212        -0.162       -0.193
                                                 (0.00494)     (0.0105)      (0.00799)     (0.00811)     (0.0106)     (0.0172)      (0.0150)     (0.0128)
              Including natives                      No            Yes           No           Yes           No           Yes           No           Yes
              Including other immigrants             No            No           Yes           Yes           No            No           Yes          Yes
              Observations                         72371         98053         97617        123299         72371        98053        97617        123299
              Mean of dep. var.                    0.0519        0.0519        0.0519       0.0519         0.412        0.412        0.412         0.412

     Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table reports differences between Italians in Argentina and the US with respect to rates of home ownership and
     the likelihood of holding an unskilled occupation. The mean of the dependent variable is computed among Italians in the United States. In columns 1 and 5, the
     sample is restricted to first-generation Italian migrants. In columns 2 and 6, I also include native-born individuals in Argentina and the US. I columns 3 and 7,
     I compare Italians to other immigrant groups in Argentina and the US. In columns 4 and 8, I compare Italians to the rest of the working-age population. The
59




     sample is restricted to the cities of Buenos Aires (Argentina) and New York (US).
     Sources: Argentine data are from Somoza (1967) and US data are from Ruggles et al. (1997) and the 1900 full count census available though the NBER server.
Table B3: First-generation immigrants in Argentina and the US, excluding departures from non-
Italian ports


                                                     Owner                   Unskilled
                                               (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
                 Italian in Argentina      0.0323***     0.0313**     -0.214***     -0.228***
                                            (0.0105)     (0.0124)      (0.0127)      (0.0149)
                 Years since arrival           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                 Port of origin                Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                 Literacy                      Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                 Occupation                    Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                 Surname                       Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                 Italian Ports                 No            Yes          No            Yes
                 Observations                30922          23360       30922         23360
                 Mean of dep. var.           0.145          0.127       0.476         0.512
                 R2                          0.438          0.471       0.492         0.532

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table compares Italians in Argentina and the US with respect to
the likelihood of owning their home and the likelihood of being employed in an unskilled occupation. The sample in
columns 2 and 4 is restricted to Italians departing from Italian ports.




                                                       60
       Table B4: First-generation northern and southern Italians in Argentina and the US


                                                          Owner                        Unskilled
                                                    (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
          Italian in Argentina                  0.0319***                    -0.225***
                                                (0.00842)                     (0.0101)
          Southern Italian X Argentina                         0.0436***                    -0.252***
                                                                (0.0131)                     (0.0157)
          Northern Italian X Argentina                         0.0625***                    -0.264***
                                                               (0.00660)                    (0.00791)
          Northern Italian X US                                0.0352***                    -0.0529***
                                                               (0.00887)                     (0.0106)
          Years since arrival                       Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
          Port of origin                            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
          Literacy                                  Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
          Occupation                                Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
          Observations                            23360          23360         23360          23360
          Mean of dep. var.                       0.127          0.127         0.512          0.520
          R2                                      0.0389         0.0388        0.153          0.153

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table compares Italians in Argentina and the US with respect to the
likelihood of owning their home and the likelihood of being employed in an unskilled occupation. In columns 2 and
4, I split Italians into four mutually exclusive groups based on whether they departed from a Northern or a Southern
port, and whether they migrated to Argentina or the US. The omitted category in columns 2 and 4 are southern
Italians in the US.




                                                          61
Table B5: First-generation immigrants in Argentina and the US, excluding farmers and unskilled
workers upon arrival


                                                     Owner                   Unskilled
                                               (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
                 Italian in Argentina      0.0315***       0.0254     -0.216***     -0.176***
                                           (0.00752)      (0.0172)    (0.00902)      (0.0198)
                 Years since arrival           Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                 Port of origin                Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                 Literacy                      Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                 Occupation                    Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                 Observations                30922           5444       30922         5444
                 Mean of dep. var.           0.145          0.150       0.476         0.357
                 R2                          0.0401         0.0534      0.139         0.137

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table compares Italians in Argentina and the US with respect to
the likelihood of owning their home and the likelihood of being employed in an unskilled occupation. The sample in
columns 2 and 4 excludes individuals who declared farming or an unskilled occupation upon arrival.



Table B6: First-generation immigrants in Argentina and the US, surname × port of origin fixed
effects


                                                     Owner                   Unskilled
                                               (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
                 Italian in Argentina      0.0323***      0.0255*     -0.214***     -0.219***
                                            (0.0105)      (0.0136)     (0.0127)      (0.0161)
                 Years since arrival           Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                 Literacy                      Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                 Occupation                    Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                 Surname                       Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                 Surname X Port                No            Yes          No           Yes
                 Observations                 30922         30922       30922         30922
                 Mean of dep. var.            0.145         0.145       0.476         0.476
                 R2                           0.438         0.622       0.492         0.671

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table compares Italians in Argentina and the US with respect to
the likelihood of owning their home and the likelihood of being employed in an unskilled occupation. In columns 2
and 4, I include port of origin × surname fixed effects.



                                                       62
Table B7: First-generation immigrants in Argentina and the US, first and last name fixed effects


                                                        Owner                      Unskilled
                                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                  Italian in Argentina       0.0323***       0.0378***      -0.214***      -0.215***
                                              (0.0105)        (0.0121)       (0.0127)       (0.0145)
                  Years since arrival            Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
                  Literacy                       Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
                  Occupation                     Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
                  Port                           Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
                  Surname                        Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
                  First name                      No             Yes            No            Yes
                  Observations                  30922           30922         30922          30922
                  Mean of dep. var.             0.145           0.145         0.476          0.476
                  R2                            0.438           0.472         0.492          0.526

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table compares Italians in Argentina and the US with respect to
the likelihood of owning their home and the likelihood of being employed in an unskilled occupation. In columns 2
and 4, I include first name in addition to surname fixed effects.




 Table B8: First-generation immigrants in Argentina and the US, Altonji et al. (2005) bounds


                                                        Owner                      Unskilled
                                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                  Italian in Argentina       0.0349***       0.0320***      -0.222***      -0.216***
                                             (0.00748)       (0.00750)      (0.00920)      (0.00900)
                  Controls                        No             Yes            No            Yes
                  Observations                  31025           31025         31025          31025
                  Mean of dep. var.             0.145           0.145         0.475          0.475
                    C
                   NC - C                                       11.11                        37.56

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table compares Italians in Argentina and the US with respect to
the likelihood of owning their home and the likelihood of being employed in an unskilled occupation. Columns 1 and
3 control for age fixed effects, years since migration and port of origin fixed effects. In columns 2 and 4, I control for
the occupational category declared upon arrival and for literacy.




                                                           63
Table B9: First-generation immigrants in Argentina and the US, excluding short-term arrivals


                                                              Owner       Unskilled
                                                               (1)           (2)
                                Italian in Argentina       0.0302**       -0.221***
                                                           (0.0151)        (0.0166)
                                Years since arrival            Yes          Yes
                                Port of origin                 Yes          Yes
                                Literacy                       Yes          Yes
                                Occupation                     Yes          Yes
                                Surname                        Yes          Yes
                                Observations                  21788        21788
                                Mean of dep. var.             0.174        0.443
                                R2                            0.486        0.538

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table compares Italians in Argentina and the US with respect
to the likelihood of owning their home and the likelihood of being employed in an unskilled occupation. Sample is
restricted to Italians who had spent five year or more at the destination by the time of the census.
Sources: Data are from the samples linking passenger lists to the census as described in the main text.


                          Table B10: Differences by US region of destination


                                                 Home ownership             Unskilled occupation
                                                  (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)
               US Northeast X Italian         -0.0804         -0.242         0.291        0.320
                                              (0.00431)       (0.00689)     (0.00622)    (0.00678)
               US Midwest X Italian           0.0242          -0.250         0.270        0.279
                                              (0.00463)       (0.00723)     (0.00668)    (0.00711)
               US South X Italian             -0.0335         -0.222         0.260        0.228
                                              (0.00490)       (0.00754)     (0.00707)    (0.00741)
               US West X Italian               0.111          -0.124         0.233        0.245
                                              (0.00471)       (0.00758)     (0.00680)    (0.00745)
               Including natives                  No            Yes            No           Yes
               Observations                     283250         1118624       283250       1118624
               Mean of dep. var.                 0.195          0.195         0.209        0.209

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table repeats the analysis in Table 1 but splitting the US
indicator into four variables: US Northeast, US Midwest, US South and US West. The sample in columns 1 and 3 is
restricted to Italian immigrants. In columns 2 and 4, the sample also includes natives. Omitted category are Italians
in Argentina.
Sources: Argentine data are from Somoza (1967) and US data are from Ruggles et al. (1997).



                                                         64
Table B11: Argentine Surname Index and likelihood of moving to Argentina, standardized sur-
names


                                          (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)
         ASI (NYSIIS)                  0.471         0.456         0.437         0.440         0.393
                                      (0.00147)     (0.00146)     (0.00169)     (0.00163)     (0.00420)
         ASI X female                                             0.0737
                                                                  (0.00327)
         ASI X child                                                            0.0776
                                                                                (0.00353)
         ASI X unskilled/farm                                                                 0.0232
                                                                                              (0.00466)
         Individual controls              No           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
         Observations                  1308843       1308843       1308843       1308843       778318
         Mean of dep. var.              0.396         0.396         0.396         0.396         0.385
         R2                             0.281         0.298         0.298         0.298         0.319

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. The dependent variable is an indicator that takes a value of one if the
observations belongs to the Argentine data. The Argentina Surname Index (ASI) measures the relative frequency of
an individual's surname in the Argentine and US data based on the standardized surnames of previous Italian arrivals
to Argentina and the US. Columns 1 to 4 include the full sample of immigrant arrivals to Argentina and the US. In
column 5, the sample is restricted to working age (18 to 60 years old) males.
Source: Passenger lists data as described in the main text.




                                                        65
