                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE OPPORTUNITIES AND LIMITATIONS OF MONOPSONY POWER IN HEALTHCARE:
            EVIDENCE FROM THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA

                                         Jillian Chown
                                         David Dranove
                                        Craig Garthwaite
                                         Jordan Keener

                                       Working Paper 26122
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26122


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jillian Chown, David Dranove, Craig Garthwaite, and Jordan Keener. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Opportunities and Limitations of Monopsony Power in Healthcare: Evidence from the
United States and Canada
Jillian Chown, David Dranove, Craig Garthwaite, and Jordan Keener
NBER Working Paper No. 26122
July 2019
JEL No. H0,H4,I0,I1

                                         ABSTRACT

Perhaps more than any other sector of the economy, healthcare depends on government resources.
As a result, many healthcare systems rely on the use of government monopsony power to
decrease spending. The United States is a notable exception, where prices in large portions of the
healthcare sector are set without government involvement. In this paper we examine the
economic implications of a greater use of monopsony power in the United States. We present a
model of monopsony power and test its predictions using price differences between the United
States and Canada ­ a country that represents an example of a "Medicare for All" style system.
Overall, we find that wage differences for medical providers across the two countries are
primarily driven by the broader labor market while price difference for prescription drugs are
more directly the result of buyer power. We discuss theoretical reasons why a Canadian
monopsonist may be more willing to exploit its buyer power over prescription drugs rather than
provider wages and why a U.S. monopsonist might not be willing to do the same

Jillian Chown                                   Craig Garthwaite
Kellogg School of Management                    Department of Strategy
Northwestern University                         Kellogg School of Management
2211 Campus Dr                                  Northwestern University
Room 5165                                       2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-0898                         Evanston, IL 60208
jillian.chown@kellogg.northwestern.edu          and NBER
                                                c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu
David Dranove
Department of Strategy                          Jordan Keener
Kellogg School of Management                    Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University                         Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road                              2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208                              Evanston, IL 60208-0898
d-dranove@kellogg.northwestern.edu              jordan.keener@kellogg.northwestern.edu
         Health care spending varies markedly across countries. It is widely accepted that at least a portion of

spending differences results from the willingness and ability of governments to exercise monopsony power

when purchasing healthcare goods and services. Broadly speaking, governments that finance healthcare

services often use their buyer power to push down the prices paid for healthcare inputs such as

pharmaceutical products, medical devices, and the wages of medical providers. Differences in the willingness

and ability to exercise buyer power certainly contributes to the considerable healthcare price and wage

dispersion across countries. However, the degree to which these price differences across countries are the

result of buyer power as opposed to other economic forces is an open question that we explore in this paper.

         At an aggregate level, the United States stands at an extreme of a relatively parsimonious government

role in the financing of healthcare services, a limited use of government buyer power, and a relatively large

percentage of its economic activity occurring in the health sector. 1 Concerned about the rising cost of U.S.

healthcare, many policymakers have proposed that the federal government make greater use of its buyer

power. Proposals include various "Medicare-for-All" policies that would expand existing public insurance

systems to cover more than simply the elderly, poor and disabled, as well as more limited proposals, such as

requiring Medicare to use its size to negotiate lower pharmaceutical prices. The economic effects of a greater

use of monopsony power obviously depend on the specifics of the proposed policy reform. While

proponents have offered a variety of "Medicare-for-all" alternatives, we will use the term in this paper to refer

to a truly single payer system where no private insurance options exist. Under this option, which has been

proposed by numerous policymakers, the federal government would be the single purchasing agent for all

Americans. 2




1 U.S. healthcare spending was estimated to be 16.8% of GDP in 2015, compared to an average of 8.75% of GDP for
other OECD countries. Half of healthcare spending in the U.S. was financed through government transfers or social
insurance contributions, compared to 71% on average for other countries (OECD Health Statistics 2018).
2 Other policies that now fall under the rubric of "Medicare for all" include allowing individuals to buy in to private

managed care plans (i.e. Medicare Advantage) and allowing individuals to buy in to traditional Medicare
(https://www.vox.com/2018/12/13/18103087/medicare-for-all-explained-single-payer-health-care-sanders-jayapal).

                                                                                                                          1
         The potential savings from implementing such a single payer system would primarily come from two

sources 3: (1) decreased administrative costs resulting from a single firm providing health insurance and (2) the

exercise of buyer power to reduce input prices. We will briefly discuss the former before moving on to the

latter, which is the main focus of this paper.

         Centralizing insurance in a single entity would certainly eliminate some duplicative administrative

functions. In addition, a single insurer that lacked competitive pressures would likely have lower marketing

expenses. On the other hand, individuals could no longer choose a plan that best met their idiosyncratic

preferences for plan design (Dafny et al, 2013), and centralization might also stifle innovation in insurance

offerings. Overall, the exact magnitude of the economic benefits from changes in administrative costs

resulting from a single payer system is unclear. 4

         While administrative expenditures are a potential source of savings, a single payer aiming to

meaningfully reduce spending would, by necessity, follow the proverbial "Willie Sutton" rule of health

spending 5 and target the prices paid to healthcare inputs such as medical providers and pharmaceuticals.

These input prices represent the bulk of U.S. healthcare spending with labor costs comprising approximately

60 percent (Kocher and Sahni, 2011) and pharmaceuticals accounting for an additional 15 percent. 6 A

government payer could cut both of these prices either by directly reducing the fees paid to physicians, other



3
  Savings could also result from a more efficient use of medical services that reduced the uncompensated care burden of
hospitals, which are substantial and may represent inefficient care (Garthwaite et al., 2018). However, the impact of
insurance on use of healthcare services is a point of debate in the literature with some studies seeing increased spending
and others finding decreased spending (Finkelstein et al., 2012; Anderson et al, 2012; Garthwaite et al., 2017; Sommers et
al, 2012; Sommers et al., 2016)
4 For example, the net savings from eliminating these functions could be tempered by different onerous administrative

requirements for public payers that have been recently identified (Gottlieb, Shapiro and Dunn 2018). In addition, some
of these administrative requirements, such as prior authorization, may decrease moral hazard and reduce spending
(Gottlieb and Mark Shepard 2018). Another source of savings could come from reduced marketing and underwriting
expenditures by commercial insurers, which themselves would either be eliminated or vastly restructured. However, to
the extent that advertising and outreach improves the matching of customers to networks and other features of
insurance products the economic savings here may again be limited. In particular, the degree to which this would be a
source of savings is a function of whether Medicare Part C (i.e. Medicare Advantage) continues to exist as a program.
Given Medicare Advantage is the private, managed care version of Medicare, many of these administrative costs could
remain if that form of coverage remained an option in the insurance market.
5 Explaining why he robbed banks, Willie Sutton reportedly said, "because that's where the money is."
6 The exact amount of spending on pharmaceuticals is difficult to estimate because many pharmaceuticals are

administered by providers and therefore are accounted for as hospital or physician spending. The 15 percent figure
includes retail prescription drugs spending as well as spending for certain drugs, such as infusion drugs, sold directly by
physicians, or drugs dispensed in hospitals (Yu, Atteberry and Bach 2018).

                                                                                                                         2
medical personnel, and pharmaceutical manufacturers or by reducing payments to hospitals and other

institutions, which would then have to reduce their costs (i.e., cut wages and reduce other medical inputs) to

remain financially viable.

         Proponents of an expanded use of government buyer power frequently cite the experiences of other

developed countries that have both far more extensive government involvement in healthcare and lower

health spending. Within these comparisons, the Canadian system is perhaps the most similar to Medicare-for-

all. In Canada, provincial governments offer health insurance and finance care delivery under rules established

by the government, but medical services are mostly provided by private providers in privately owned and

operated facilities. 7 The similarity of the Canadian system to many U.S. proposals for Medicare-for-all can

perhaps be most clearly seen in Senator Bernie Sanders (I-VT) explicit statements that the Canadian system is

a model for his widely discussed universal coverage proposal (Kliff 2017). 8 Thus, the decisions of Canadian

insurers provide perhaps the best evidence of the potential optimal savings available from the creation of a

single monopsonist in the United States. 9

         Projections for healthcare spending in a U.S. Medicare-for-all system that are based on the

experiences of Canada implicitly assume that under Medicare-for-all, American healthcare providers would

earn broadly similar wages to their Canadian counterparts and Americans would obtain drugs at Canadian

prices. At first blush, these seem like reasonable assumptions. After all, if a relatively small centralized

Canadian payer can use its monopsony power to achieve those spending levels, certainly a meaningfully larger

centralized U.S. payer could do the same or even better.

         However, assuming the U.S. monopsonist would find it optimal to adopt the Canadian input price

schedule requires the further assumption that the entirety of the price difference between the two nations



7
  Primary care and specialist physicians are typically self-employed in private practice and bill fee-for-service. Hospitals
are a mix of public and privately owned non-profits, with hospital-based physicians typically not being salaried
employees regardless of ownership type (Allin and Rudoler 2017).
8 To the extent that Medicare-for-all involves multiple firms competing for customers rather than the single entity in

Canada, the potential savings from both administrative costs and lower prices listed above would likely decrease.
9 Another potential comparison is the United Kingdom, where the National Health Service (NHS) directly provides

health insurance, owns hospitals, and employs many physicians. The NHS is meaningfully more involved in the health
economy than nearly all of the single payer proposals currently being debated in the United States and the creation of
such a system would involve far more than simply the increased use of monopsony power.

                                                                                                                               3
results from the greater exercise of buyer power by the Canadian government. This ignores the multitude of

factors that can drive prices differences across countries. Even without any exercise of buyer power, a

country with a single payer system could have markedly lower healthcare wages and drug prices simply

because local economic conditions result in lower optimal prices for all goods and services in that nation.

Estimating the potential opportunities and limitations of increased monopsony power in the U.S. healthcare

sector clearly requires a more careful understanding of the role of buyer power in causing the observed price

differences across the two nations. In this paper, we present a simple theoretical model to predict the optimal

decisions of a healthcare monopsonist such as Canada. We then use price data across the U.S. and Canada to

empirically test the predictions of this model to help understand the scope of savings optimally available to a

similar monopsonist in the United States.

        The model makes several predictions about how a monopsonist would optimally exercise its market

power. These predictions rest on the elasticity of supply the monopsonist faces. This is because the

monopsonist must balance a fundamental tension between the benefits of lower spending resulting from

exercising its buyer power and the potential adverse consequences of moving away from the unfettered

market outcome. As supply becomes more elastic, the adverse consequences of a monopsonist exercising

market power also increases. For example, a monopsonist facing elastic labor supply that heavily suppresses

wages may simultaneously suppress current and future labor market participation to unacceptably low levels.

Physicians, nurses and other medical personnel might leave (or never enter) the sector in favor of higher

wages in other fields. Similarly, lowering drug prices may suppress entry into this market in the short run,

although the magnitude of this is unclear given the relatively low marginal cost of a drug. Perhaps more

concerning, if the profit implications are big enough (i.e. if the local monopsonist is also a global

monopsonist) the exercise of monopsony power may affect the development of new drugs in the long run.

        The predictions of the model suggest the optimal exercise of market power will differ based on both

the relative size of the monopsonist in the relevant market and the resulting elasticity of supply it faces. We

test the predictions of this model using U.S. and Canadian price data for two key inputs of healthcare

services: prescription drugs and medical providers.


                                                                                                                  4
        These two outcomes were selected because they are both important inputs to the healthcare

production function and they have specific economic features that highlight the model's different predictions.

Specifically, we leverage differences in the Canadian monopsonist's relative importance in the local labor

market for physicians and the global pharmaceutical market. Given our model predicts a different response

based on the monopsonist's relative market size (and therefore the respective elasticity of supply), it predicts

different exercises of market power across these two input markets. Specifically, our model predicts the

Canadian monopsonist would exercise more of its market power for pharmaceuticals than for labor.

        At a high level, the data support the model's prediction that a monopsonist facing elastic labor supply

will limit its use of buyer power. Specifically, we find that highly educated Canadian healthcare workers earn

approximately 26 percent less than their U.S. counterparts ­ which matches the conventional wisdom that the

Canadian single payer depresses provider wages. However, it is unclear whether this difference truly reflects

the exercise of buyer power, or merely is the result of broader local labor market conditions. If these lower

wages reflect the exercise of buyer power by the Canadian monopsonist, the gap in healthcare wages across

the United States and Canada would differ from the gap in wages earned by similarly skilled employees in

other parts of the economy. The data, however, largely do not show this. Instead, we find that Canadians with

similar amounts of education as skilled healthcare workers earn 22 percent less than U.S. workers in similar

professions. Thus, while skilled healthcare workers do earn less in Canada, these lower wages primarily reflect

differences in earnings for all high-skilled employees across the two countries.

        This role of the broader labor market can be clearly seen in Figure 1, which depicts the income

distributions across the two countries using harmonized household survey data (Minnesota Population Center

2018). Panel A contains data for all workers and shows that at most points of the distribution, incomes are

quite similar. For example, the median income in the United States is $31,043 compared to $27,885 in

Canada. However, the upper tail of the income distribution stretches much higher in the United States. For

example, income at the 95th percentile is $117,396 in the United States compared to $89,783 in Canada.

Figure 2 limits the sample to employees with at least a bachelor's degree, with Panel A containing data for all

workers and Panel B containing the data for healthcare workers. The similarity across the two panels suggests


                                                                                                                   5
that differences in earnings primarily reflect differences in returns to skill and training across the broader

labor markets in the two countries.

         Turning to drug prices, a monopsonist with a relatively small global footprint faces relatively inelastic

supply. Given the large fixed cost nature of developing pharmaceutical products, it's important to separately

consider both the short run and long run elasticity of supply. In the short run, the marginal costs of

production are quite low and therefore a manufacturer would likely find it optimal to sell even at a markedly

depressed price. In the long run, manufacturers face the full and substantial costs of drug development and

the supply of new products might be more sensitive to prices. However, investment decisions regarding the

development of new products are dictated by global rather than local profits ­ and a relatively small

monopsonist has little impact on global profits. Therefore, a relatively small monopsonist will likely still find

it optimal to suppress drug prices even after considering the long run impact on the supply of new products.

Consistent with this prediction, we find evidence that the Canadian monopsonist does exercise buyer power

with respect to drugs. 10 Using highly detailed pricing data that has not been previously studied for this

purpose, we estimate that for a consistent basket of pharmaceutical goods, Canadian consumers pay 54

percent less than Americans.

         Again we consider whether this cross-country price difference results from broader economic

conditions or the use of buyer power. Given the similarity across much of the income distribution in Figure

1, it is unlikely that the profit-maximizing price for most goods and services is wildly different across the two

nations. A variety of data supports this assumption. For example, in 2017 the price level index for Canadian

dollars relative to US dollars, which is the ratio of purchasing power parity to market exchange rate, was 0.96.

This suggests that average prices in Canada are four percent lower than in the U.S. Over the past decade, this

index has been greater than one for most years, meaning U.S. prices have actually been lower. In addition,

Numbeo (an online service that uses a variety of data sources to calculate cross-country cost of living indices)

finds that consumer prices in Canada were 5.69 percent lower than in the United States from May 2017



10Ideally, we would like to exploit meaningful inter-drug variation in Canadian drug consumption as a percentage of
global drug consumption. Canada represents too small a share of the global market for such meaningful variation.

                                                                                                                      6
through November 2018 (Numbeo 2018). Given these statistics, we might expect the prices for

pharmaceuticals could be slightly lower in Canada. However, our analysis finds that Canadian drug prices are

54 percent lower ­ a difference that is far greater than for other goods and services. We interpret this as

evidence that Canadian provincial governments are willing and able to exercise monopsony power over drugs

to a greater degree than in the labor market ­ which is consistent with our monopsony model's predictions.

        The fact that Canadian wages for highly skilled employees show limited evidence of an exercise of

buyer power while prescription drug prices indicate a large role for the public payer's negotiations suggests

that Canadian policymakers carefully consider the potential consequences of exploiting monopsony power in

healthcare markets. For products where Canadian consumers represent a relatively small part of the market,

such as prescription drugs, policymakers have the freedom to exploit buyer power without meaningful

consequences ­ and they do. In contrast, in labor markets, Canadian policymakers must contend with the fact

that if they use their negotiating power to push down input prices it could have large and potentially harmful

short and long term consequences for healthcare labor supply.

        We proceed in this paper as follows. In Section I we present a theoretical model of a monopsonist

and developing testable predictions for the wage and price structure based on the model. Section II discusses

the prescription drug pricing and wage data we have gathered from the United States and Canada. In sections

III, IV, and V we present evidence from these data to support the predictions of our model. Section VI

concludes and discusses implications for these healthcare markets.



I. Input Prices and Monopsony

A switch from the current mixed U.S. health economy to a "Medicare for all" monopsony market could

affect input prices for several reasons. The overarching reason is that a single monopolist/monopsonist

(henceforth, the monopsonist) would replace a combination of government payers and commercial insurers.

If the monopsonist is a profit maximizer, this would normally lead to a suppression of output, with a

corresponding reduction in input demand and reduced input prices. A government monopsonist might

choose greater or lesser output than a profit-maximizer, for example by imposing different copayments or by


                                                                                                                 7
directly rationing access to services. If the monopsonist chose to reduce output, this would cause

corresponding decreases to expenditures on inputs, leading to reductions in worker salaries, which we

interpret as a change in input prices.

        The extent to which the switch to monopsony suppresses input prices depends, to a large extent, on

the elasticity of input supply. We show the importance of input elasticities using the classic formulation of the

monopsonist's input demand decision. For simplicity, we compare the competitive outcome with the

outcome for a profit-maximizing monopsonist, though we would draw similar conclusions if we compared

the oligopsonistic outcome to monopoly. In keeping with the textbook model, we refer to input prices as

wages but the model can be used to predict any input market.

        Figure 3 presents the classic monopsony problem. Let D denote industry demand and S denote

industry supply. In a competitive equilibrium, wages are wc and quantity supplied is qc. A profit maximizing

monopolist/monopsonist still faces output demand D and input supply S, but optimizes input demand using

the corresponding marginal revenue MR and marginal factor cost MFC. The monopsonist selects wage wm

with corresponding inputs qm. Compared with the competitive equilibrium, wages are suppressed by wc-wm.

        Figure 4 depicts the monopsonist's problem when it faces elastic supply, in the sense that input

supply changes more rapidly as the monopsonist deviates from the competitive equilibrium wage wc. The

industry supply curve rotates around the competitive equilibrium to S*, and MFC flattens to MFC*. The

resulting wage wm* is generally higher than before, and the extent of optimal wage suppression (wc-wm*) falls.

Note that the change in quantity is generally indeterminate.

        The elasticity of input supply will vary by input, depending on several factors:

        1) The alternatives for suppliers
        2) The time horizon
        3) The size of the purchaser relative to the overall size of the input market

We next address these in turn.

        A monopsonist cannot easily suppress wages when supply is elastic. In the healthcare context, even a

government monopsonist must pay prevailing wages for low skilled positions, such as hospital aides and

orderlies, as these workers have many alternatives. The availability of alternatives helps explain cross-payer


                                                                                                                 8
wage patterns within the market for U.S. physicians. Commercial insurers in the United States pay fees that

are 30 to 75 percent higher than those paid by Medicare (Clemens and Gottlieb 2014). Medicare can currently

suppress payments because the supply of physician labor to Medicare is relatively inelastic ­ despite the low

fees, the percentage of physicians accepting new Medicare patients is nearly identical to the percentage

accepting new commercially insured patients (Boccuti, et al. 2015). In contrast, physicians who refuse to

contract with a commercial insurer trying to suppress wages may still retain many patients enrolled with that

insurer. 11 Some patients will stay with the insurer but pay higher copayments in order to continue accessing

their preferred physician. Other patients will switch to a different insurer so that they may continue with their

preferred physician without increased cost-sharing. As a result, physicians are more willing to say no to a

commercial insurer that attempts to suppress wages than they are willing to say no to Medicare. 12 In terms of

the model, commercial insurers face relatively elastic supply and are less able to suppress physician wages.

         The discussion thus far has taken a short run perspective. In the long run, the supply of physicians

and other skilled medical personnel is likely to be more elastic, as talented young individuals have the option

to choose other career options before they have sunk the cost of training. Facing long run elastic supply,

payers might be reluctant to reduce wages. Of course, long run responses depend on the size of the payer

relative to the size of the market. United Healthcare, the largest commercial insurer in the United States, has

about 41 million members, or less than 13 percent of the U.S. population (and an even smaller share of total

health spending). Medicare, the largest single purchaser, covers less than 18 percent of the population and

accounts for just 22 percent of health spending. Thus, no individual payer in the current U.S. market is likely

to be overly concerned with the impact of its own fee schedules on long run labor supply. 13 In contrast, fee

reductions by a Medicare-for-all monopsonist could have a substantial effect on long run supply. Even so,



11 This is an important feature in models of insurer provider bargaining (Ho and Lee 2017).
12
   If physicians refused to accept traditional Medicare, they could attempt to persuade their patients to switch to a
Medicare managed care plan. There is considerable evidence that patients are reluctant to do so, as was brought out in
the recent Department of Justice challenge to the Aetna/Humana merger. Moreover, Medicare managed care payment
rates are similar to traditional Medicare (Chen, Hicks and Chernew 2018). Taken together, these facts suggest that
physicians have little leverage against traditional Medicare.
13
   A few insurers in some states may have relatively large shares of the commercial insurance market. The wages paid by
these insurers may affect the willingness of medical providers to work in that state. Whether or not this affects the
exercise of monopsony power is beyond the scope of this paper.

                                                                                                                      9
any impact would not be felt overnight and might never affect those individuals with idiosyncratic

preferences for a career in medicine. Thus, the monopsonist would not face perfectly elastic supply in the

intermediate or even the long run and might suppress wages to a certain extent. 14

         Thus far, we have focused on the supply of labor. Similar issues arise when we consider the supply of

innovative medical products such as drugs and devices. The marginal costs of medical products with patent

protection are well below prices. As a result, in the short run, a monopsonist can reduce prices without

driving away supply. In the long run, however, lower prices may translate into fewer innovations because

investments in medical innovation strongly respond to profit incentives (Acemoglu and Linn 2004,

Finkelstein 2004, Dubois, et al. 2015, Blume-Kohout and Sood 2013, Dranove, Garthwaite and Hermosilla

2014). At the same time, innovators produce for global markets and therefore base their investments on

expectations about global rather than local profits. Thus, the effect of local monopsony pricing on global

innovation depends on the size of the local monopsonist relative to the global market. Canada accounts for

just 2.8 percent of global pharmaceutical spending (Torreya Partners 2017). If Canada (or a similarly small

purchaser) suppresses the prices it pays for drugs, this will not materially affect global profits and therefore

should have little effect on the global supply of new drugs. If U.S. drug spending did not change, a Medicare-

for-all purchaser would account for 36.9 percent of global pharmaceutical spending. (Torreya Partners 2017).

Suppression of prices by such a large monopsonist would meaningfully impact profits and therefore suppress

global investments in research and development for new pharmaceuticals. Thus, even if the U.S. monopsonist

and the Canadian monopsonist held the same view about the welfare consequences of decreased innovation,

the fact that they face different long run elasticities of drug supply means they might optimally choose to

exercise different amounts of buyer power in the drug market.




14 Considering the elasticity of supply for the physician market requires also thinking about the fact that the potential
supply of physicians is constrained by the number of available spots at medical colleges. The number of slots may affect
the elasticity of supply for the physician workforce. That said, a monopsonist is likely concerned not just with the
quantity of physicians but also their underlying quality. To the extent that the exercise of market power moves higher
quality candidates out of the medical field, this could be a negative consequence that the monopsonist must consider. In
addition, we note that Canadian medical schools are oversubscribed so, to the extent that the actions of Canadian
monopsonist serves as a benchmark for the decisions of a United States monopsonist, the Canadian monopsonist also
(to some degree) accounts for this rationing of slots at medical schools.

                                                                                                                      10
           Table 1 summarizes the short run, long run, and purchaser size effects of supply elasticities for three

broad categories of inputs: unskilled labor, skilled labor, and medical products. This analysis generates several

predictions for comparisons of input prices between the U.S. and other nations, and for the U.S. today versus

a U.S. monopsonist. These appear in Table 2. Regardless of nation, unskilled labor will receive wages based

on overall macroeconomic activity. To the extent that unskilled labor receives higher pay in the U.S., unskilled

medical workers will also receive higher pay. Skilled medical labor will receive higher pay than unskilled labor.

All nations may suppress wages of skilled labor to the extent that supply is inelastic in the long run. There

may be less suppression in the United States today, however, because commercial insurers face relatively

elastic short run supply. Smaller nations may suppress prices for medical products because they have minimal

impact on innovation incentives.

           The monopsony model thus makes predictions about how a monopsonist would approach setting an

optimal price for inputs. This should vary both by the monopsonist's local market power as well as its

presence in the global market. To understand the degree to which this model predicts the variation in input

prices across countries, we will test its predictions on wage and price data from Canada and the United States.

Specifically, the monopsony model above would suggest the following patterns in the data from these two

markets:

           (1) Unskilled healthcare and non-healthcare workers should earn similar wages in Canada;

           (2) Skilled healthcare workers may earn less than skilled non-healthcare workers in Canada;

           (3) The difference between U.S. and Canadian unskilled healthcare workers should be the same as

               the difference for unskilled non-healthcare workers;

           (4) U.S. and Canadian skilled healthcare workers may have a larger wage differences than non-

               healthcare workers ­ with the size of that difference reflecting the Canadian monopsonist's

               market power;

           (5) Pharmaceutical prices should be lower in the Canada than the average difference in prices for

               other goods and services across the two markets; and




                                                                                                                11
           (6) Differences in the quantity of workers and pharmaceuticals, on a per capita basis, is

               indeterminate.

           If these patterns appear in the data, it has economically meaningful implications for the expected

effect of the optimal exercise of monopsony power on U.S. healthcare spending. Specifically, if the U.S.

switches to monopsony and follows the example of the Canadian monopsonist, we would expect no impact

on wages for unskilled workers, and some wage suppression for skilled labor. To the extent that there is some

global commonality in the degree to which skilled medical labor is supplied inelastically (e.g., medicine is as

much a "calling" in the U.S. and Canada), we may see similar degrees of wage suppression in both nations ­

but U.S. wages would not fall to Canadian levels. Finally, we would expect some price suppression for

medical products, but this could be limited by concerns about disrupting global supply and the ability of a

monopsonist to internalize these concerns (which is fundamentally a political economy question).



II. Data and Methods

           We analyze employment income and labor supply using data from two nationally representative

household surveys: the Current Population Survey (CPS) for the United States and the National Household

Survey (NHS) for Canada. We focus our analysis on the surveys from 2011, the last year that income and

labor statistics are available for Canada with the level of occupation detail we require. For the United States,

we use the March 2011 edition of the CPS, which features an expanded set of questions and a larger sample

of households.

           Both the Canadian and U.S. data provide detailed employment information for a broad set of

occupational groups. In particular, Statistics Canada reports estimated average and median employment

income as well as the total number of employees for 500 detailed occupation classes defined by the National

Occupational Classification (NOC) coding system. 15 For the U.S., we calculate mean and median employment

income and the quantity of workers from the CPS microdata form IPUMS. Occupations in the CPS are

coded into 525 classifications using the American Community Survey OCC codes.


15   Statistics Canada, 2011 National Household Survey Data Tables, Catalogue number: 99-014-X2011042

                                                                                                                  12
        For privacy reasons, various income components in the CPS are altered above certain levels to

reduce the risk of identification of individuals with very high incomes. However, respondents' incomes are

not capped at these values. Instead, each income value above the topcoded level is systematically swapped

with another topcoded value within a bounded interval, and rounded to two significant digits. 16 The intervals

used in the swapping procedure are not released, so we do not observe how much measurement error or

potential bias is introduced to our overall measure of employment income for respondents with wage income

subject to the swapping procedure. For this reason we consider both the mean and the median ­ both of

which have benefits and drawbacks. Although this procedure does not necessarily bias our ultimate outcome

measure of mean employment income by occupation, it does introduce unknown and heterogeneous

measurement error to this variable. Estimates for the median wage avoid this concern. However, the median

provides no information on the upper tail of income ­ a feature of the wage distribution that may be of

interest to a monopsonist interested in reducing healthcare spending. Therefore, in our tables we report both

measures and in the text we primarily discuss the mean wages by profession in each country.

        In the U.S. data, we construct occupation-level average employment income and quantity of

employees that match the definitions of these variables in the data tables for Canada. Specifically, for Canada,

total employment income in the NHS is defined as the total of wages and salary, net income from a non-farm

unincorporated business or professional practice, and net farm self-employment income. For the U.S., each

of these income components is available in the CPS microdata. Since employment income by occupation for

Canada is reported only for sample respondents with employment income, we impose the same sample

restriction on the CPS microdata before aggregating by occupation. Therefore, the quantity of workers

reported is the number of workers with employment income for each occupation. We then attempt to match

occupation categories across the two countries for all healthcare related occupations by job title. Our cross-

country analysis of the healthcare sector focuses on the 18 matched occupation classes shown in Table 3 and

Table 4. Section A.1 of the appendix provides a full list of OCC and NOC codes that are used to form each


16For our income measure, two components of total employment income are subject to the swapping procedure. These
are incomes from primary employment (either wages or from self-employment) above $250,000, wage incomes from
secondary employers above $47,000, and secondary self-employment business incomes above $60,000.

                                                                                                              13
occupation category and describes the matching process in greater detail. We convert incomes for Canada to

2011 USD using the 2011 purchasing power parity (PPP) conversion rate and normalize quantity of workers

to be per 100,000 members of the total population of the each country in 2011 (OECD 2018).

         Note that all of our results are subject to varying degrees of survey error and may be both noisy and

biased. We use these survey data to gain an understanding of the role of wage differentials rather than to

develop a precise estimate of the differential. We have seen no evidence to suggest that our results grossly

misstate the importance of wage differentials. 17

         We note that while our data are appropriate for cross-country comparisons, they are incomplete in

two ways that lead to small and potentially offsetting biases. First, our data could overstate or understate U.S.

physician earnings due to the topcode swapping procedure in the CPS. For this reason, and as described

above, we present both mean and median income estimates ­ with the qualitative conclusions being broadly

similar across the two measures. Second, we lack data on employee fringe benefits (such as healthcare or

retirement programs). The impact of this omission difference should be relatively consistent across health and

non-health professions with the important exception of U.S. physicians, who are often self-employed and

must provide their own health insurance. An apples-to-apples comparison of wages would deduct the cost of

health insurance from U.S. self-employed physicians. Failure to do so causes us to slightly overstate U.S.

physician earnings and creates an upward bias in our estimates of the wage differences across the two

countries.

         To examine prescription drug prices, we require data on a comparable set of products in the United

States and Canada. Our data on Canadian drug prices comes from the Ontario Drug Benefit Formulary as of

July 2018. We use Ontario for Canada as it is the largest province by population and the formulary has each




17For example, we also compared U.S. healthcare wages against several European countries, using data analyzed by the
Washington Post that was compiled by the University of Amsterdam's Wage Indicator Foundation, which surveys
workers in dozens of nations on six continents and reports average wages adjusted for purchasing power parity (Noack
2015). This survey, which includes voluntary responses submitted online and is therefore less reliable than the
NHS/OES data, nevertheless shows similar wage differentials as those between the United States and Canada. Similarly,
the ratio of physician earnings across a number of developed countries has been found to be broadly similar to the ratio
of earnings for other high income occupations (Cutler and Ly 2011).

                                                                                                                     14
data element we need to match drugs. 18 For each Drug Identification Number (DIN) listed on the Ontario

formulary, we observe the unit price and convert this price to US dollars using the 2017 OECD PPP

conversion rate.

            Obtaining accurate market-wide drug pricing data for the United States is a perpetual problem for

researchers. While list prices in the United States are available, these prices rarely represent the actual prices

paid for these products. Instead, pharmaceutical firms provide a variety of rebates (i.e. discounts from the list

price) that allow them to price discriminate across the various payers in the system. In order to facilitate profit

maximization these rebates are confidential and thus researchers often lack data on the actual prices paid.

That said, federal regulations require that firms provide the Medicaid system with a rebate equal to the largest

rebates provided to any private payer in the system, effectively guaranteeing Medicaid pays a price equal to

the lowest price paid in the market.

            To determine drug prices in the United States, we first estimate post-rebate drug prices and then

exploit the Medicaid rules to estimate minimum price differences between private purchasers in the United

States and the formulary unit price in Ontario. We use the 2018Q1 Medicaid Drug Utilization Data for two

main reasons: it contains data for a wide range of drugs and, as noted, there is a mechanical relationship

between post-rebate Medicaid prices and minimum prices for private purchasers. In these data, we observe

the average pre-rebate unit price for each National Drug Code (NDC), limiting the sample to prescription

drugs. To estimate post-rebate unit prices in the United States, we use the 2015 Medicaid Financial

Management Reports to calculate rebates as a share of total of Medicaid drug spending, which is 45 percent.

As we are interested in comparing brand name drug prices, we calculate an upper bound of the rebate share

for brand name drugs by dividing the overall rebate share by the fraction of Medicaid spending on brand

name drugs, which is 78 percent. Together, this implies that rebates for brand name drugs were at most 57

percent of total spending on brand name drugs. We estimate post-rebate prices for Ontario in a similar

fashion. Following Kang et al. (2019), we reduce list prices by the average rebate share for brand name drugs

in 2016 and 2017 ­ 30 percent.


18
     Although our data is for Ontario, drugs are purchased at the national level.

                                                                                                                     15
         Finally, to match drugs across countries we create a one-to-one correspondence between NDCs and

DINs for a subset of drugs by matching on generic name, manufacturer, dosage form, and dosage strength. 19

We further limit to tablet and capsule dosage forms measured in milligrams to ensure comparability of units.

         Overall, we match 183 NDCs in the Medicaid data to a DIN on the Ontario formulary, 48 of which

are brand name drugs. These matched brand name drugs account for 26 percent of Medicaid prescription

drug spending on brand name tablets and capsules. The composition of the matched drugs by major drug

class (as listed on Ontario formulary) is similar to the overall composition of the formulary at the drug level,

although the share of Medicaid spending on neurological drugs in our sample is higher than the share of

spending on neurological drugs overall in Medicaid. 20 Our sample is therefore largely representative of the

broader formulary and the drugs included represent a meaningful portion of the overall prescription drug

spending.



III. Differences in Healthcare Labor Costs between the United States and Canada

In order to understand the healthcare labor cost differences between the United States and Canada we begin

by comparing the salaries earned by medical professionals. Recall that the wage patterns for skilled and

unskilled healthcare and non-healthcare workers inform the potential implications of using monopsony

power in the United States. Table 3 contains the wages for the 18 matched health occupations. Column 2

contains the mean U.S. salaries, Column 3 contains mean Canadian salaries, and column 4 contains the ratio

of U.S. to Canada salary. Columns 5-7 replicate Columns 2-4 but with median salaries instead of means.

Employees in nearly every healthcare profession earn higher wages in the United States.

         To ease comparison of these wages, we report the number of workers per capita in each occupation

in Table 4, and use these to construct wage indices across matched occupations  of the form,




19We exclude authorized generics or other cases where these variables do not uniquely identify a DIN or NDC.
2086% of spending on matched brand name drugs is for neurological drugs (first character of all ATC-4 codes is "N"),
while neurological drugs account for 60% of Medicaid spending on brand name prescription tablets and capsules. As
drugs have multiple ATC-4 classifications, here drugs are classified as "neurological" if any of its ATC-4 codes begins
with and "N".

                                                                                                                      16
                                                                  
                                            =                                         ,
                                                                   

where  is number of workers per capita 4 and  is generally mean employment income unless stated

otherwise. Table 5, Panel A contains our estimates of these wages indices. We find that Canadian wages are

24 percent lower than those in the United States. 21 This difference is driven both by higher salaries per

professional and differences in the composition of the healthcare workforce. Specifically, we note that in

addition to paying higher salaries, the United States also employs a greater percentage of specialists ­ each of

whom earns a higher salary than a generalist. If we break out specialists and generalists and recalculate the

wage index, the differential slightly increases to 27 percent, although this result should be interpreted with

caution as it relies on a separate data source to split U.S. physician wages by generalist/specialist. 22

Reweighting using Canadian labor supply produces an identical wage differential of 24 percent when we

combine all physicians and surgeons.

         While these data provide clear evidence that wages are meaningfully higher in the United States,

variation in the size and composition of the workforce beyond the number of specialists could also drive

differences in spending. Table 4 reveals many differences in the number of workers per capita in each

country. The U.S. has more workers in some occupations such as dietitians and respiratory therapists but

Canada has more dental hygienists and occupational therapists. These differences, which may reflect labor

supply, medical demand, or both, can contribute to differences in health spending, even if wages were the

same in the two countries. For example, if the U.S. employs 10 percent more healthcare workers per capita in

all occupations, this will contribute to 10 percent higher labor costs. In order to estimate the labor supply

effect on total spending, separately from the wage effect, we constructed a quantity index using U.S. wages as

weights. 23 We find that overall, the Canada healthcare labor supply is 6 percent lower than in the United




21 The gap should not be construed, however, as indicating that U.S. medical workers enjoy a higher standard of living;
that would depend on a myriad of other factors well beyond the scope of this analysis.
22 We describe how we use the Medscape Physician Compensation Report to fill in this data in Section A.2.
23 Note that this index fixes the composition of the labor force. We do not estimate how differences in composition, as

opposed to aggregate supply, affect differences in health spending.

                                                                                                                     17
States. This implies 6 percent of the overall labor cost differential is due to the greater use of labor in the

United States. Using Canada wages as weights does not change the results.



IV. Differences in Wages in the Broader United States and Canadian Labor Markets

          We have shown that U.S. healthcare workers earn substantially more than those in Canada. Broadly

speaking, there are three potential reasons for this. First, Canadian provincial governments may be exercising

monopsony power. Second, there could be entry barriers into medical jobs, such as tuition or licensing

requirements, and these barriers (particularly those related to the fixed cost of education) could be higher in

the United States. Third, the wages for healthcare workers might reflect the conditions of the broader labor

market. Put simply, highly skilled workers in the United States might make more than in Canada, regardless of

occupation. If the first two reasons are the source of the wage differences, then we should observe higher

U.S. compensation for certain occupations in the health sector, but not in other sectors. However, if the

differences reflect the broader labor market, then we should see similar wage differentials across other

occupations outside of healthcare. 24

          Understanding the source of labor market differences is not simply an academic exercise. If high U.S.

healthcare wages reflect the broader labor market, then cutting healthcare wages could have unintended

effects: current healthcare workers may decide to seek other employment opportunities outside healthcare ­

or at least outside of the scope of the monopsonist's power. Perhaps more detrimental would be the long run

effect on labor supply. Talented young individuals have a choice of career paths, and if healthcare wages fall

below what they could expect to earn in other jobs, the supply of qualified individuals training for healthcare

careers will likely fall.


24 It is also possible that the Canadian monopsonist chooses to exercise its market power to decrease wages which limits
the attractiveness of healthcare as an employment sector. This could subsequently shift highly skilled applicants to other
sectors, which would decrease their equilibrium wages. The effect of this decline would be based on the number and
quality of potential physicians that shift into these other sectors. We believe that this effect, to the extent that it exists, is
likely limited. Using the quantity of workers in Table 2, there were roughly 80,000 physicians and surgeons in Canada in
2010. Each decile of our sample of Canadian workers plotted in Figure 1, Panel A contains roughly 1.65 million
observations, so the entire population of physicians is less than 5 percent of the size of the entire top decile of workers
by employment income. Therefore, the potential scope for this effect appears small. It is also true that a United States
monopsonist would also need to consider this potential suppression of wages in other sectors as it makes its optimal
decision.

                                                                                                                               18
         One way to determine if U.S. healthcare wages are "too high" relative to other occupations is to

return to our comparison with Canada. As reported earlier, Canadian healthcare workers earn 24 percent less

than their U.S. counterparts. If this reflects broader labor market conditions, then we would expect Canadian

workers in other occupations requiring similar skills and training to also make about 24 percent lower wages.

If this instead reflects differences in health policy, entry barriers or licensing restrictions in healthcare, then

the Canada to U.S. wage differential in non-healthcare jobs should be well below that level.

         Table 6 contains the wages for jobs in the health sector and the broader economy that require similar

levels of education. Panel A contains the 10 healthcare occupations with the highest average years of

completed education in the United States. On average, individuals in these occupations had 16.67 years of

education with a high of approximately 20 years for doctors and dentists and a low of approximately 15 years

for registered nurses. Similar to the results above, highly educated medical occupations in Canada earn about

26 percent less than their American counterparts. Panel B of Table 6 contains a set of non-health occupations

that require broadly similar levels of education. Specifically, for each health occupation in Panel A, we find

the non-health occupation with the most similar average years of education that we can match to a single

Canadian occupation code. While there are many other potential careers a medical provider could have

chosen, these occupations represent a reasonable counterfactual career path had these educated providers not

initially chosen to pursue a healthcare occupation. The average years of completed education for workers in

this comparison set of high-education non-healthcare occupations is 17.57. Overall, we find that Canadian

employees in these occupations earn 22 percent less than their American counterparts. For example, lawyers

in the United States earn approximately $145,000 a year while Canadian lawyers earn only $110,000.

         This comparison of health occupations with the highest average education levels to the small subset

of non-health occupations in Panel B of Table 6 has two advantages. One is that we are able to use the most

detailed country-specific occupations codes possible and only compare occupations where there is a clear

one-to-one correspondence between countries. The second advantage is that in terms of education, these

occupations most closely resemble the health occupations in Panel A. However, these occupations may not

be representative of all high-skill, non-health occupations. By using slightly broader occupation categories and


                                                                                                                      19
loosening the criteria for matching between countries, we show that our findings of higher earnings in the

U.S., particularly for occupations with greater average years of education, are robust to expanding the set of

non-health occupations we consider. We do this by aggregating our data on earnings and workers per capita

from country-specific codes to 2008 International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-08) codes.

Using crosswalks from each country's occupations classifications, we are able to estimate average

employment income and labor supply in each country for 115 of 429 ISCO-08 occupation classes. 25 Of these

codes, 18 are health care occupations. These roughly correspond to the set of hand-matched occupations in

Table 3, although the ISCO-08 occupation categories are often less precise. We calculate wage and quantity

indices for these occupations with both U.S. and Canada weights and then average the two, with results

shown in Panel B of Table 5. For this set of matched occupations, we find that Canadian workers earn 21

percent less in healthcare occupations and 14 percent less in non-healthcare occupations. Dividing both the

healthcare and non-healthcare occupation groups in half by average years of education completed, we see

similar patterns for each; more highly educated occupations have larger wage differentials. However, workers

in the healthcare sample are much more educated on average than workers in the non-healthcare sample. If

we compare the full healthcare sample, where workers have 15.57 years of education on average, to the

above-median education non-healthcare sample, where workers average 15.05 years of education, the wage

differential between countries looks similar. Overall, these results are similar to those from the small subset of

high-education occupations in Panel B of Table 6, where we find those particular high-education, non-health

occupations have 22 percent lower earnings in the Canada.

         These data demonstrate that a large fraction of the difference in healthcare wages reflects the broader

labor market. These differences by profession should also be visible across the distribution of wages for these

two countries. We examine this in Figure 1, which depicts average wages by income ventile for the two

countries. Panel A contains average employment income across ventiles for all workers and shows that wages

are remarkably similar for all but the highest ventile, where on average American workers earn $204,000 and


25 We can only calculate these at the ISCO-08 level for a subset of occupations because for each crosswalk from country-

specific occupation codes to ISCO-08 codes, we must discard occupations where the mapping from country-specific
codes to ISCO-08 is not well-defined, i.e. a country-specific code is related to multiple ISCO-08 codes.

                                                                                                                    20
Canadian workers earn $154,000. Panel B shows the same comparison for healthcare workers only, which is

broadly similar except for the upper tail where there is a greater U.S. wage premium for healthcare workers

than seen for all workers in Panel A.

        Given that healthcare workers have a large amount of education, the wage distribution for more

educated workers likely provides more information about the broader income differentials between the two

countries. Figure 2 contains the same comparison of employment income across income ventiles for

individuals with a graduate degree. Panel A contains data for all workers. Here the evidence of differences in

the broader labor market is even more obvious, with higher income workers in the United States earning

meaningfully higher salaries than their Canadian counterparts. For example, workers at or above the 95th

income percentile (among advanced degree holders) in the United States earn $371,000 while those in Canada

earn $286,000. Panel B contains data for healthcare workers with an advanced degree. In this sample, the

spread between U.S. and Canadian workers begins earlier in the wage distribution. Thus these broader income

distributions provide confirming evidence that the labor cost differences are not driven solely by the decisions

of the monopsony insurer but instead reflect, in large part, the broader labor market.

        There could be a remaining concern that the differences in pay for physicians across the United

States and Canada reflects some differences in underlying productivity. While true measures of productivity

are difficult to obtain, we provide some evidence of potential differences based on the number of hours

worked. Figure 5 contains the average hours worked by U.S. and Canadian employees across eight broad

occupational categories available in the harmonized household survey data from IPUMS International. These

categories are arranged based on the percentage of individuals in the occupation category that have a college

degree. For professions with a greater percentage of college graduates, United States employees do work

more hours.

        The greater hours worked in the U.S. may be one reason for the higher wages earned at the top of

the income distribution. To examine whether this could be driving the higher wages for U.S. healthcare

workers, we next examine whether these differences in hours among highly skilled professionals differ across

health and non-health professions. Table 7 contains the average hours worked by U.S. and Canadian


                                                                                                              21
employees based on whether they work in a professional occupation and whether they are a healthcare

employee. 26 Overall, these results demonstrate that while employees in professions with a higher share of

college grads do work longer hours, there is no discernible difference between health and non-health workers

in those sectors. Together, these data suggest that the differences in the hours worked cannot explain the

differences in wages for healthcare professionals across the two countries. In addition, they reinforce the

importance of the broader labor market in explaining different wages for healthcare professional across the

two countries.



V. Prescription Drug Prices in the United States and Canada

        To compare brand name prescription drug prices, we estimate a between-country price index for

each drug  in our sample of matched brand name drugs:

                                                             
                                         =
                                                              

Table 8 contains these price indices. We find that the estimated post-rebate Ontario prices are 54 percent

lower than the estimated post-rebate Medicaid prices for our sample of brand name drugs. As we use an

upper bound of brand name rebate share to calculate post-rebate Medicaid prices, this would understate the

price difference between countries under the assumption that rebates as a share of total spending for our

sample of drugs is similar to the overall Medicaid and Ontario Drug Benefit rebate shares.

        As noted earlier, the percentage of Medicaid spending on neurological drugs is higher for our

matched sample than for Medicaid as a whole, so this price index disproportionately reflects differences in

neurological drugs prices. When we re-calculate the index separately by drug class, we find that brand name

neurological drugs prices are 52 percent lower in Ontario compared to Medicaid, while other brand name




26 The broad occupation categories in Table 7 and Figure 5 come from the ISCO-1988 occupation coding. We use these

because they are coded consistently between countries in the IPUMS International versions of the 2011 National
Household Survey and the 2010 American Community Survey. Almost all health occupations that we study (see Table 3)
fall under the "Professionals" or "Technicians/Associate Professionals" occupation groups.

                                                                                                               22
drugs are 64 percent less expensive in Ontario. This again suggests that the 54 percent price differential may

understate the true price differential for all brand-name drugs.

         Just as with our estimates of wage differences between countries, we caution that these estimates are

imprecise and imperfect. However, our results are broadly similar to prior studies comparing prescription

drug prices in Canada and the U.S. using alternative data and methods and covering earlier time periods

(Danzon and Furukawa 2008, Graham and Robson 2000). Machado, et al. 2011 summarize previous studies

on international drug price comparisons and outline six measures of quality for such comparisons. Our

analysis performs well on these measures, failing only to have a fully representative sample of brand name

drugs, but our sample is as representative as possible while still matching drugs across countires at the

NDC/DIN level.

         The difference in pharmaceutical prices reflects a combination of the different optimal prices for

goods and services across the two markets and the exercise of monopsony power by the Ontario

government. For a variety of reasons we find it unlikely that the optimal price differs by enough across the

two countries to explain the totality of the difference. First, to the extent that a different optimal price is

driven by the budgets of consumers, incomes across the two countries are quite similar. Figure 1 shows that

incomes across the income distribution are comparable. For example, U.S. median income is $31,043

compared to $27,885 in Canada, just a 10 percent difference.

         Second, broad measures of economy-wide price levels and cost-of-living indicies based on a fixed

basket of goods suggest that the observed difference in prescription drug prices far exceeds general price

differences between the two countries. One way to see this is to look at the price level index between

Canadian dollars and U.S. dollars, which is ratio of purchasing power parity to market exchange rates. This

provides a rough estimate of differences in overall price levels between countries at a point in time, but is

noisy from year-to-year due to market exchange rate volatility. In 2017, the price level index of Canadian

dollars to U.S. dollars was 0.96, implying Canadian prices are 4 percent lower. Given the volatility of market

exchange rates, a better measure of price differences could be the average value of the index across years,

which is 0.98 for all years since 1990. We show in the Section A.3 of the Appendix that differences between


                                                                                                                  23
countries (relative to the U.S. dollar) are stable and consistent with ex ante beliefs about countries with high or

low prices compared to the U.S., and that the overall trend of this index for a given country is relatively flat.

This implies that the average across years is informative about price level differences between countries. Cost-

of-living indices that compare prices between the U.S. and Canada for a fixed basket of goods provide similar

estimates. For example, the website Numbeo collects price data for each country from a combination of

sources including firm websites, government institutions, and user input (Numbeo 2018). For goods and

services for which they have data for each country, consumer prices were 5.69 percent lower in Canada than

in the U.S. from May 2017 to November 2018. Therefore, this again suggests Canadian prices overall are

slightly lower than prices in the U.S., but the difference is significantly smaller than the price differcnes we

observe for prescription drugs, where Canadian prices are 54 percent lower.

         These data on both income levels and the prices for other goods and services suggest that a

potentially large fraction of the difference in prescription drug prices across countries is the result of the

monopsonist's decisions. This would be consistent with the prediction of the monopsony model discussed

above.



VI. Conclusions

         In this paper, we examine the role of monopsony power in healthcare markets by comparing prices

and quantities of healthcare inputs in Canada and the United States. We provide a theoretical framework and

empirical evidence for the optimal behavior of a monopsonist. We focus on two critical inputs to the

healthcare production function that illustrate key features of the theoretical model ­ labor and prescription

drugs. In line with the theoretical expectations we outline, we find that the Canadian monopsonist is more

willing to exploit its market power over prescription drugs than provider wages.

         Examining a market basket of prescription drugs, we find that prices in Canada are 54 percent lower

than in the U.S. This price differential is much larger than the general cost-of-living differences between the

two countries, which we interpret as evidence that the Canadian monopsonist is willing to use its power to

lower the cost of this particular medical input. This is in line with our theoretical expectations: because


                                                                                                                   24
Canada represents a small share of the global drug market, policymakers are able to exploit their buyer power

without incurring broader consequences, such as reducing innovation.

        In contrast, we find that the differential in provider wages between the U.S. and Canada can largely

be explained by differences in the prevailing labor market conditions, implying that the Canadian

monopsonist is not willing to exercise the full scope of its buyer power for this input. In particular, we find

that Canadian medical workers earn about 24 percent less than their American counterparts. If this was solely

the result of profligate U.S. health spending, we should expect that U.S. providers would not only be paid

more than their Canadian counterparts but also relatively more than other highly skilled professionals in the

United States. This is not the case. We primarily attribute differences in wages for U.S. medical providers to

the structure of the broader labor market; i.e., U.S. providers are paid more than in Canada because all highly

skilled U.S. professionals are paid more than in Canada. In particular, high skilled healthcare workers in

Canada make about 26 percent less than similar workers in the United States, while high skilled non-

healthcare workers make 22 percent less. Thus, the vast majority of the 26 percent wage differential likely

reflects overall labor market conditions. The remaining 4 percentage point differential between healthcare and

other professional wages may reflect a variety of factors--potentially including inefficiencies in the U.S.

system that provide excess wages to healthcare providers or a choice by the Canadian monopsonist to exploit

some of its market power.

        Our findings are consistent with the idea that the Canadian monopsonist believes that a substantial

reduction in the wages of physicians and other healthcare workers could cause a reallocation of talent across

the economy. This is true even conditional on similar individuals receiving medical training. These individuals

have a number of opportunities beyond clinical practice, and there are some reports physicians are

increasingly choosing these options (Mostue 2017). Perhaps more concerning would be a reallocation of

talent out of medical training altogether. For example, if the U.S. took steps so that its physicians were paid

the same as Canadians, this would move physicians from the second highest paid profession in the U.S. to the

eighth highest paid profession--situated just above computer engineers, mathematicians and biomedical

engineers. This change in relative pay could push many talented young individuals considering medicine into


                                                                                                                  25
entirely different fields. 27 Given this concern, it should perhaps not be surprising that even the Canadian

monopsonist does not appear to have chosen to meaningfully exercise its wage setting power. In Canada, as

in the United States, physicians and surgeons are among the highest paid employees in society.

         Staffing levels represent another important potential source of inefficiency in the U.S. healthcare

labor market. Weighting by wages, we find that Canada has 6 percent fewer healthcare workers per capita

than in Canada. Whether this reflects excesses in the United States, or shortages due to the exercise of

monopsony power in Canada, is an open question.

         That the healthcare wage differences appear to be the result of broad labor market consequences

should perhaps not be surprising. That being said, there still appear to be minor differences between the

wages earned by U.S. and Canadian physicians that are not driven by the broader labor market and could be a

source of potential, albeit smaller, savings. For example, American medical specialists are compensated above

and beyond the broad labor market differences between the countries. While both countries ration entry into

the profession, and especially into specialties, this could reflect tighter entry restrictions in the United States.

On the other hand, this is also consistent with the exercise of monopsony power in Canada, which we would

expect to result in both lower equilibrium wages and quantities.

         Taken together, our findings should temper the expectations of anyone who believes that Medicare-

for-all will drive U.S. health spending to Canadian levels. Most health spending goes toward labor expenses.

Returning to the Willie Sutton analogy, while labor is "where the money is," a U.S. monopsonist might find,

just as in Canada, that it is not worth "robbing the bank" by lowering labor expenses, as this would drive

highly skilled workers into other fields. And while the U.S. monopsonist could drive down drug prices to

levels at or below those in Canada, it might be tempered by concerns about disruptions to long term drug

supply, a problem not shared by the much smaller Canadian monopsonist.




27The exact effect would depend on several factors, such as the relative importance college students place on future
income versus other job attributes.

                                                                                                                       26
References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Linn. 2004. "Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence
        from the Pharmaceutical Industry." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (3): 1049-
        1090.
Allin, Sara, and David Rudoler. 2017. "The Canadian Health Care System." International Health
        Care System Profiles. The Commonwealth Fund. Accessed April 19, 2019.
        https://international.commonwealthfund.org/countries/canada/.
Anderson, Michael L., Carlos Dobkin, and Tal Gross. 2013. "The Effect of Health Insurance on
        Emergency Department Visits: Evidence from an Age-Based Eligibility Threshold." The
        Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (1): 189­95.
Baghdadi, Ramsey. 2017. "Medicaid Best Price." Health Affairs Health Policy Brief. August 10.
        doi:10.1377/hpb20171008.000173.
Baker, Dean. 2017. "The problem of doctors' salaries." Politico. October 25. Accessed
        November 6, 2017. https://www.politico.com/agenda/story/2017/10/25/doctors-salaries-
        pay-disparities-000557.
Blume-Kohout, Margaret E., and Neeraj Sood. 2013. "Market Size and Innovation: Effects of
        Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical Research and Development." Journal of Public
        Economics 97: 327-336.
Boccuti, Cristina, Christa Fields, Giselle Casillas, and Liz Hamel. 2015. "Primary Care
        Physicians Accepting Medicare: A Snapshot." Kaiser Family Foundation. October 30.
        Accessed January 30, 2019. https://www.kff.org/medicare/issue-brief/primary-care-
        physicians-accepting-medicare-a-snapshot/.
Chen, Julius L., Andrew L. Hicks, and Michael E. Chernew. 2018. "Prices for Physician Services
        in Medicare Advantage Versus Traditional Medicare." The American Journal of
        Managed Care 24 (7): 341-344.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2014. "Do Physicians' Financial Incentives Affect
        Medical Treatment and Patient Health?" American Economic Review 104 (4): 1320-1349.
Cutler, David M., and Dan P. Ly. 2011. "The (Paper)Work of Medicine: Understanding
        International Medical Costs." Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (2): 3-25.
Dafny, Leemore, Kate Ho, and Mauricio Varela. 2013. "Let them have choice: Gains from
        shifting away from employer-sponsored health insurance and toward an individual
        exchange." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(1): 32-58.
Danzon, Patricia M., and Michael F. Furukawa. 2008. "International Prices And Availability Of
        Pharmaceuticals In 2005." Health Affairs 27 (1).
Dranove, David, Craig Garthwaite, and Manuel Hermosilla. 2014. "Pharmaceutical Profits and
        the Social Value of Innovation." NBER Working Paper No. 20212. June.
Dubois, Pierre, Olivier de Mouzon, Fiona Scott-Morton, and Paul Seabright. 2015. "Market Size
        and Pharmaceutical Innovation." The RAND Journal of Economics 46 (4): 844-871.
Finkelstein, Amy. 2004. "Static and Dynamic Effects of Health Policy: Evidence from the
        Vaccine Industry." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2): 527-564.
Flavelle, Christopher. 2012. "To Cut Health-Care Costs, Pay Doctors Less." Bloomberg View.
        December 12. Accessed November 6, 2017.
        https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2012-12-12/to-cut-health-care-costs-pay-
        doctors-less.



                                                                                           27
Flood, Sarah, Miriam King, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert Warren. 2017. Integrated Public Use
        Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 5.0. Minneapolis: University of
        Minnesota. doi:10.18128/D030.V5.0.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P.
        Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and Oregon Health Study Group. 2012. "The
        Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year," The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 127 (3): 1057­1106.
Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo.. 2018. "Hospitals as Insurers of Last
        Resort." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10 (1): 1­39.
Garthwaite, Craig, John Graves, Tal Gross, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2017. "Insurance
        Expansion and Hospital Emergency Department Access: Evidence From the Affordable
        Care Act." Annals of Internal Medicine, 166(3):172-179.
Gottlieb, J.D., A.H. Shapiro, and A. Dunn. 2018. "The Complexity of Billing and Paying for
        Physician Care." Health Affairs 37 (4): 619-626.
Gottlieb, Joshua D., and Mark Shepard. 2018. "How Large a Burden are Administrative Costs in
        Health Care?" Econofact. Accessed December 7, 2018. https://econofact.org/how-large-
        a-burden-are-administrative-costs-in-health-care.
Graham, J, and BA Robson. 2000. "Prescription Drug Prices in Canada and the United States--
        Part 1: A Comparative Survey." Vancouver, B.C.: The Fraser Institute.
Gruber, Jonathan. 1994. "The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits." The American
        Economic Review 84 (3): 622-641.
Ho, Kate, and Robin S. Lee. 2017. "Insurer Competition in Health Care Markets." Econometrica
        85 (2): 379-417.
Kang, So-Yean, Michael J. DiStefano, Mariana P. Socal, and Gerard F. Anderson. 2019. "Using
        External Reference Pricing in Medicare Part D to Reduce Drug Price Differentials with
        Other Countries." Health Affairs 38 (5): 804-811.
Kliff, Sarah. 2017. "What Canada taught Bernie Sanders about health care." Vox. October 31.
        Accessed November 6, 2017. https://www.vox.com/policy-and-
        politics/2017/10/31/16566450/bernie-sanders-canada-health-care.
Kocher, Robert and Nikhil Sahni. 2011. "Rethinking Healthcare Labor." New England Journal of
        Medicine, 365: 1370-1372.
Machado, M, R O'Brodovich, M Krahn, and TR Einarson. 2011. "International drug price
        comparisons: quality assessment." Rev Panam Salud Publica 29 (1): 46-51.
McCanne, Don. 2017. "Single payer systems have lower drug spending than do multi-payer
        systems." Physicians for a National Health Program. June 16. Accessed November 6,
        2017. http://pnhp.org/blog/2017/06/16/single-payer-systems-have-lower-drug-spending-
        than-do-multi-payer-systems/.
Minnesota Population Center. 2018. "Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, International:
        Version 7.1 [dataset]." Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS.
        doi:https://doi.org/10.18128/D020.V7.1.
Mostue, Anne. 2017. "Med School Grads Go to Work for Hedge Funds." Bloomberg
        Businessweek. September 5. Accessed November 6, 2017.
        https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-09-05/med-school-grads-go-to-work-
        for-hedge-funds.
Noack, Rick. 2015. "See how much (or how little) you'd earn if you did the same job in another
        country." The Washington Post. March 3. Accessed November 6, 2017.

                                                                                            28
       https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2015/03/03/chart-see-how-much-
       or-how-little-youd-earn-if-you-did-the-same-job-in-another-country.
Numbeo. 2018. Cost of Living Comparison Between Two Countries. October. Accessed October
       18, 2018. https://www.numbeo.com/cost-of-living/compare_countries.jsp.
OECD Health Statistics. 2018.
OECD. 2018. "Purchasing power parities (PPP) (indicator)." doi:10.1787/1290ee5a-en.
Rampell, Catherine. 2008. "Doctors' Salaries and the Cost of Health Care." The New York Times
       Economix Blog. November 14. Accessed November 6, 2017.
       https://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/11/14/do-doctors-salaries-drive-up-health-
       care-costs/.
Sommers, Benjamin D., Katherine Baicker, and Arnold M. Epstein. 2012. "Mortality and Access
       to Care among Adults after State Medicaid Expansions." The New England Journal of
       Medicine 367 (11): 1025­34.
Sommers, Benjamin D., Robert J. Blendon, E. John Orav, and Arnold M. Epstein. 2016.
       "Changes in Utilization and Health Among Low-Income Adults After Medicaid
       Expansion or Expanded Private Insurance." JAMA Internal Medicine 176 (10): 1501­9.
Torreya Partners. 2017. "The Future of the Pharmaceutical Industry." October. Accessed
       December 7, 2018.
       https://torreya.com/publications/torreya_global_pharma_industry_study_october2017.pdf
World Bank. 2014. "Health expenditure per capita (current US$)." The World Bank Group.
       Accessed November 6, 2017. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.PCAP.
Yglesias, Matthew. 2013. "America's Overpaid Doctors." Slate. February 25. Accessed
       November 6, 2017.
       http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2013/02/american_doctors_are_overpa
       id_medicare_is_cheaper_than_private_insurance.html.
Yu, Nancy L., Preston Atteberry, and Peter B. Bach. 2018. "Spending On Prescription Drugs In
       The US: Where Does All The Money Go?" Health Affairs Blog. July 31. Accessed
       October 22, 2018. doi:10.1377/hblog20180726.670593 .




                                                                                          29
Figure 1. Income Distribution by Country




                             Panel A                                                                              Panel B




               Notes: Figure plots the mean income for each within-country income ventile for all workers and workers in a health care occupation. For
               Panel B, income quantiles are calculated only among individuals in health care occupations. Sample is employed, paid workers in the 2011
               National Household Survey (Canada) and 2010 American Community Survey (U.S.), using the harmonized versions of each data source from
               IPUMS International.



                                                                                                                                                          30
Figure 2. Income Distribution by Country for Advanced Degree Holders




                              Panel A
                                                                                                  Panel B




    Notes: Figure plots the mean income for each income ventile (within country and degree status) for all workers and workers in a health care
    occupation. For Panel B, income quantiles are calculated only among individuals in health care occupations. Sample is employed, paid workers in the
    2011 National Household Survey (Canada) and 2010 American Community Survey (U.S.), using the harmonized versions of each data source from
    IPUMS International.




                                                                                                                                                          31
Figure 3. Classic Monopsonist Market




                                       32
Figure 4. Monopsonist Market with Elastic Supply




                                                   33
Figure 5. Hours Worked by Occupational Category




Notes: Data source is the harmonized versions of the 2011 National Household Survey (Canada) and 2010 American Community Survey (U.S.) from IPUMS
International. Sample is employed individuals that reported the number of hours worked in the past week (Canada) or on a typical week (U.S.). The harmonized
occupation codes come from the ISCO-1988 occupation coding system. The occupation groups included in this figure, ordered by average years of education in the
U.S., are: Professionals (1), Technicians and Associate Professionals (2), Clerks (3), Service Workers and Shop and Market Sales (4), Skilled Agricultural and Fishery
Workers (5), Crafts and Related Trades Workers (6), Plant and Machine Operators and Assemblers (7), and Elementary Occupations (8). Legislators and Armed
Forces/Military Officers are excluded.




                                                                                                                                                                         34
Table 1. Supply Elasticities by Input Type

                                Unskilled     Unskilled        Skilled      Skilled          Medical       Medical
                                Labor:        Labor:           Labor:       Labor:           Products:     Products:
                                US Payer      Monopsonist      US Payer     Monopsonist      US payer      Monopsonist
                   Short run    Elastic       Elastic          Somewhat     Inelastic        Somewhat      Inelastic
                                                               elastic                       elastic
                   Long run     Elastic       Elastic          Somewhat     Somewhat         Somewhat      Depends on
                                                               elastic      elastic          elastic       size
                   Purchaser    Not           Not              Not          Larger           Elastic for   Elastic for
                   size         applicable    applicable       applicable   elasticity for   large         large
                                                                            larger           purchaser     purchaser
                                                                            purchaser


Table 2. Monopsony and Wage Suppression

                                       Unskilled Labor                Skilled Labor                Medical Products
                    U.S v. Smaller     Between country wage           Between country wage         Input price
                    Nation             differences based on           differences based on         suppression in
                                       differences in overall labor   differences in overall       smaller nation.
                                       markets.                       labor markets.
                                       No suppression relative to     Some within-country
                                       non-medical workers.           suppression relative to
                                                                      non-medical workers.
                    U.S. today v.      No change.                     Some wage suppression        Some input price
                    U.S.                                              possible. Comparable to      suppression, but
                    monopsonist                                       additional wage              not as much as U.S.
                                                                      suppression observed in      versus other
                                                                      smaller nation.              nations.


                                                                                                                         35
Table 3. Comparison of Employment Income for Healthcare Workers
                                                  Mean Employment Income                                              Median Employment Income
 Job Title                                     U.S.        Canada U.S./Canada                                       U.S.      Canada     U.S./Canada
 Physicians and surgeons                                    $184,075         $124,033           1.48              $150,000         $98,543             1.52
  Primary Care                                              $159,667         $110,045           1.45
  Specialists                                               $249,500         $141,200           1.77
 Dentists                                                   $138,460         $100,637           1.38              $120,000         $84,761             1.42
 Optometrists                                               $111,328          $75,211           1.48              $105,000         $66,111             1.59
 Chiropractors                                              $106,010          $49,344           2.15               $55,000         $38,678             1.42
 Pharmacists                                                $102,440          $72,506           1.41              $100,000         $69,268             1.44
 Allied primary health practitioners                         $73,884          $58,487           1.26               $51,000         $60,294             0.85
 Physical therapists                                         $67,953          $43,679           1.56               $62,000         $43,552             1.42
 Occupational therapists                                     $58,107          $42,540           1.37               $57,000         $43,955             1.30
 Registered nurses                                           $56,452          $46,331           1.22               $55,000         $48,168             1.14
 Dietitians and nutritionists                                $54,806          $37,508           1.46               $46,000         $37,677             1.22
 Respiratory therapists                                      $54,166          $47,192           1.15               $50,000         $46,401             1.08
 Dental hygienists                                           $42,742          $36,552           1.17               $39,000         $36,427             1.07
 Emergency medical technicians and paramedics                $42,360          $48,982           0.86               $40,000         $48,704             0.82
 Licensed practical and licensed vocational nurses           $35,223          $30,603           1.15               $35,000         $31,959             1.10
 Opticians, dispensing                                       $33,031          $32,041           1.03               $31,000         $31,094             1.00
 Medical records technicians                                 $30,874          $35,415           0.87               $30,000         $34,753             0.86
 Dental assistants                                           $27,560          $24,193           1.14               $27,000         $24,182             1.12
 Medical assistants                                          $25,511          $26,144           0.98               $26,000         $26,584             0.98

Notes: Data sources are the 2011 Current Population Survey (U.S.), 2011 National Household Survey (Canada), and 2012 Medscape Physician Compensation Report.
Shows the median employment income for the 18 health occupation categories that were matched between the OCC codes in the CPS data used for the United States
and the NOC codes in the NHS data used for Canada. The matching process is described in more detail in the Section A.2. Income is in 2011 U.S. dollars, adjusting
for purchasing power parity. Employment income is defined as wages and salary plus net income from self-employment. Income for primary care and specialist
physicians in the U.S. is obtained from the 2012 Medscape Physician Compensation Report. Wage indices use the pooled physicians category obtained from the CPS
unless explicitly stated otherwise.



                                                                                                                                                               36
Table 4. Comparison of Supply of Healthcare Workers
                                                                       U.S.             Canada
                                                                                                         U.S. /
 Job Description                                                   Employees          Employees
                                                                                                         Canada
                                                                   per 100,000        per 100,000
 Physicians and surgeons                                              261.2              235.8             1.11
  Primary Care                                                        94.75             129.92             0.73
  Specialists                                                        166.45             105.87             1.57
 Dentists                                                             63.8                52.8             1.21
 Optometrists                                                          8.2                14.0             0.58
 Chiropractors                                                        19.9                19.3             1.03
 Pharmacists                                                          93.0                97.6             0.95
 Allied primary health practitioners                                  26.2                14.4             1.82
 Physical therapists                                                  71.4                62.2             1.15
 Occupational therapists                                              36.4                42.0             0.87
 Registered nurses                                                    899.1              886.7             1.01
 Dietitians and nutritionists                                         36.8                29.8             1.23
 Respiratory therapists                                               38.2                28.9             1.32
 Dental hygienists                                                    48.6                69.1             0.70
 Emergency medical technicians and paramedics                         52.7                74.9             0.70
 Licensed practical and licensed vocational nurses                    178.2              166.8             1.07
 Opticians, dispensing                                                16.8                25.6             0.66
 Medical records technicians                                          43.1                13.9             3.10
 Dental assistants                                                    92.1                91.2             1.01
 Medical assistants                                                   132.8               45.6             2.91

Notes: Data sources are the 2011 Current Population Survey (U.S.), 2011 National Household Survey
(Canada), and 2012 Medscape Physician Compensation Report. Shows the estimated number of employees per
100,000 members of the total country population in each of the 18 matched health occupation categories based
on the CPS and NHS survey data for the United States and Canada, respectively. The matching process is
described in more detail in the Section A.2. Worker quantities for primary care and specialist physicians in the
U.S. are obtained from the 2012 Medscape Physician Compensation Report. Wage and quantity indices use the
pooled physician category obtained from the CPS unless explicitly stated otherwise.




                                                                                                             37
Table 5. Wage Indices
                                                                       Wage Index                 Quantity Index
                                                                    (Canada relative to         (Canada relative to      Mean Years of Education
                                                                          U.S.)                       U.S.)                (U.S. workers only)               N
 Panel A: Matched Country Specific Occupation Codes

 Healthcare (see Table 3)                                                    0.76                         0.94                       15.89                   18

 Healthcare, High Education (see Table 6)                                    0.74                         0.94                       16.67                   10

 Non-Healthcare, High Education (see Table 6)                                0.78                         1.08                       17.57                   10

 Panel B: Occupations Mapped to ISCO-08 Occupation Codes

 Healthcare                                                                  0.79                         0.99                       15.57                   18

          Below Median Education (within sample)                             0.93                         0.99                       14.34                     9

          Above Median Education (within sample)                             0.76                         0.98                       16.09                     9

 Non-Healthcare                                                              0.86                         1.01                       13.75                   97

          Below Median Education (within sample)                             0.90                         1.09                       12.62                   49

          Above Median Education (within sample)                             0.83                         0.97                       15.05                   48


Notes: Data sources are the 2011 Current Population Survey (U.S.) and 2011 National Household Survey (Canada). Table shows estimated wage and quantity indices
as described in Section III. Mean Years of Education is the average number of years of education for workers in the CPS for each sample of occupations. For Panel A,
the Healthcare occupation sample corresponds to the occupations listed in Table 3. The High Education samples correspond to the occupations in Table 6. Wage
indices are calculated using mean employment income by occupation and US quantity weights. Panel B shows analogous results for occupations that could be matched
to ISCO-08 occupation groups from each set of country-specific codes. High and low education subsamples are divided in half within the healthcare and non-
healthcare samples separately.




                                                                                                                                                                   38
Table 6. Comparison of Employment Income for High-Education Healthcare and Non-Healthcare Occupations
 Panel A: Top 10 Matched Health Occupations by U.S. Years of Education
                                  U.S. Years of         Mean Employment Income              Median Employment Income
 Job Title                         Education          U.S.      Canada U.S./Canada         U.S.       Canada U.S./Canada
 Dentists                                        20.23            $138,460       $100,637          1.38              $120,000        $84,761            1.42
 Optometrists                                    20.17            $111,328        $75,211          1.48              $105,000        $66,111            1.59
 Chiropractors                                   20.02            $106,010        $49,344          2.15               $55,000        $38,678            1.42
 Physicians and surgeons                         20.00            $184,075       $124,033          1.48              $150,000        $98,543            1.52
 Pharmacists                                     18.01            $102,440        $72,506          1.41              $100,000        $69,268            1.44
 Physical therapists                             17.15             $67,953        $43,679          1.56               $62,000        $43,552            1.42
 Occupational therapists                         16.16             $58,107        $42,540          1.37               $57,000        $43,955            1.30
 Allied primary health practitioners             15.83             $73,884        $58,487          1.26               $51,000        $60,294            0.85
 Dietitians and nutritionists                    15.45             $54,806        $37,508          1.46               $46,000        $37,677            1.22
 Registered nurses                               15.27             $56,452        $46,331          1.22               $55,000        $48,168            1.14
 Panel B: Matched Non-Health Occupations with similar years of education
 Lawyers                                 19.80            $142,922      $109,627                   1.30              $100,000        $74,481            1.34
 Psychologists                           18.99             $63,920       $44,698                   1.43               $60,000        $41,948            1.43
 Astronomers and physicists              17.77             $72,335       $66,519                   1.09               $55,000        $61,866            0.89
 Biological scientists                   17.64             $66,914       $48,435                   1.38               $55,000        $46,823            1.17
 Chemists and materials scientists       17.30             $75,638       $51,614                   1.47               $74,000        $47,183            1.57
 Secondary school teachers               16.43             $49,614       $47,107                   1.05               $48,000        $50,430            0.95
 Electrical and electronics engineers    16.24             $94,047       $68,432                   1.37               $80,000        $63,459            1.26
 Petroleum engineers                     15.82            $165,320      $123,162                   1.34              $185,000        $91,488            2.02
 Computer programmers                    15.47             $70,668       $48,440                   1.46               $65,000        $48,490            1.34
 Materials engineers                     15.13             $67,573       $68,681                   0.98               $55,905        $62,863            0.89

Notes: Data sources are the 2011 Current Population Survey (U.S.) and 2011 National Household Survey (Canada). Panel A shows the 10 matched healthcare
occupations with the highest average years of education in the U.S. based on the 2011 CPS. Panel B shows the 10 matched non-healthcare occupations with the closest
average years of education to the corresponding rank in Panel A. Years of educations is the estimated number of post-kindergarten years of education based on the
category indicated for highest level of education attained.




                                                                                                                                                                39
Table 7. Comparison of Hours Worked

                                                                              Mean Hours Worked
                                                                                  per Week                    Share College Degree
                                                                               Canada      US                  Canada         US
                              Professionals                                     37.8       40.4                  0.76         0.78
                                      Healthcare                                37.6       40.5                  0.72         0.71
                                      Non-Healthcare                            37.8       40.4                  0.76         0.79
                              Technicians/Associate Professionals               36.0       38.9                  0.29         0.48
                                      Healthcare                                34.6       37.5                  0.21         0.39
                                      Non-Healthcare                            36.2       39.3                  0.30         0.51

Notes: Data source is the harmonized versions of the 2011 National Household Survey (Canada) and 2010 American Community Survey (U.S.) from IPUMS
International. Sample is employed individuals that reported the number of hours worked in the past week (Canada) or on a typical week (U.S.), and is limited to
workers in the two major ISCO-1988 occupation groups that contain healthcare professionals: "Professionals" and "Technicians/Associate Professionals."




                                                                                                                                                                  40
Table 8. Prescription Drug Price Indices
                                                           Estimated Price Index (Canada              Share of Medicaid Spending in
                                                              relative to United States)                         Sample

                    Full Sample                                              0.46                                       0.26

                              Neurological Drugs                             0.48                                       0.36

                              Non-Neurological Drugs                         0.36                                       0.12


Notes: Table shows estimated price indices for the sample of brand name prescription drugs described in Section V. Share of Medicaid Spending in Sample gives the
fraction of Medicaid spending on prescription tablets and capsules in the first quarter of 2018 reflected in our estimation sample for each drug class group.




                                                                                                                                                                41
Appendix

A.1 ­ Matching Healthcare Occupation Codes

Table A.1: Occupation codes used to construct each health occupation category

 Job Description                                        OCC Code(s)      NOC Code(s)
 Physicians And Surgeons                                    3060          3111, 3112
 Dentists                                                   3010             3113
 Optometrists                                               3040             3121
 Chiropractors                                              3000             3122
 Pharmacists                                                3050             3131
 Allied Primary Health Practitioners                  3110, 3256, 3258       3124
 Physical Therapists                                        3160             3142
 Occupational Therapists                                    3150             3143
 Registered Nurses                                          3255             3012
 Dietitians And Nutritionists                               3030             3132
 Respiratory Therapists                                     3220             3214
 Dental Hygienists                                          3310             3222
 Emergency Medical Technicians And Paramedics               3400             3234
 Licensed Practical And Licensed Vocational Nurses          3500             3233
 Opticians, Dispensing                                      3520             3231
 Medical Records And Health Information Technicians         3510             1252
 Dental Assistants                                          3640             3411
 Medical Assistants                                         3645             1243

Of the 44 healthcare occupations classified by the OCC for the United States, we are able to
match 16 to an identical or near identical classification in the Canadian data. We also include
two additional occupations where a group of occupations in one country can be aggregated to
match a single occupation in the other. These occupations are "Physicians and Surgeons", which
the NOC system divides into generalists and specialists but the OCC combines, and "Allied
Primary Health Practitioners", which the NOC designates as a single category including nurse
anesthetists, nurse midwives, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants, while the U.S. OCC
codes classify each of these separately. In both cases we aggregate as needed to form comparable
groups between the countries. We are able to separately break out generalist and specialist
income and quantity information for the U.S. using a third data source, the 2012 Medscape
Physician Compensation Report, and use these data in further comparisons of wage and labor
supply differentials.

Table A.1 lists the occupation codes from each country that are used to form the occupation
categories for the analysis comparing healthcare occupations between the U.S. and Canada. We
match occupations between countries using the Find Your NOC tool provided by Statistics
Canada. 1 We first limit to healthcare OCC codes, then enter the job title for each OCC code into
the search feature, looking for a single NOC code that has an identical or nearly identical job
title. We are able to find such an NOC code for 16 of the 44 healthcare OCC codes.

As mentioned previously, we also include two additional job categories where one country has a
unique occupation code that corresponds to several occupation codes in the other country:
Physicians and Surgeons and Allied Primary Health Practitioners. Physicians and Surgeons is a
single category in the U.S. data, and can be easily matched to the appropriate subgroups in the
data for Canada: Specialist Physicians (NOC code 3111) and General Practitioners and Family
Physicians (NOC code 3112). Allied Primary Health Practitioners is a single category in the
Canadian data. The example job titles provided are anesthesia assistant, midwife, nurse
practitioner, and physician assistant. We match these to three OCC codes for the U.S.: Nurse
Practitioners and Nurse Midwives (3258), Nurse Anesthetists (3256), and Physician Assistants
(3110).


A.2 ­ Primary Care and Specialist Incomes for the United States

Average incomes for primary care and specialist physicians in the U.S. are calculated using the
2012 Medscape Physician Compensation Report (MPCR). 2 The MPCR surveyed 24,216
physicians in the United States across 25 specialties in February of 2012. The exhibits available
online report average income and the share of respondents for each specialty category. We define
primary care to be internal medicine, family medicine, and pediatrics, and specialists to be all
other specialties. We then calculate average income for each using the reported incomes and
share of respondents for each specialty. These results are shown in the indented lines below the
Physicians and Surgeons entry in Table 1 and Table 2. To estimate the number of primary care
and specialist physicians, we use the share of respondents to the MPCR that are primary
care/specialists, and multiply it by the total number of physicians and surgeons estimated by the
CPS. These results are shown in the indented lines beneath the Physicians and Surgeons entry in
Table 2.


A.3 ­ Cost-of-Living Comparisons and Price Level Indices

In 2017, the ratio of purchasing power parity to market exchange rates from the Canadian dollar
to US dollars was 0.95, which implies that the overall price level is 5 percent lower in Canada
than in the United States. This measure is unstable over time due to fluctuations in currency
exchange rates, and in fact this ratio was greater than one (implying higher prices in Canada) for
most years since 2000. Appendix Figure X plots the time series of this price level index for
Canada (relative to the U.S.) from 1990-2017. The unweighted average across years is 0.98,
meaning prices have been 2 percent lower in Canada than the U.S. on average over the past three
decades. We also plot this same time series for Switzerland and Mexico to show that differences


1
    http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/immigrate/skilled/noc.asp
2
    https://www.medscape.com/features/slideshow/compensation/2012/public
between countries are relatively stable, and that the mean across years for a country seems to
provide a good estimation of general price levels relative to the U.S.
Figure A.1




Notes: Figure plots the price level index (ratio of PPP to market exchange rate) for each country-year. Dotted lines
are predicted values from OLS regressions of price level on year, estimated separately for each country.
