                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  LABOR SHARES IN SOME ADVANCED ECONOMIES

                                        Gilbert Cette
                                       Lorraine Koehl
                                      Thomas Philippon

                                      Working Paper 26136
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26136


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




The views expressed in this paper are the authors' and do not necessarily reflect those of their
institutions or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Gilbert Cette, Lorraine Koehl, and Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor Shares in Some Advanced Economies
Gilbert Cette, Lorraine Koehl, and Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 26136
August 2019
JEL No. E01,E02,E2

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the joint impact of three measurement issues in the empirical literature on the labor
share:(i) start and end periods for the empirical analysis; (ii) accounting for self-employment; and
(iii) accounting for residential real estate income. When we correct for these three potential
biases, we do not find a general decline in the labor share in our sample of advanced economies.
In that respect the behavior of the US labor share after 2000 presents a puzzle.


Gilbert Cette                                    Thomas Philippon
Banque de France                                 New York University
1, rue de la Vrillière                           Stern School of Business
75001 Paris, France                              44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
and Aix-Marseille School of Economics,           New York, NY 10012-1126
CNRS & EHESS                                     and NBER
gilbert.cette@banque-france.fr                   tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu

Lorraine Koehl
INSEE
88 av Verdier
Montrouge 92120
France
lorraine.koehl@insee.fr
1. Introduction


The evolution of the labor share plays a central role in economics. Following Kaldor (1957),
economists have viewed the relative long-term stability of the labor share as an important stylized
fact. In recent years, however, the stability of the labor share has been challenged. Karabarbounis
and Neiman (2014) argue that the decline in the labor share is global and mainly driven by a decline
in the relative price of investment goods. The IMF (2017) and OECD (2018) also mention that the
labor share has been on a downward trend in a large majority of developed countries since the early
1990s. The common wisdom in recent macroeconomic research appears to be that there has been a
global and gradual decline in the labor share over the past 30 or 40 years. For instance, Grossman et
al. (2017) motivate their recent paper by writing that "unlike several of the other explanations for the
decline in the labor share, ours does not rely on considerations that are specific to the United States.
The shift in aggregate factor shares has been seen in the data for many countries, especially among
the advanced countries."


In this short note we challenge the accepted wisdom of a general labor share decline outside the
United States. We do not find a systematic trend in labor shares in most countries and we emphasize
three important biases that have plagued the existing literature: (i) starting periods for the empirical
analysis; (ii) accounting for self-employment; and (iii) accounting for residential real estate income.


Let us start with the first bias: the starting points for the time series. Before the literature on the
surprising decline in the labor share, there was a literature on the surprising increase in the labor
share. The labor share increased during the stagflation of the 1970s, especially in Europe. As
Blanchard (1998) notes, there was an increase in both unemployment and the labor share in the
1970s. This is commonly interpreted as a "wage push", as wages failed to adjust to the slowdown in
underlying productivity growth. Following the oil shocks of the 1970s, countries that were net
importers of oil and gas experienced an adverse change in their terms of trade. Several factors
explained the size and the duration of the "wage push": the reliance on oil and gas importations, the
dual indexation of wages on consumption price and of prices on labor costs, and the impact of
unemployment on wage dynamics (the Phillips curve). As unemployment continued to increase
during the 1980s, wages stagnated, and the labor share fell. We find that the labor share reverted to
its long run value, but the transition involved some overshooting in some countries.


The first bias, then, is that the labor share in many European countries was above its steady state
value in the late 1970s, and it was bound to revert to its long run average. Empirical studies that

                                                                                                          2
takes the period 1973-1983 as a starting point are therefore likely to find a spurious decrease in the
labor share. This is of course a common issue in estimating trends when positions in the business
cycle are not the same at the beginning and at the end of the sample. What is special here is that the
labor share cycle is long, large, and common to many countries, especially in Europe.


The second and third biases have already been studied in the literature. Elsby et al. (2013) focus on
self-employment in the U.S. and conclude that a third of the decline in the headline measure of the
labor share is an artifact of statistical procedures used to impute the labor income of the self-
employed. Rognlie (2015) shows that much of the increase in the capital share in the US comes from
the housing sector. Gutiérrez (2017) and Gutiérrez and Piton (2019) show that non-housing gross
labor share remained stable in Europe and declined only in the US. Importantly, Gutiérrez and Piton
(2019) show that the common approach of using data from non-financial corporate sector is not
enough to remove all housing income in several countries.


Our contribution is to address the three issues together and to provide a long run analysis of labor
shares in France and the United States. For France and the United-States we are able to construct
measures of the labor share for the entire post-war period. Taking into account the three biases
mentioned above, we don't observe any structural decrease of the labor share in France. If anything,
we find that the labor share has increased slightly over the last two decades in France. We observe a
decrease in the labor share in the U.S., but it is not a secular decline. The U.S. labor share shows no
trend until 2000 but declines sharply between 2000 and 2015.


We then extend our analysis to the Euro Area (EA) and eight additional developed countries:
Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. For
the EA and these countries we can only start in the 1990s. We find a decline in the labor share in four
countries, an increase in five countries and a quasi-stability for the EA. We conclude that there has
not been a global decline in the labor share in advanced economies. These results are consistent with
those of Rognlie (2015) for G7 economies and with OECD (2018) when we consider the same set of
countries. Our treatment of various sectors of the economy differs from these studies however, so
our results are not directly comparable.


Measuring the evolution of the labor and capital shares is important for understanding the
underlying driving forces behind long term growth and the distribution of income. For instance,
Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) argue that the driving force is the decline in the relative price of
investment goods. This decline has happened in the US and in Europe, so this theory predicts

                                                                                                     3
declines in both regions. Elsby et al. (2013) suggest offshoring of the labor-intensive component of
the US supply chain as a leading potential explanation of the decline in the US labor share over the
past 25 years. Offshoring is also a global phenomenon, although its intensity might vary by country.
Autor et al. (2017) suggest that the driving force is technology that creates winner-takes-all
dynamics. They show that the decline of the labor share corresponds to the growth of firms with low
labor share technologies, especially in the digital economy. They argue that this can happen when
information technology makes consumer demand more elastic. Aghion et al. (2019) relates the
growth of large firms with a high productivity and a low labor share to a decrease in the cost of
running a large number of product lines. This decrease in costs comes from the use of information
and communication technologies (ICT). These explanations apply to Europe as well as the US, since
the growth of ICT and of intangible capital is global. If labor shares dynamics differ between Europe
and the US, then, this would suggest that another factor also plays a role. Gutiérrez and Philippon
(2019) and Philippon (2019) argue instead that declining competition explains some of the decline in
the US labor share. They show that barriers to entry have increased and antitrust enforcement has
weakened in the US relative to Europe. This explains the increase in corporate profits in the US and
the decline in the labor share in the US, but not in Europe.




The rest of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes a simple theoretical model to
organize the discussion of the three biases. Section 3 describes the data and methodology. Section 4
presents our empirical analysis for ten developed countries, first over a long period of seven decades
for France and the US, and after for the ten countries over a shorter period of two decades. Section 5
concludes.


2. Theoretical discussion


2.1. Labor Share in Production


Consider a standard CES production function with capital K and labor N:


                                               )   *-)     )     *-) *
                                  = [(1 - )*        *    +  *     * ]*-)




We assume that firms are price takers in factor markets, i.e., they take the wage W and the rental
rate R as given when choosing how much capital and labor to hire. On the other hand, we assume


                                                                                                    4
that firms have market power when they sell their output, so that they charge a markup  of price
over marginal cost. The marginal cost of production is:


                                                                      )
                                    = [(1 - ) )-* + )-* ])-*


Firms set up the markup so that:
                                                  = µ


Monopoly power is a standard assumption in macroeconomic models, but its implications are similar
to those of monopsony power in the labor market (Azar et al., 2017; Benmelech et al., 2018) or on
two-sided platforms. Cost minimization implies that the capital labor ratio satisfies:


                                                   *
                                               =   ( )
                                               1 -  


and profit maximization implies:


                                                         )
                                               = [(1 - ) ]*
                                                        

                                       ;
                           7       9
and similarly for capital,  = ( )< . The labor share is defined as:
                           8       :



                                                     
                                                 =
                                                     

                                                      )
                                             (1 - )*  )-*
                                           =        ( ) *
                                                     


This shows how the labor share depends on the output/labor ratio. Using the production function,
we can express this ratio as a function of the capital/labor ratio:


                                             )    )  *-) *
                                    = [(1 - )* +  * ( ) * ]*-)
                                                     


Finally, we can use the cost minimization condition to obtain:


                                                                                               5
                                     )-*                      1
                                   ( ) * =                )      )
                                                                     *-)
                                                  (1 -   )*   +  * () *




                                              1                 1
                                       =           )          
                                           (1 -   )*   1 + 1 -  (  )*-)


We therefore have the following expression for the labor share:


                                             1          1
                                        =                     (1)
                                              1 +       *-)
                                                    1 -   ( )


Equation (1) allows us to summarize many theories about the labor share. In the case of a Cobb-
Douglass production function we have  = 1 and therefore


                                                         1 - 
                                                    =
                                                           


The labor share can decline because of higher markups ( ) or because of capital bias technology
(). When   1,changes in factor prices also affect the labor share. Karabarbounis and Neiman
(2014) assume that  > 1 and argue that R has decreased. In that case the increase in W/R implies a
large demand for K relative to N and a drop in the labor share. There are three issues with this
explanation. One issue is that empirical estimates of the substitution elasticity usually find values in
the range of 0.4-0.8 (see for instance the literature survey and original estimates on plant level US
data from Oberfield and Raval, 2014, or Raval, 2019, or the recent meta-analysis from Knoblach et
al., 2019, using estimates from 77 studies on the US economy). The empirical consensus is a value
below one for the elasticity of substitution. This elasticity might hide important heterogeneity across
workers, however. In particular, capital might be a better substitute for unskilled labor than for
skilled labor, which means that the Karabarbounis-Neiman argument might still be relevant even if
the average elasticity is below one.


The second issue is that the timing of the decrease in the relative price of investment does not match
the timing of the decrease in the labor share. Figure 1 presents the growth rate of the investment
price deflator relative to the GDP price deflator in the US. We focus on the U.S. here because the

                                                                                                      6
National Statistical Institute has done substantial work to measure the prices of various investment
goods. We see that the relative price of investment has been decreasing for several decades, but this
decrease was stronger in the 1980s and 1990s, while, as we show later, the US labor share only
declines in the 2000s, at a time when the relative price of investment was more stable.


Figure 1. Growth rate of investment deflator relative to GDP deflator in the US (%)
  5


  0


  -5
                                                                   Total investment

 -10
                                                                   Equipement

 -15
                                                                   Hardware

 -20
                                                                   Software


 -25
                                                                   Communication
                                                                   equipment

 -30


 -35




Source: Author's calculation from US BEA data.
These growth rates are smoothed using a three-year moving average. Total investment price includes
construction price, which is not represented in this Graph.


The third issue relates to the behavior of the capital-output ratio over the period shown in the Figure
2. We observe that the capital ratio in value is quite-stable over the long 1949-2017 period, despite
the decline of the relative price of equipment, which suggests a substitution elasticity close to one.




                                                                                                         7
Figure 2. Ratio of Equipment Capital to GDP in the US




   3




                                                              capital coefficient at constant
                                                              price

   2


                                                              capital coefficient at nominal
                                                              price




                                                              relative price
   1




   0




Source : GDP in constant price, investment and GDP price: National accounts ­ BEA; Equipment capital in
constant price: Bergeaud, Cette and Lecat (2016) calculation, from national accounts ­ BEA investment data.
See www.longtermproductivity.com.


Another strand of literature argues that  is small -- at least in the short to medium run. A wage push
could then increase the labor share in the short run. Formally, W/R goes up, firms cannot substitute
much capital, and so the labor share increases. This can help explain the dynamics of the labor share
in Europe in the 1970s (Blanchard, 1998). We will see that this can also explain the dynamics of the
labor share in Germany during the 2000s.


In the long run, technology can also change. A prime example is automation. For Acemoglu and
Restrepo (2018), automation increases productivity more than wages, which reduces the labor share.
They argue that "automation increases output per worker more than wages and reduce the share of
labor in national income". Martinez (2018) builds an interesting model where capital and labor are
complementary ( < 1) and the aggregate production function resembles a CES, but with endogenous
weights influenced by automation. Opening trade to low wage countries can also lower the
equilibrium wage (at least for low skilled workers), and  < 1 can lead to a lower labor share.


2.2. Discussion of the three biases



                                                                                                         8
Initial period
Most international studies of labor share focus on trends, not on levels. Comparison of levels across
countries is complicated because of differences in industrial composition and in statistical
methodologies. In fact, we discuss two such issues below. As a result, most studies shy away from
level comparisons and focus on trends.


The problem with trends is that they depend on the choice of the initial period. If shocks are small,
this is not an issue. But when shocks are large, this can create severe biases.


Equation (1) assumes away adjustment costs and transition dynamics but it is not difficult to
understand how these frictions play out. Following Blanchard (1998), let us define a "wage push" as
wage inflation in excess of underlying labor productivity growth. When prices are rigid in the short
term, a wage push leads to a lower markup . This increases the labor share. In addition, if  is less
than one ­ the empirically relevant case as we have discussed ­ an increase in W/R also increases the
labor share.


These effects can be large, but they are temporary. If one takes the period after the wage push as the
starting point, then simple mean reversion will create the illusion of a decline in the labor share,
while in fact the labor share is simply returning progressively to its initial steady state. We show
below that this effect is large in the case of France and Germany. Any labor share using the period
1975-1985 as a starting point will find a spurious decline in the labor share.




Self-employment
The second issue is self-employment. The labor share of employees is easier to estimate than that of
self-employed individuals (Elsby et al., 2013). Workers who are on the payroll of employers earn
wages as well as employer contributions to pension and insurance funds. Their compensation is
usually well measured.


For self-employed workers, on the other hand, we do not have a direct measure of their wage, and it
is usually difficult to distinguish labor and capital income. The usual way to deal with the issue is to
assume that self-employed workers earn the same wage as employees in their industry (see Box). We
follow the literature, but we note that the adjustment can be biased since it assumes that self-
employed workers are identical to other workers. This issue matters especially when the share of
self-employment varies over time or across countries.

                                                                                                      9
Real estate
The last issue is income from real estate. In the model above, K represents capital used by firms to
produce goods and services. It does not include residential real estate. In national accounts,
however, income from residential real estate is counted as capital income.


The proper way to account for real estate income depends on the question we want to answer. Real
estate capital income is indeed a form of capital income, and it has important redistributive effects
within and across generations. If we are interested in the dynamics of wealth inequality, we must
clearly include real estate capital.


On the other hand, if we seek to understand the impact of technology, trade, or market power, we
should carefully remove residential capital income from our measures. The theories discussed above
emphasize the evolution of productive capital and predict how value added is shared between labor
compensation and profits. To assess the impact of automation, AI, trade, unionization, oligopoly
rents, or monopsony power, we must use a measure of capital income that does not include real
estate income.


There are in fact two levels of bias. First, at the country level, residential rentals are part of value
added, with rentals imputed for owner occupied dwellings. This can clearly create a bias when the
value added of real estate over GDP changes. A solution is to compute the labor share excluding the
real estate sector. We implement this correction and we show that labor share changes differ
depending on whether or not we remove real estate services from value added. A second issue is
that, in many countries, business firms own real estate and earn rental income. This rental income is
not part of payment to productive capital and creates a bias in the measurement of the labor share
even at the sector/industry level. This point is analyzed in detail by Gutiérrez and Piton (2019).


3. Data and methodology



Data sources

We chose the data sources that yield the longest time series. For France and the US, we use data
from the National Statistical Institutes -- INSEE and the BEA respectively ­ and we can go back as far
1949. For the 8 other countries, we use STAN from the OECD, which provides data from different

                                                                                                     10
dates but at least from 1995 for all countries. The data come primarily from annual national accounts
and are available via Eurostat for European countries. The OECD fills in some missing information,
especially in early years and for detailed levels, so it may not reflect exactly national accounts
publications.

Labor share calculation methodology

We compute the labor share as the ratio of the compensation of employee (D1)1 over value added at
factor costs, which is gross value added (B1G) minus taxes (D29) and subvention (D39) to production.
In the case of France, however, the national accounts allow us to separate taxes on wages and
workforce from other taxes on production, and then we consider taxes on wages as part of labor
costs.

Self-employment adjustment

The income of self-employed workers creates problems for calculating the labor share. The national
accounts provide a breakdown of value added at factor costs into employees' compensation, gross
operating surplus, and mixed income at various levels of aggregation (industries, sectors, and the
entire economy). Mixed income is the income of self-employed workers and it includes both capital
and labor incomes. We need to make assumptions in order to distinguish the compensation for labor
services from the returns to capital.

The usual way to separate the labor and capital shares in self-employed mixed income is to assume
that self-employed workers earn the same gross hourly wages as employees in the same industry.
These adjustment matter especially when the structure of employment between paid and
independent workers changes. For instance, in France, the number of self-employed workers has
decreased since the Second World War, in particular because of the decline in the employment share
of farming: the share of self-employed workers in the total employment has decreased from 39% in
1949 to 13% in 2017.

We compute the average hourly gross wage for employee at the detailed industry level, and we apply
it to self-employed workers. We use seventeen various industries for France, seventeen for the US in
the later years and twelve for the earlier ones, and thirty-four for all the other countries. For the US,
the nomenclature changes during our sample period, going from the 1972 Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) systems to the 1987 one in 1987, and then to North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) in 1997. In consequence, the labor share curve is discontinuous in 1997


1 Classification from the ESA 2010.

                                                                                                      11
and 1987, without restatement. For these two years, we computed the labor share using two sets of
data, and then we fitted the trend from the earlier year to the value given by the earlier set of data.
These adjustments go from -2,7% to +3,9%.

Branches of activities

The labor share has been calculated on different fields: first for the entire economy (all branches of
activities, including the government); second for the business sector2; third for the business sector
excluding real estate services. These indicators are corrected as described above for self-employed
workers. For France and the US, we calculate two other indicators: for the business sector without
corrections for self-employment to show the impact of these correction; and also for non-financial
companies (NFC). The NFC scope does not include self-employed workers in France and the United
States, but this is not always the case in other countries (see Pionnier and Guidetti, 2015).

We consider the following branches as non-business ones: Public administration and defense
services, Compulsory social security services (Section O)3, Education services (Section P); human
health and social work services (Section Q), Arts, entertainment and recreation services (Section R);
Other services (Section S) and Private households as employers (Section T). This definition has been
applied to all countries rather than considering non-business sector on a case-by-case basis, even
though there are differences. For example, human health services are evaluated4 as a non-business
branch in France but as a business branch in the USA. Applying same definition for non-business
sector provides a coherent field for international comparisons.

Definition of imputed rentals

In real estate services, a significant part of reported production comes from imputed rentals: in
France, in 2015, rentals make up for 97% of the total value added of real estate services, with 61%
consisting of imputed rentals. National accounts use rents paid to landlords to estimate the value of
real estate services. For owners who occupy their own dwellings the convention is to assume that
they pay a (virtual) rent to themselves. Without this correction it would be difficult to compare GDP
across countries with different levels of home ownership. On the other hand, the correction creates
measurement issues.




2 We consider here and in the whole paper "business sector" as equivalent to "market sector".
3 Classification NACE Rev.2
4 Market and non-business branch is a distinction based on the evaluation method in national account. A
  service or product is considered as non-market if it is free or sold at a non-economic significant price (less
  than 50% of the cost). In this case, the value of the production is estimated as the sum of production costs.

                                                                                                             12
There is also an important distinction between residential and non-residential real estate. Residential
real estate is considered final consumption and is counted as part of value added. On the other hand,
when a firm rents a building, it is considered an intermediate consumption of real estate in the
process of production.



4. Empirical results


In this section, we study trends in the labor shares of ten developed countries for which the data
allow us to analyze the biases mentioned in the previous section. These ten countries are Belgium,
Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the
United States. We also look at the labor share trends in a reconstituted Euro Area comprising
Germany, France, Italy, Spain, The Netherlands and Belgium.5 For France and the United States, data
used to build labor share indicators are directly available from their National Statistical Institute from
the end of the 1940s. For this reason, we start by looking at the long run evolution of labor shares in
these two countries.


4.1. Long term trends in France and the United States


We compare five measures of the labor share in France and the US over the period 1949-2017. The
first covers the whole economy. Its main advantage is to be exhaustive. But its disadvantage is to
include non-market activities. Public administration services account for roughly a quarter of GDP in
the two countries at the end of the sample and are estimated according to specific international
accounting conventions using a factor cost approach.


Our four other measures focus on the business sector: one with and one without corrections for self-
employed workers; one for the business sector excluding real estate activities; and one for non-
financial corporation (NFC). This last measure excludes self-employment6 and financial corporations
for which the estimation of value added depends on different accounting conventions. This NFC
measure is the cleanest, but it covers about half of the GDP at the end of the period in the two
countries.



5
    In 2017, these six countries represented 86% of the GDP of the whole Euro Area.
6
    The fact that the NFC scope does not include self-employed workers is specific to a few countries, such as
    France and the United States (see Pionnier and Guidetti, 2015). For this reason, we do not calculate and
    analyse its evolution for other developed countries in the next section.

                                                                                                           13
The labor share in France
Figure 3-A presents the five labor share measures for France. It illustrates the three biases mentioned
earlier.7


Our preferred measure uses the business sector, corrected for self-employment, and excluding real
estate services. This measure is reassuringly similar to the one for the non-financial corporate sector,
and neither one shows a trend over the long sample. There are, however, large medium run cycles.


The rise and fall of the labor share between 1973 and 1985 highlight the issue of the starting period.
The oil shocks of the 1970s triggered a large increase in price and wage inflation. From the mid-
1980s, the strategy of "competitive disinflation" ("désinflation compétitive") implemented by the
French Government managed to reduce wage inflation. In doing so, however, it also decreased the
labor share. The labor share settled about 2 points below its pre-1973 average until 2008. Over the
past 3 years it has remained at its long-term average.


The lowest line in Figure 3A shows the large impact of the self-employment correction. The non-
corrected labor share indicator is lower and grows more rapidly than the corrected one. The
discrepancy comes from the fact that the share of self-employed in total employment has decreased
continuously from about 39% at the end of the 1940s to about 10% in the early 2000s (see Figure 4).
It has remained stable since then, with a slight increase slightly by about 1 percentage point because
of the creation of a specific status of auto-self-employed ("auto-entrepreneur").




7
    See Cette and Ouvrard (2018) for an early analysis along these lines.

                                                                                                     14
Figure 3. Labor share ­ In % of the value added


A ­ France
   80



   75


                                                                                             Business sector excluding real
   70                                                                                        estate services


                                                                                             Non financial companies
   65


                                                                                             Total economy
   60


                                                                                             Business sector
   55

                                                                                             Business sector without self-
                                                                                             employment correction
   50



   45



   40




B ­ United States
  80



  75


                                                                                            Business sector excluding
  70                                                                                        real estate services

                                                                                            Non financial companies
  65

                                                                                            Total economy
  60

                                                                                            Business sector

  55
                                                                                            Business sector without
                                                                                            self-employment correction
  50



  45



  40




Sources: Author's calculation from national accounts.




Finally, the gap between our preferred series and the "business sector" shows the impact of real
estate services. If we do not correct for real estate, the labor share in the business sector exhibits a


                                                                                                        15
large downward trend until 2008. The cumulative decline of 10 percentage point is entirely due to
the increase in residential real estate income. The share of real estate services in total value added
has increased from about 3½% at the end of the 1940s to about 16% in 2008.


The correction of the three biases changes the diagnosis regarding the labor share in France. Over a
long period of seven decades, from the end of the 1940s until 2018, the labor share has experienced
medium run fluctuations around a stable level.


Figure 4. Share of self-employed workers in the total employment ­ In %
    40


    35


    30


    25


    20                                                                                      France
                                                                                            United States
    15


    10


     5


     0



Sources: Author's calculation from national accounts.




The labor share in the United States


Figure 3-B presents the five labor share indicators for the US. The biases are less severe than in
France, for several reasons. Concerning the timing bias, the oil shocks of the 1970s did not have a
significant impact on the labor share indicators in the US. One potential reason is that the US is a
large producer of oil and gas, so the oil shocks were mainly a transfer from energy-using sectors
towards the domestic oil and gas sector. The share of the petrol and gas extraction in the total value
added increased in the US from about 1% in the early 1970s to a maximum of 4% in the early 1980s,
to fall back to 1% in the early 1990s. In France, by contrast, it was a negative terms of trade shock
from domestic sectors towards foreign oil producers.8


8
    This explanation is discussed by Baghli, Cette and Sylvain (2003).

                                                                                                      16
Concerning the self-employment bias, it matters early in the sample from 1949 to 1970 when the
uncorrected share has a trend while the corrected indicator remains stable. The reason is that the
share of self-employed in total employment decreased from about 17% to about 9% during this sub-
period (see Figure 4). The large decrease in self-employment observed in France until the early 2000s
happened earlier in the US.


Figure 5. Share of real estate services in the total value added ­ In %
 17
 16
 15
 14
 13
 12
 11
 10
  9
  8                                                                                        France
                                                                                           United States
  7
  6
  5
  4
  3
  2
  1
  0




Sources: Author's calculation from national accounts.




Concerning the real estate bias, it is smaller than in France because the share of real estate services
in total value added increased by about 6 percentage points (from about 10% to about 16%) between
1949 and 2017 while the increase was about twice as large in France (see Figure 5). The corrected
labor share fluctuates around a stable level of about 70% from the end of the 1940s to the early
2000s. It then decreases by about 5 percentage points.


The decrease in the US labor share coincides with three other evolutions in the US economy: industry
concentration and profits have increased, while net investment has fallen relative to
output. Covarrubias, Gutiérrez and Philippon (2019) discuss the relative importance of competition,
barriers to entry, technology, and trade. Trade plays an important role in manufacturing. Overall,
however, the evidence suggests that an increase in market power in most industries in the 2000s
explains the dynamics of concentration, profits, investment, and the labor share. Market power
comes from rising barriers to entry, weak antitrust enforcement, and lobbying by incumbents.



                                                                                                       17
4.2. Labor shares in eight developed countries and the Euro Area


We look now at the labor share in eight other developed countries for which data from the STAN
OECD database is available with enough details to build our indicators: Belgium, Denmark, Germany,
Italy, The Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom. We construct labor shares for the
business sector and the business sector excluding real estate services.9 The indicators are adjusted
for self-employment mixed income. The trends do not change when financial activities are removed
from our calculations. The first and last observations differ across countries, so we cannot always
analyze the timing bias. We look also at the labor share at the level of a reconstituted Euro Area (EA)
defined as Germany, France, Italy, Spain, The Netherlands and Belgium.


Figure 6 presents the labor share indicators for the eight new countries. The first main finding is that
there is no obvious trend in the data. Some countries have increasing shares (UK, SWE, ESP), some
decreasing shares (NLD, Belgium). The other ones are ambiguous. Detailed comparisons are difficult
because the sample periods differ from one country to the next, but some of the issues we discussed
for France are readily apparent. First, all countries with long term data show the rise and fall of the
labor share in the 1970s and 1980s to varying degrees. Germany and The Netherlands look similar to
France. In Italy the process seems to drag on for longer.


Germany displays this pattern twice, the second time being during the reunification between East
and West Germany. The reunification led to an initial increase in the labor share, consistent with the
political decision not to devalue the East German currency and to implement large fiscal transfers
from the West to the East. The decrease happens in the early 2000s following the Hartz labor market
reforms. Burda and Steele (2016) show that these reforms created a positive labor supply shock (a
reversed wage push). With a capital-labor elasticity of substitution less than one this implies a fall in
the labor share. However, if we take a long-term perspective, we see that the overall labor share in
Germany was 68.5% in 2015 versus 69.2% in 1970. Over 45 years, then, the labor share in Germany
has moved by only 70 basis points.




9
    We do not present the labor share for the whole economy. Its level is always higher than that in the
    business sector, but the trends of the two indicators are similar in the eight countries.

                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               85




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                            19                                                                    19                                                    19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    70                                                            70                                                                    70                                                       70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                            19                                                                    19                                                    19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    73                                                            73                                                                    73                                                       73                            Belgium




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                            19                                                                    19                                                    19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    76                                                            76                                                                    76                                                       76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                            19                                                                    19                                                    19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    79                                                            79                                                                    79                                                       79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                            19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19                                                    19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    82                                                            82                                                                    82                                                       82
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                            19                                                                    19                                                    19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    85                                                            85                                                                    85                                                       85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                            19                                                                    19                                                    19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    88                                                            88                                                                    88                                                       88
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                            19                                                                    19                                                    19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    91                                                            91                                                                    91                                                       91
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                            19                                                                    19                                                    19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    94                                                            94                                                                    94                                                       94
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                            19                                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  97                                                                  19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    97                                                                                                                                  97                                                       97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20                                                            20                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  00                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    00                                                                                                                                  00                                                       00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20                                                            20                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  03                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    03                                                                                                                                  03                                                       03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20                                                            20                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    06                                                            06                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        06                                                       06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  09                                                                  20                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    09                                                                                                                                  09                                                       09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 6. Labor shares ­ In % of the value added




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20                                                              12                                                                  20                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12                                                                                                                                  12                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15                                                                  20                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15                                                                                                                                  15                                                       15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          75
                                                                                                                                                                                                               19                                                               19                                                                     19                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Italy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 70                                                               70                                                                     70                                                   70




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                               19                                                               19                                                                     19                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 73                                                               73                                                                     73                                                   73
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Denmark




                                                                                                                                                                                                               19                                                               19                                                                     19                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 76                                                               76                                                                     76                                                   76
                                                                                                                                                                                                               19                                                               19                                                                     19                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 79                                                               79                                                                     79                                                   79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                                               19                                                                                                                                      19                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 82                                                               82                                                                     82                                                   82
                                                                                                                                                                                                               19                                                               19                                                                     19                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 85                                                               85                                                                     85                                                   85
                                                                                                                                                                                                               19                                                               19                                                                     19                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  88                                                                     88                                                   88
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 88
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                19                                                                     19                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                                                                               19                                                                 91
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 91                                                                                                                                      91                                                   91
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                19                                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                                                                                                               19                                                                 94                                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 94                                                                                                                                      94                                                   94
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                19
                                                                                                                                                                                                               19                                                                 97                                                                   19                                                   19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 97                                                                                                                                      97                                                   97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                               20                                                                 00                                                                   20                                                   20




                                                                                                              __ Business sector excluding real estate services. _ _ Total economy. . . . . Business sector.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 00                                                                                                                                      00                                                   00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                               20                                                                 03                                                                   20                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 03                                                                                                                                      03                                                   03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                               20                                                                 06                                                                   20                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 06                                                                                                                                      06                                                   06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                               20                                                                 09                                                                   20                                                   20




     Break in German series is due to reunification. Sources: Author's calculation from STAN OECD database.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 09                                                                                                                                      09                                                   09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                               20                                                                 12                                                                   20                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12                                                                                                                                      12                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                               20                                                                 15                                                                   20                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15                                                                                                                                      15                                                   15




19
Real estate services have the expected impact. They lower the uncorrected labor share in all
countries, and lead to a downward trend in countries that experience a boom in real estate. The
most striking example is of course Spain, as we see in Figure 7a.


Figure 7 (a,b). Share of real estate services in the business sector value added ­ In %

 19
 18
 17
 16
 15
 14
 13                                                                                                               France
 12                                                                                                               Italy
 11
                                                                                                                  Spain
 10
                                                                                                                  United Kingdom
  9
                                                                                                                  United States
  8
  7
  6
  5
  4
   70

          73

                 76

                        79

                               82

                                      85

                                             88

                                                    91

                                                           94

                                                                  97

                                                                         00

                                                                                03

                                                                                       06

                                                                                              09

                                                                                                     12

                                                                                                            15
 19

        19

               19

                      19

                             19

                                    19

                                           19

                                                  19

                                                         19

                                                                19

                                                                       20

                                                                              20

                                                                                     20

                                                                                            20

                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                          20




 19

 18

 17

 16                                                                                                              Belgium
 15

 14                                                                                                              Denmark

 13
                                                                                                                 Germany
 12

 11
                                                                                                                 Sweden
 10

  9
                                                                                                                 The
  8                                                                                                              Netherlands

  7

  6

  5

  4
   70

          73

                 76

                        79

                               82

                                      85

                                             88

                                                    91

                                                           94

                                                                  97

                                                                         00

                                                                                03

                                                                                       06

                                                                                              09

                                                                                                     12

                                                                                                            15
 19

        19

               19

                      19

                             19

                                    19

                                           19

                                                  19

                                                         19

                                                                19

                                                                       20

                                                                              20

                                                                                     20

                                                                                            20

                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                          20




Source: Author's calculation from the STAN OECD database.



                                                                                                                                   20
Spain has such a large boom-bust cycle in real estate income that it changes the sign of the trend in
the labor share from 1995 to 2016. The share of the real estate services in the business sector value
added increased from 6.4% to almost 15% at the peak before decreasing to 12.4% at the end of our
sample. As a result, the uncorrected labor share drops by about 2 percentage points while the
corrected one increases by 2 percentage points. In Belgium, The Netherlands and Sweden the share
of real estate services in business sector value added has been stable or slightly decreasing over the
past 20 years (Fig 7b).


In Figure 8, we create an indicator for the Euro Area including Germany, France, Italy, Spain, The
Netherlands and Belgium. In 2017, these six countries represented 86% of Euro Area GDP. When real
estate services are removed from value added, we find that the EA labor share does not have a
trend.


Figure 8. Labor share in the Euro Area ­ In % of the value added
 70

 69

 68

 67

                                                                                  Business sector excluding
 66                                                                               real estate services

 65

                                                                                  Total
 64

 63

 62                                                                               Business sector


 61

 60

 59

 58

 57
   95

   96

   97

   98

   99

   00

   01

   02

   03

   04

   05

   06

   07

   08

   09

   10

   11

   12

   13

   14

   15
 19

 19

 19

 19

 19

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20

 20




Euro Area includes Germany, France, Italy, Spain, The Netherlands and Belgium. Sources: Author's calculation
from the STAN OECD database.




The last point to emphasize is the convergence in levels towards a labor share of 0.65. This is also
important to interpret the historical data. The Netherlands is the country with the largest decline in


                                                                                                              21
the labor share since the 1970s, but it started from a very high level. Spain has an increasing labor
share, but it started from a relatively low level. In both cases the countries seem to head towards a
labor share of 0.65.


    5. Conclusion


We highlight the relevance of three potential biases in the empirical literature on the evolution of the
labor share: (i) starting periods that correspond to peaks or troughs of medium run cycles; (ii)
accounting for self-employment; and (iii) accounting for residential real estate income. When we
correct for these three potential biases, we do not find a general decline in the labor share in our
sample of advanced economies. An important point is that the evolution of the US labor share --
which remains constant until 2000 and then decreases by about 6 points ­ is not shared by European
countries.


The medium run cycles suggest the need for more research on the impact of cost push shocks and
labor market reforms. Accounting for self-employment creates difficulties for comparisons in levels
across countries. Whether real estate income should be included or not depends on the question at
hand. If one wishes to study inequality or household finance, then obviously one should include real
estate income. On the other hand, if one wishes to understand the consequences of technological
change, trade, unionization, the relative price of equipment goods, the role of intangible assets or
the consequences of monopoly power, then one should exclude real estate income to focus on
capital used by firms in production.




                                                                                                     22
References


Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2018). Artificial Intelligence, Automation and Work. NBER Working
Paper, n° 24196, January.


Aghion, P., A. Bergeaud, T. Boppart, P. Klenow and H. Li (2019). A theory of Falling growth and Rising
Rents. Mimeo. April.


Azar, J., I. Marinescu and M. Steinbaum (2017). Labor market concentration. Technical report, NBER
Working Paper.


Baghli, M., G. Cette and A. Sylvain (2003). Les déterminants du taux de marge en France et quelques
autres grands pays industrialisés : analyse empirique sur la période 1970-2000. Economie &
Prevision, 2003(2), n° 158, pp. 1-25.


Benmelech, E., N. Bergman and H. Kim (2018). Strong employers and weak employees: How does
employer concentration affect wages?". Technical report, NBER Working Paper.


Blanchard, O. (1998). Revisiting european unemployment: Unemployment, capital accumulation, and
factor prices. Technical report, NBER Working Paper.


Burda, M. and Steele, S. (2016) No Role for the Hartz Reforms? Demand and Supply Factors in the
German Labor Market, 1993-2014, SFB 649 Discussion Papers


Cette, G. and J.-F. Ouvrard (2018). The labour share in value added: a complex assessment. Banque
de France, Eco Note pad, https://blocnotesdeleco.banque-france.fr/en/blog-entry/labour-share-
value-added-complex-assessment.


Covarrubias, M., G. Gutiérrez and T. Philippon (2019) « From Good to Bad Concentration? U.S.
Industries over the past 30 years », NBER Macro Annual.


Elsby, M., B. Hobijn and A. Sahin (2013). The decline of the u.s. labor share. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 44(2 (Fall)), 1­63.




                                                                                                   23
Grossman, G. M., E. Helpman, E. Oberfield and T. Sampson (2017). The productivity slowdown and
the declining labor share: A neoclassical exploration. Technical report, NBER Working Paper.


Gutiérrez, G. (2017). Investigating global labor and profit shares. Working Paper.


Gutiérrez, G. and Piton, S. (2019) Revisiting the Global Decline of the Labor Share. Working Paper.


Gutiérrez, G. and Philippon, T. (2019) How EU Markets Became More Competitive Than US Markets:
A Study of Institutional Drift. NBER working paper.


IMF (2017). Understanding the downward trend in labor income shares. Chapter 3 of the World
Economic Outlook, 2017, April.


Kaldor, N. (1957). A model of economic growth. Economic Journal 67(268), 591­624.


Karabarbounis, L. and B. Neiman (2014). The global decline of the labor share. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 129(1), pp. 61­103.


Knoblach, M, M. Roessler and P. Zwerschke (2019). The Elasticity of Substitution Between Capital and
Labour in the US Economy: A Meta-Regression Analysis. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics.
Early View.


Martinez, J. (2018). Automation, growth and factor shares. Technical report, LBS.


Oberfield, E. and D. Raval (2014). Micro Data and Macro Technology. NBER Working Papers 20452.


OECD (2018). Labour share developments over the past two-decades: The role of technological
progress, globalization and "winner-takes-most" dynamics. Chapter 2 of the OECD Employment
Outlook, 2018, July. The content of this chapter comes from Schwellnus, Pak, Pionnier and Crivallaro
(2018).


Philippon (2019) The Great Reversal, Harvard University Press.


Pionnier, P.-A. and E. Guidetti (2015). Comparing profit shares in value-added in four OECD countries:
toward more harmonised national accounts. OECD, Working Paper n° 61, STD/DOC(2015)3, 29 May,

                                                                                                      24
https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/fr/economics/comparing-profit-shares-in-value-added-in-four-oecd-
countries_5js0bsm2g0lt-en.


Raval, D. (2019). The micro elasticity of substitution and non-neutral technology. The RAND Journal
of Economics, Vol. 50, issue 1, pp. 147-167.


Rognlie, M. (2015). Deciphering the Fall and Rise in the Net Capital Share: Accumulation or Scarcity?
Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 1-69.


Schwellnus, C., M. Pak, P.-A. Pionnier and E. Crivallaro (2018). Labour share developments over the
past two-decades: The role of thechnological progress, progress, globalization and "winner-takes-
most" dynamics. OECD, Economic Department Working Papers, n° 1503, 3 September.




                                                                                                  25
