                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                       DOES EVICTION CAUSE POVERTY?
             QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM COOK COUNTY, IL

                                     John Eric Humphries
                                      Nicholas S. Mader
                                     Daniel I. Tannenbaum
                                      Winnie L. van Dijk

                                      Working Paper 26139
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26139


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019


The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation
(SES-1757112, SES-1757186, SES-1757187), the Laura and John Arnold Foundation, the
Spencer Foundation, and the Kreisman Initiative on Housing Law and Policy. We would like to
thank Lawrence Wood and others at the Legal Assistance Foundation in Chicago, Melissa C.
Chiu at the U.S. Census Bureau, Leah Gjertson and Robert Goerge at Chapin Hall, Lydia Stazen
Michael at All Chicago, Carmelo Barbaro, Ruth Coffman and Emily Kristine Metz at UChicago
Urban Labs, Joe Altonji, Eric Chyn, Angela Denis Pagliero, Michael Dinerstein, Bill Evans, Alex
Frankel, Pieter Gautier, Matt Gentzkow, Michael Greenstone, Jim Heckman, Ali Hortaçsu,
Peter Hull, Louis Kaplow, Ezra Karger, Paymon Khorrami, Thibaut Lamadon, Jeff Lin, Maarten
Lindeboom, Hamish Low, Sarah Miller, Magne Mogstad, Derek Neal, Matt Notowidigdo, Ed
Olsen, Azeem Shaikh, Beth Shinn, Jeff Smith, Jim Sullivan, Chris Taber, Alex Torgovitsky,
Bas van der Klaauw, Laura Wherry, and seminar participants at the Summer 2017
University of Chicago Crossing Disciplinary Boundaries workshop, the 2017 Fall APPAM
conference, the University of Chicago, SOLE, the Philadelphia Fed, the 2018 NBER Summer
Institute, the University of Oslo, ALEA, the Institute for Research on Poverty Summer
Workshop, Nebraska Law, and the University of Alicante for helpful discussion. Iliana
Cabral, Ella Deeken, Deniz Dutz, and Katherine Kwok provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by John Eric Humphries, Nicholas S. Mader, Daniel I. Tannenbaum, and Winnie L.
van Dijk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Does Eviction Cause Poverty? Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Cook County, IL
John Eric Humphries, Nicholas S. Mader, Daniel I. Tannenbaum, and Winnie L. van Dijk
NBER Working Paper No. 26139
August 2019
JEL No. H00,I30,J01,R38

                                           ABSTRACT

Each year, more than two million U.S. households have an eviction case filed against them. Many
cities have recently implemented policies aimed at reducing the number of evictions, motivated
by research showing strong associations between being evicted and subsequent adverse economic
outcomes. Yet it is difficult to determine to what extent those associations represent causal
relationships, because eviction itself is likely to be a consequence of adverse life events. This
paper addresses that challenge and offers new causal evidence on how eviction affects financial
distress, residential mobility, and neighborhood quality. We collect the near-universe of Cook
County court records over a period of seventeen years, and link these records to credit bureau and
payday loans data. Using this data, we characterize the trajectory of financial strain in the run-up
and aftermath of eviction court for both evicted and non-evicted households, finding high levels
and striking increases in financial strain in the years before an eviction case is filed. Guided by
this descriptive evidence, we employ two approaches to draw causal inference on the effect of
eviction. The first takes advantage of the panel data through a difference-in-differences design.
The second is an instrumental variables strategy, relying on the fact that court cases are randomly
assigned to judges of varying leniency. We find that eviction negatively impacts credit access and
durable consumption for several years. However, the effects are small relative to the financial
strain experienced by both evicted and non-evicted tenants in the run-up to an eviction filing.


John Eric Humphries                              Daniel I. Tannenbaum
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Yale University                                  University of Nebraska ­ Lincoln
37 Hillhouse Ave                                 HLH 525 B
New Haven, CT 06511                              P.O. Box 880489
john.humphries@yale.edu                          Lincoln, NE 68588
                                                 dtannenbaum@unl.edu
Nicholas S. Mader
Chapin Hall at the University of Chicago         Winnie L. van Dijk
313 E 60th St                                    Becker Friedman Institute
Chicago, IL 60637                                University of Chicago
nmader@chapinhall.org                            5757 S. University Avenue
                                                 Chicago, IL 60637
                                                 and NBER
                                                 wlvandijk@uchicago.edu



An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26139
               ... and no one knew whether the house was mine or yours because there was no disagreement
               between me and you. But now I am being subjected to violence by your very own Ptolema,
               who sent me word to this effect: "Give up the house. Otherwise your household furnishings
               will be put out."
               - Letter from the third century A.D. by an Egyptian tenant to his landlord (Frier, 1980).



         1      Introduction
         Each year, more than two million U.S. households have an eviction case filed against them
         (Desmond et al., 2018a). Many of these households live in poor urban communities where eviction
         is a frequent occurrence; in some census tracts, more than 10 percent of renter households are
         summoned to eviction court annually. Many cities have introduced policy measures to reduce
         the number of evictions,1 motivated by a growing body of research showing that being evicted is
         associated with subsequent adverse economic outcomes for low-income households.2 Yet it is
         difficult to know the extent to which such associations represent a causal relationship because
         eviction itself is likely to be a consequence of adverse life events, such as job loss, negative
         financial shocks, or deteriorating health. Quasi-experimental research capable of establishing
         such a causal relationship has thus far not been available to inform this policy debate.
             This paper provides new evidence on the consequences of eviction for financial distress,
         residential mobility, and neighborhood quality. We collect the near-universe of Cook County
         court records over a period of seventeen years, and link these records to credit bureau and
         payday loans data. We first characterize trends in financial strain in the run-up and aftermath
         of eviction court for both evicted and non-evicted households, documenting high levels and
         striking increases in financial strain in the years before an eviction case is filed. This pattern is
         reminiscent of an `Ashenfelter dip,' which has been shown to drive erroneous conclusions about
         causal impacts in other settings. Guided by this descriptive evidence, we employ two approaches
         to draw causal inference on the effect of eviction. The first takes advantage of the panel data
         through a difference-in-differences (DiD) design. The second is an instrumental variables strategy
         (IV), relying on the fact that court cases are randomly assigned to judges of varying leniency.3
         Our findings lead to two broad conclusions.
             First, we find that eviction negatively impacts credit access, credit scores, and durable
         consumption for several years, and increases debt in collections. However, when we consider the
   1
       See Appendix A for a review of recently proposed or passed reforms.
   2
    See, e.g., Crane and Warnes (2000); Desmond (2012); Desmond and Kimbro (2015); Desmond et al. (2015); Desmond
and Gershenson (2016a), and Desmond (2016).
   3
     Our analysis focuses on the causal effect of a court-ordered eviction, also referred to as an order for possession. A
court-ordered eviction is well defined by the legal system and recorded in data sets derived from court records. However,
it is important to note that this is a more narrowly-drawn concept than an "involuntary move," and distinct from a
tenant being illegally coerced to move by his landlord, which is sometimes referred to as an "informal eviction." Both
concepts appear in the sociology literature and are occasionally used interchangeably with the term "eviction." We
depart from that practice in using the term "eviction" solely to denote an eviction order issued by the court.


                                                            1
magnitude of these effects in the context of the financial strain experienced by both evicted and
non-evicted tenants in the years preceding an eviction case, the effects are small. For example,
the IV estimate for total debt in collections 13 to 36 months after the case is $209 and statistically
insignificant, yet both groups have, on average, approximately $3,000 dollars in collection four
years prior to the case, and both groups experience increases of $1,000 to $1,200 dollars between
two years before and two years after the case. In addition, we do not find evidence of a causal
impact on residential mobility or neighborhood poverty. The IV and DiD estimates are, for the
most part, similar in magnitude, but the IV estimates are less precise.
   Second, bias due to selection on levels and trends, if ignored, leads to the erroneous conclusion
that eviction has large impacts on financial distress. Using an additional panel of credit records
for a random sample of Cook County residents, we replicate the empirical strategy used in
existing studies, which compare evicted tenants to tenants not in eviction court (controlling
for observable characteristics). The results from this analysis imply large effects of eviction. In
contrast, when we limit the sample to tenants in eviction court, OLS regressions comparing
evicted tenants to non-evicted tenants produce much smaller estimates. For example, the sample
restriction reduces the estimated effect on credit score by more than 75 percent. Our results
suggest that, while we find evidence that eviction exacerbates financial strain, the financial strain
faced by those in eviction court is largely pre-existing, and not a consequence of being evicted
per se.
   Our research speaks to an active policy debate on how, if at all, local governments should
address the high frequency of evictions. Given the prevalence of evictions, it is important to
know how tenants might be affected by policies that intervene in eviction court, such as policies
that make proceedings more lenient toward them. Our results speak directly to this question.
While we find small causal effects on financial health and larger effects on access to credit, the
results are much more moderate than the existing work on evictions. Moreover, both evicted
and non-evicted households face increasing financial distress more than two years before the
eviction court case is filed. This suggests that interventions targeting eviction court are likely to
be ineffective at alleviating the financial distress of evicted tenants. The results also point to
the possibility that intervening earlier may be necessary to avoid the financial strain faced by
evicted tenants.
   There is little research by economists on evictions. Our paper contributes to the broader
economics literature on the consequences of housing policy for the economic mobility of low-
income households. Several studies of housing vouchers and the Moving to Opportunity program
have found small benefits of moving to a better neighborhood for adults, and larger effects for
children (Kling et al., 2007; Gennetian et al., 2012; Chetty et al., 2016; Chyn, 2018; Van Dijk,
2019). Evans et al. (2016) show that emergency financial assistance is a cost-effective tool for
reducing homelessness. We contribute to this literature by studying the dynamics of financial
strain surrounding an eviction filing, by implementing a quasi-experimental research design to



                                                  2
       identify the causal effect of an eviction,4 and by documenting the prevalence of eviction in a
       major urban area. Moreover, we employ a set of outcome variables that has been under-used for
       studying financial strain in the context of housing policy. Our credit panel allows us to follow
       individuals across neighborhoods, not only within Cook County, but throughout the US, which is
       uncommon in studies of the urban poor.5 We also observe a tenant's interaction with subprime
       lenders. This data allows us to observe demand for high interest loans, which are common among
       poor households (Skiba and Tobacman, 2015; Bhutta et al., 2015).
          This paper also contributes to a growing body of work in sociology and public health. Recent
       studies find that eviction has a negative association with the physical and mental health of tenants
       (Burgard et al., 2012; Desmond and Kimbro, 2015; Sandel et al., 2018), and a positive association
       with depression, stress, material hardship (Desmond and Kimbro, 2015), suicide (Fowler et al.,
       2015; Rojas and Stenberg, Rojas and Stenberg), job loss (Desmond and Gershenson, 2016a), and
       homelessness (Crane and Warnes, 2000; Phinney et al., 2007). Desmond and Bell (2015) provide
       an overview of this literature. Due to the limited availability of administrative data on evictions,
       the evidence is largely based on ethnographic research and short-term surveys of households at
       risk of eviction, including the Milwaukee Area Renters Study. We contribute to this literature by
       assembling a large-scale administrative data set of eviction cases in Cook County that is linked
       to a panel of credit reports, including payday loan account openings and inquiries. Our study
       presents some of the first evidence on the effects of eviction that addresses the endogeneity from
       selection and correlated unobservables. One closely related study is Collinson and Reed (2019),
       an independent and contemporaneous working paper that studies public assistance recipients
       who appear in New York City's eviction court, and also uses a randomized case assignment design
       to examine the impact of eviction on tenants' income, mental health, future public assistance
       receipt, and homelessness.6 In addition, Desmond et al. (2018a) have recently assembled and
       made publicly available area-level data on the number of eviction court cases. Both of these
       research efforts are complementary to our paper and make important advances in data collection
       on evictions.
          The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides institutional details
       relevant for understanding evictions in Cook County. Section 3 describes the data collection and
   4
    Several recent studies in other settings rely on random assignment of cases to judges for identification, including
Kling (2006); Berube and Green (2007); Green and Winik (2010); Dahl et al. (2014); Maestas et al. (2013); Dobbie and
Song (2015); Aizer and Doyle (2015); Bhuller et al. (2019); Mueller-Smith (2015); Dobbie et al. (2018); Hyman (2018).
   5
    Several studies use credit bureau data to measure financial strain, including work on health insurance (Mazumder
and Miller, 2016; Dobkin et al., 2018) and bankruptcy (Dobbie et al., 2017).
   6
     There are methodological differences between Collinson and Reed (2019) and this paper worth highlighting. First,
because Collinson and Reed (2019) do not observe the identity of judges, their instrument is based on courtroom leniency
rather than judge leniency, which is problematic because judges rotate across courtrooms. Second, the treatment in
Collinson and Reed (2019) is the execution of an eviction order by the City Marshal, rather than the court eviction
order. In Appendix B, we explain how this approach may lead to concerns related to identification, measurement, and
interpretation of the identified parameter. Despite these differences, Collinson and Reed (2019) find a similar pattern of
moderate causal effects and we view their results as complementary to those presented here.


                                                            3
linkage process, and provides a description of the population of tenants in the baseline sample.
Section 4 explores selection into eviction court and documents that this is an important source
of selection bias. Section 5 provides new descriptive evidence on the evolution of financial strain
and residential mobility experienced by evicted and non-evicted tenants in the run-up to and
aftermath of court filing. Section 6 formalizes the quasi-experimental research design and tests
the key underlying assumptions. Section 7 presents the main findings of the causal impact of
eviction and a discussion of the mechanisms. Section 8 concludes.


2     Evictions in Cook County
To interpret the causal effects that we estimate in this paper, and to assess the external validity
of our findings, it is necessary to understand the institutional environment in which evictions
take place in Cook County. Below, we provide aggregate empirical facts based on our newly
assembled data, describe the eviction court process, and discuss the representativeness of Cook
County for other urban areas.


2.1     Scope and spatial incidence
Thirty to forty thousand evictions cases are filed every year in Cook County. Figure 1 shows
the number of eviction cases filed and the number of evictions ordered by a judge from 2000 to
2016, the period covered in our analysis. There is a slight downward trend in both the number of
evictions and the number of cases filed, but evictions have been a relatively stable feature of the
rental housing market over this period. As a benchmark for the scope and cyclicality of evictions,
Figure 1 also shows the number of foreclosure filings between 2005 and 2016. The number of
eviction filings exceeds the number of foreclosure filings, except during the financial crisis.
    Evictions are concentrated in low-income neighborhoods. Figure 2 presents a map of the first
municipal district of Cook County, which includes the City of Chicago, and depicts the number
of evictions relative to the total number of occupied rental units in each census tract, for the
year 2010. While evictions occur across all of Cook County, they are concentrated in Chicago's
poorer south and southwest side neighborhoods. We find that more than 44 percent of evictions
occur in census tracts with more than 20 percent of residents living below the poverty line, and
more than 22 percent of evictions occur in census tracts with more than 30 percent of residents
living below the poverty line. This finding is consistent with Desmond (2012), Desmond and
Shollenberger (2015), and Desmond and Gershenson (2016b) who find that eviction is a common
occurrence in poor communities in Milwaukee. In the City of Chicago, the census tracts with
the highest concentration of evictions have more than 10 percent of occupied rental units with at
least one eviction per year, which is four times the city-wide eviction rate of 2.5 percent.




                                                 4
         2.2     The eviction process
         This section summarizes the legal process surrounding eviction.7 To begin an eviction, the
         landlord must serve the tenant a written notice, which includes the reason for termination of the
         lease, and the requisite number of days until the lease will terminate. The notice must list all
         tenants whose names are on the lease, and it will typically refer to tenants who are not on the
         lease as "any and all unknown occupants." The period before termination varies depending on
         the reason for discontinuation of the lease; for instance, nonpayment of rent has a 5-day notice
         period, using the property for the furtherance of a criminal offense has a 5-day notice period, and
         breaking a rule in the lease such as a prohibition of pets has a 10-day notice period. The data
         does not include the reason for eviction; however, studies of eviction court in other cities have
         found nonpayment of rent the most common reason for eviction (Desmond et al., 2013).8 The
         landlord has discretion over whether and when to serve a termination notice. Chicago has no
         official policy specifying the number of days a tenant may be late on the rent before the landlord
         is allowed to serve a notice.
             If the number of days in the written notice elapses without resolution, the landlord has a right
         to take legal action and file an eviction case with the clerk in the Circuit Court of Cook County.
         The case filing is the starting point from which we observe evictions in our study. The landlord
         must file the case in the district where the property is located.9 When filing, the landlord must
         decide whether to file a single action case, in which he seeks only possession of the property, or
         a joint action case, in which he seeks both possession and a money judgment. At the time of
         filing, the landlord or his attorney can select a return date for the first hearing, which must be
         at least 14 days from the date the case is filed. In our data, the earliest available date is almost
         always selected.
             At the time of filing, the case is randomly assigned to a courtroom on the selected date
         by a computer algorithm, in accordance with the Circuit Court of Cook County official policy
         (General Order 97-5, effective June 2, 1997). The landlord is notified of the court room number
         and time slot to which the case has been randomly assigned, but is not provided with the name
         of the judge who will preside over the hearing. Our data include the initial judge assignment,
         which we use to construct our instrument.
             Cases may end up being ruled on by a different judge than the one initially assigned, for one
         of three reasons. First, if the defendant has not been successfully served a court summons by
   7
    Appendix C contains further details. The relevant legislation can be found in the Municipal Code of Chicago
Residential Landlords and Tenants Ordinance (RLTO) and the Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS). Particularly relevant
are the Forcible Entry and Detainer Act (735 ILCS 5/9) and the Civil Practice Act (735 ILCS 5/2).
   8
     Following the notice, if the tenant pays the full amount of rent due, the landlord must accept the payment and
loses the right to evict the tenant. In the City of Chicago, and in many other jurisdictions, accepting partial payment
will cause the landlord to lose the right to evict the tenant based on the filed notice. Such instances will not appear in
our data since the conflict is resolved prior to court filing.
   9
       See Appendix C.3 for a map of the six court districts in Cook County.


                                                            5
         the date scheduled for the first hearing, a new attempt must be made to serve the tenant, and
         the first hearing is rescheduled.10 Rescheduling the first hearing can sometimes lead to the case
         being assigned to a different judge; for example, if the currently assigned judge is transferring
         out of eviction court or is on leave. Second, either party has a right to request assignment of a
         new judge once. The case is then randomly assigned to another judge.11 Third, either party can
         request a trial by jury, which will result in the assignment of a jury trial judge, but such cases
         are rare; they comprise only 3 percent of total case volume. Since requests for a new judge may
         be endogenous to the initial judge assignment, we use the initial judge assignment to construct
         our leniency measure.12
             Hearings in eviction court are typically concluded quickly. Court observation studies have
         found that the average eviction hearing is completed in less than 2 minutes in Cook County
         (Doran et al., 2003). The judge's main decision is whether to grant the landlord an eviction
         order. For joint action cases, in which the landlord is additionally seeking a money judgment,
         the judge also decides the amount, if any, to award the landlord. If the judge decides against an
         eviction order, the case is dismissed, and no money judgment is awarded. We discuss dismissals
         in greater detail below.
             The vast majority of tenants (97%) are not represented by an attorney. This stands in
         contrast to the high proportion of represented landlords (75%). Figure 3 provides an overview of
         possible trajectories an eviction case can take through the court system, as well as a breakdown
         of the fraction of cases that follows each path in our data. About two out of three cases result in
         an order for eviction.
             If an eviction order is granted, the landlord has to subsequently file the order with the Sheriff's
         Office and pay a nonrefundable $60.50 administrative fee. A sheriff's deputy will then execute
         the eviction order, which involves changing the locks and removing any possessions. The sheriff
         does not execute all orders for possession, because the landlord may neglect to file the order or
         to pay the sheriff, or because occupants voluntarily leave after the judge's order. According to
         data from the Cook County Sheriff's Office from 2011 to 2015, only 50.6 percent of the cases in
         our data with an eviction order are filed with the Sheriff's Office, and 51.8 percent of those are
         executed. For executed evictions, the median time between when the judge issues the eviction
         order and when the eviction takes place is 71 days.13 Tenants do not know the exact date on
  10
    If the tenant cannot be served after multiple attempts, the judge can allow the case to proceed without the
defendant, though in that circumstance no money judgment can be awarded. In about 10 percent of cases, the case is
dismissed prior to the tenant being successfully served, which may occur if the tenant has moved out or if the tenant
and landlord reach an agreement.
  11
       In the court dockets, 5.9% of cases involve a judge transfer.
  12
       The method for deriving this information from the case histories is detailed in Appendix D.2.
  13
    Although enforcement of the order may occur as soon as 24 hours after the order has been filed with the Sheriff's
Office, the length of time it takes to complete the eviction is determined by the capacity constraints of the Sheriff's
Office and by a rule that prohibits enforcement of eviction if the temperature is below 15 degrees Fahrenheit. Also, no
evictions are executed between Christmas and New Year's Day.


                                                              6
        which the eviction will be executed. The Cook County Sheriff's Office publishes their planned
        schedule only 3 days in advance.


        2.3      How representative is Cook County?
        Cook County's eviction court procedures are similar to many other eviction courts across the
        United States. The process from filing an eviction case to the execution of an order typically
        takes several months, which is similar to the duration in other county courts. Other notable
        commonalities are the high proportion of unrepresented tenants, the public accessibility of court
        records, and the swiftness with which eviction hearings are concluded (Hartman and Robinson,
        2003; Greiner et al., 2012; Desmond, 2012; Krent et al., 2016).
            The regulatory environment of the rental housing market in Cook County is also broadly
        similar to that of most medium to large American cities, with a handful of exceptions. Cook
        County has no rent-controlled housing, which can affect landlords' incentives to evict as well as
        tenants' ability to find new housing if evicted (Diamond et al., 2019). The absence of rent control
        is common in American cities, but notable exceptions are Washington, D.C., and some cities
        in California, Maryland, New Jersey and New York. Like most cities, Cook County does not
        have a comprehensive social safety net aimed at preventing housing instability or homelessness.
        For example, there is no "right to shelter" which would guarantee recently evicted individuals
        access to a homeless shelter.14 Finally, in Cook County it is legal for a landlord to decline to
        extend a lease beyond its stated termination date without citing a specific reason. Such "no
        cause" evictions are allowed in most U.S. cities.15 Taken together, these facts suggest that Cook
        County's institutional environment is similar to most American cities, though potentially less
        representative of some large cities with more heavily regulated rental markets.


        3      Data collection and linkage
        The analysis in this paper relies on extensive data collection efforts that have brought together
        detailed court case histories spanning a period of seventeen years. These records have been linked
        to longitudinal data on defendants' credit reports. Below, we outline the structure of these data
        sets, linkage procedures, and sample selection criteria. Further details on data cleaning and
        linkage are available in Appendix D.2.
  14
       As of this writing, only Massachusetts, New York City, and Washington D.C. have a right to shelter.
  15
   Cities that prohibit or place restrictions on "no cause" evictions include Seattle, San Francisco, Berkeley, San Diego,
New York City, New Jersey, and New Hampshire.




                                                            7
         3.1     Court records
         Our data set on court histories includes the near-universe of eviction cases filed in Cook County
         in the years 2000-2016. We assembled this data through the collection of public records,
         supplemented with proprietary data sourced from Record Information Services (RIS), a private
         company that compiles court records in Illinois. The resulting case-level data set includes the
         defendant's name and address, which are used to link the court records to other data sets. The
         data includes all events entered into the electronic case file, beginning with the filing by the
         landlord or his attorney. The electronic case files include information on the case type (single or
         joint action), filing date, judge's name, plaintiff's name, defendant's name, attorneys' names if
         any, the amount of money claimed by the plaintiff in a joint action case (ad damnum amount),
         and details of each hearing, motion, and decision in the case. Importantly, the court records
         include eviction orders and money judgments issued by the judge. We supplement these data
         with records from the Sheriff's Office on court summons and the timing of forcible evictions
         from 2010-2016, which were obtained by FOIA request. Using tenant addresses, we also append
         neighborhood characteristics using data from the American Community Survey.

         Sample restrictions on court records.                  Our sample of court cases includes all cases
         filed between January 1, 2000 and December 31, 2016. We exclude from our analysis cases that
         were not concluded by the end of this period. The full sample of cases includes 772,846 named
         individuals in 583,871 cases.16 As laid out in Appendix Table D.1, we first drop eviction cases
         associated with businesses, cases associated with condominiums, cases for which the defendant's
         name is not provided, and cases involving more than $100,000 in claimed damages. After these
         restrictions, we are left with 707,213 named individuals across 546,190 cases, which represent
         our main sample of court records. We use this sample to construct leniency measures and to
         link credit bureau data. For our IV analysis, we further restrict the sample to cases in which
         the judge presided over at least 10 cases that year, and to cases in which at least two judges
         presided over eviction cases in that week and district. This sample of cases includes 599,366
         named individuals in 466,548 cases, and includes 250 judges who presided over 10 cases in at
         least one year. The average judge in our sample presided over more than 700 cases per year.

         Conceptualizing treatment and counterfactual. We define a case as ending in eviction
         if the judge issues an eviction order. In the court records, this is entered as an "order for possession."
         This definition of an eviction is similar to the one used by Desmond et al. (2018b), who compile
         the most complete national database of eviction filings and executions to date, based on court
         records.17
  16
       There are more named individuals than cases because cases commonly list multiple individuals.
  17
   An alternative definition of treatment is the execution of the eviction order by the Sheriff's Office ­ i.e., the
combination of a judge's order and the Sheriff's deputy execution of that order. However, this definition introduces



                                                            8
             Cases that do not end in eviction are dismissed, and there are multiple types of dismissals.
         Dismissals "with prejudice" bar the landlord from bringing another eviction case with the same
         allegations against the tenant. Dismissals "without prejudice" permit the landlord to present
         the same case in court again. Dismissals may also be recorded as "dismissed by stipulation or
         agreement," which reflect a settlement in which the tenant may agree to move out or the parties
         agree on a payment plan.18
             There are several reasons an eviction may generate costs for the tenant. Landlords may screen
         tenants based on prior evictions, making it harder for tenants to secure a future rental contract;
         other potential creditors may do the same. An eviction is also recorded as a civil judgment on
         the tenant's credit report if it is a joint action case and it ends in a money judgment. An eviction
         also requires the tenant to move and incur the costs associated with relocating and reorienting
         the household's work and schooling arrangements. A dismissal increases the likelihood of the
         tenant remaining in their current residence, though this is not guaranteed.


         3.2      Credit bureau records
         Our primary measures of financial strain come from credit files held by Experian, one of the
         three largest credit bureaus in the United States.19 The credit report data are biennial snapshots
         from March, 2005, to March, 2017, and an additional period, September, 2010. In addition to
         the linked sample, we also have a panel of a 10 percent random sample of individuals living in
         Cook County in March, 2011, which is linked to the other observation periods. An advantage of
         the credit bureau data is that it allows us to follow individuals across eviction cases. We are also
         able to follow individuals across neighborhoods, not only within Cook County, but throughout
         the US, which is uncommon in studies of the urban poor.20 Another feature of the data is that
         we are able to observe a tenant's interaction with subprime lenders, which we believe is a first in
         the housing instability literature.
             We analyze the following sets of financial outcomes: overall financial health, unpaid bills,
         durable consumption, and access to credit. We also study demand for high-interest loans using
         subprime borrowing data, described below. Finally, we study mobility and neighborhood poverty.
         These outcomes are described in detail in Appendix D and are briefly described here. All dollar
         amounts are expressed in 2016 dollars using the CPI-U for the Chicago metro area.
             We measure overall financial health using VantageScore 3.0, which is on a scale of 300-850;

challenges related to identification, interpretation, and measurement. We discuss these challenges in Appendix B.
  18
     In order to characterize the fraction of dismissals that result in the tenant moving out, we hand-collected additional
court microfilm documents for a random sample of court cases ending in dismissal, which we describe in Appendix D.3.
We find that, for cases with available information, approximately half of dismissals involve the tenant agreeing to pay
the landlord some amount, and slightly more than half of dismissals involve the tenant agreeing to move.
  19
       Avery et al. (2003) provide a detailed description of this data.
  20
    The random sample does not include the time-varying ZIP code of residence, so we are unable to compare move
rates in the random sample to those in our linked sample.


                                                              9
       scores under 600 are considered subprime by the credit bureau. We measure unpaid bills as the
       total balance in collections. Collections represent unpaid debt, such as credit card balances, which
       the original lender decides to turn over to a collections agency following a period of delinquency
       (typically at least 30 days).21 Our proxy for durable goods consumption is any positive balance
       on an auto loan or lease, following an approach taken by Dobkin et al. (2018) and Dobbie et al.
       (2018). We measure whether the tenant has no open source of revolving credit, such as a credit
       card, which serves as a proxy for having limited access to credit.22
          The credit bureau data are also linked to the largest available database of subprime borrowing
       behavior. We measure inquiries into and openings of high-interest single payment microloans.
       These account inquiries and openings include those originating from either online or storefront
       subprime lenders. We observe subprime loan inquiries for all months between September 2011
       and November 2018, and subprime account openings for all months between January 2010 and
       November 2018. Note that we only observe subprime borrowing activity for consumers who have
       a record in our main credit file. Approximately 66.8 percent of the matched credit sample have
       a payday loan account inquiry at some point in the sample period, and 17.28 percent have an
       account opening.23 These data are described in more detail in Appendix D.1.
          The credit bureau has supplementary information including ZIP code of residence and
       demographic information including gender and year of birth.24 We measure moves as a change in
       ZIP code, and neighborhood poverty as the ZCTA-level poverty rate. There are 215 ZIP codes
       in Cook County, and hence the ZIP code represents a relatively fine unit of geography.25


       3.3     Data linkage
       The court sample was linked by Experian to credit report data by searching name and address
       identifiers against its master file that includes a name and address history. The overall match
       rate is 61.3 percent, which is slightly lower but comparable to match rates of studies that use
  21
    Collections remain on the credit report for up to 7 years from the date the debt first became delinquent and was
not brought current; after 7 years is it automatically removed from the report.
  22
    A revolving account includes any account in which the individual can carry a balance and is not required to pay
the entire amount at the end of the month.
  23
     The high-interest loans we study are single payment microloans that originate from traditional storefront or online
subprime lenders. This data is from Clarity, a credit reporting agency that maintains a subprime database of over 62
million unique consumers. We refer to these loans as "payday loans," even though not all of these microloans are tied to
the individual's paycheck.
  24
     Evictions are not directly observable on a credit report, but they may be included in the aggregated category of
civil judgments if the decision includes a money judgment. In those cases, the credit bureau reports the presence of a
money judgment and the judgment amount awarded by the court.
  25
    From our discussions with data experts at Experian, addresses are recorded through the reporting and inquiry
process, and the ZIP code is not necessarily the most recent address reported, but is the modal address of recently
reported ZIP codes. See Lee and van der Klaauw (2010) for a detailed description of the FRBNY consumer credit
panel, which is a similar data set to the one used here, and Molloy and Shan (2010), which uses it to track residential
moves surrounding foreclosure.


                                                          10
       a similar strategy to link administrative data sets.26 In our analysis, we restrict the sample to
       those individuals who are matched to a credit report prior to the eviction filing date, so that the
       match is not endogenous to the eviction order.
           The matched sample are those who are "credit visible," meaning they have a credit record.
       The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau reports that in low-income neighborhoods, slightly
       more than 70 percent of adults have a credit record (Brevoort et al., 2015). We expect this
       number to be higher in our population since, in Chicago, having a utility bill alone is sufficient
       to generate a credit record, and individuals with their name on a lease are likely to have had a
       utility bill.27
           To better understand our matched sample and how it relates to the overall population of
       tenants in eviction court, we explore the characteristics of credit record matches in Appendix
       E. Appendix Table E.2 shows that evicted tenants are 1.9 percentage points less likely to be
       matched to a credit record, and tenants without legal representation are 1.5 percentage points
       less likely to be matched, while tenants in richer neighborhoods are only slightly more likely to
       be matched: a $1000 increase in median household income at the ZIP code is associated with a
       0.1 percentage point increase in the match rate.
           There is minimal attrition in the matched credit panel; an individual who appears in one
       period has over 99 percent likelihood of appearing in each future period. We explore attrition
       in Appendix Table E.1, which shows that attrition is unrelated to stringency. We regress an
       indicator for appearing in a subsequent filing year on judge stringency for each pair of years in
       the sample, and cannot reject a null effect of stringency on appearing in a future credit bureau
       record for any pair of years.


       3.4      Summary statistics
       Table 1 presents summary statistics for the sample used in the IV analysis (columns 1 and 2), and
       compares this sample to our 10 percent random sample from Cook County, which we reweight
       to match the ZIP code distribution of eviction cases (column 3). Comparing the eviction court
       sample to the random sample, the eviction court sample is far more likely to be female (64 percent
       compared to 50 percent) and is younger than the random sample (40 years old, on average,
       compared to 46 in the random sample). Individuals who have an eviction case are more likely

  26
     For example, Dobkin et al. (2018), using additional identifiers unavailable to us here (SSNs), are able to match 72
percent of their Medicaid sample, and the Oregon Health Experiment has a match rate of 68.5 percent.
  27
     Up until the summer of 2016, People's Gas, the main natural gas provider in Chicago, provided "full-file" reporting
to credit bureaus, allowing individuals who would otherwise have no credit score due to thin or no credit history to
have a credit score, potentially helping many build credit (Turner et al., 2008, 2012). As pointed out by PERC (2006),
Illinois was one of the few states with any utility company making full-file reports, which suggests that a much larger
portion of our sample may have credit scores and credit histories compared to cities in other states.




                                                          11
       to be black than a randomly selected individual from their neighborhood.28 Within the sample
       of defendants in eviction court, evicted tenants are more likely to be black than non-evicted
       tenants, although we note that our race measure is imprecise because we use a probabilistic
       imputation based on name and Census tract, with a 75 percent probability threshold.
           Tenants in eviction court have substantially more debt relative to individuals in the random
       sample from the same neighborhood: the average collections balance for tenants in eviction court,
       averaged over the 13-36 month period after filing, is over $3,000 compared to about $1,200 for the
       random sample. As we will show in the event studies presented in Section 5, most of this debt is
       accumulated before the eviction filing. Similarly, the use of payday loans is much higher among
       tenants in eviction court compared to the random sample: payday inquiries among tenants in
       eviction court are nearly double that of the random sample, and payday accounts opened are
       substantially higher as well (38 percent higher for the evicted group, 93 percent higher for the
       non-evicted group).
           Table 1 also reports the fraction of our eviction sample with a subsequent eviction case, either
       at any address, or at a different address than the reference case. Tenants who appear in eviction
       court are likely to appear in a future eviction court case: a tenant who is evicted has a 16.8
       percent chance of appearing in eviction court within 36 months, at a different address, compared
       to 17.4 for the non-evicted tenants.


       4     Selection into eviction court
       The empirical approach that has been available to researchers studying eviction thus far is a
       comparison of evicted tenants to observationally similar renters, using survey data. This prior
       literature uses multivariate regression (Burgard et al., 2012; Desmond and Shollenberger, 2015) or
       matching methods (Desmond and Kimbro, 2015; Desmond et al., 2015; Desmond and Gershenson,
       2016a), which rely on the assumption that, conditional on observables, eviction is effectively
       random. This is a strong assumption, because evicted individuals and individuals not facing
       an eviction case are likely to differ in unobservable aspects, which are likely to impact future
       outcomes. The extent to which these research designs are able to isolate causal relationships
       therefore depends on strong, largely untestable assumptions. In this section, we document the
       extent of selection into eviction court, and we show that the effect attributed to eviction is much
       smaller when the comparison group is non-evicted tenants.
           For our first analysis, we append the 10 percent random sample from Cook County to our
       court sample, restricting the random sample to those over age 21 without a mortgage, and
       randomly assigning a placebo filing month. We also reweight the regression sample so that the
       random sample of individuals matches our eviction court sample in their distribution across ZIP
  28
    Note that the neighborhood characteristics of the eviction court sample are similar to those of the random sample
by construction, because of the reweighting.


                                                         12
       codes.
           Comparing the eviction court sample to the random sample, we can replicate the finding
       from the existing literature that the effect of eviction is large and negative. The first bar of
       Figure 4 shows a nearly 100 point difference in average credit scores between evicted individuals
       and a representative sample from the neighborhood. For context, the credit score is on a scale of
       300-850, and 300-579 is considered "very poor." The second bar adds controls for age, gender,
       and year, which does little to close this gap. These results document large differences in levels
       between evicted individuals and similar individuals from the neighborhood, and this difference
       remains large after controlling for observables. One limitation of this exercise compared to the
       literature is that the administrative data contains substantially fewer controls than the survey
       data used in past papers.29
           The third bar of Figure 4 compares evicted and non-evicted tenants within the eviction court
       sample; the average difference in credit score is reduced to less than 20 points, providing strong
       evidence that there is substantial selection into eviction court. This difference changes little
       when controlling for observable covariates. Finally, the fifth bar additionally controls for lagged
       credit score prior to the eviction case. Controlling for lagged credit score further reduces the
       gap, demonstrating that there is selection into the eviction decision even once we restrict our
       comparison to those in eviction court.30
           These results suggest that there are two important sources of selection that must be addressed
       when attempting to quantify the causal impact of eviction: selection into appearing in eviction
       court, and selection into the court case ending in eviction. To deal with the first source of
       selection, we use court records that allow us to compare evicted individuals to individuals in
       eviction court who were not evicted. To deal with the second source of selection, we employ an
       IV strategy, which we describe in more detail in Section 6. For the remainder of the paper, we
       use the eviction court sample. We now turn to the dynamics of financial strain surrounding the
       eviction filing.


       5        Trends in financial strain and residential mobility
       This section presents an event study analysis comparing defendants who are evicted to defendants
       whose cases are dismissed. Studying the dynamics into and out of eviction court, we document
       substantial increases in financial strain for both evicted and non-evicted defendants beginning
       two years prior to the case, and we show no substantial relative increase in financial strain for
       the evicted individuals after the case.
  29
    For example, Desmond and Bell (2015) control for income, race, highest level of education, gender, marital status,
children, age, past criminal record, past job loss, past relationship dissolution, and housing assistance receipt.
  30
     Appendix Figure G.1 depicts the time path of selection into eviction court for all main analysis variables. This
figure shows selection by financial strain, as measured by levels of indebtedness and demand for payday loans, for both
evicted and non-evicted tenants, relative to the random sample.


                                                          13
          We use the following regression, where r indexes the month relative to the eviction case filing:

                                                         F         F
                                  yit = t +  × Ei +          r +         r × Ei +   it .                  (5.1)
                                                       r=S         r=S

       In the above equation, Ei represents an indicator for the case outcome being eviction, r
       represents coefficients on indicators for month relative to the case filing month, and r are the
       coefficients on indicators for relative month interacted with the eviction outcome. For this
       analysis S = -41, F = 72, and the omitted month is S = -42. The only controls included are
       calendar year dummies (t ). Figure 6 plots the r , depicted as open circles, as well as these
       coefficients added to  + r , depicted as closed circles. For both sets of coefficients we add in the
       non-evicted group mean in S = -42 so that the magnitudes are easy to interpret.31
          Overlaid on these nonparametric event studies, we depict a parametric specification of
       Equation 5.1, where the right hand side variables include a cubic polynomial in relative month
       prior to eviction filing (r < 0), a cubic polynomial in relative month for the months following
       eviction filing (r  0), and these two cubic polynomials interacted with the eviction case outcome.
       Again, we add in the baseline mean for ease of interpretation, and the only controls are calendar
       year dummies. We require the polynomials on either side of the eviction filing to connect at
       r = 0, a choice motivated by the nonparametric event studies, which do not suggest a discrete
       jump at the time of filing.
          Figure 6 reports results of the event study for several sets of outcomes, while Appendix Table
       2 reports DiD estimates, based on the parametric specification, at different time horizons relative
       to r = -12. As shown in the top left panel of Figure 6, tenants who appear in eviction court
       have very poor credit in the run up to eviction and those whose cases end in eviction have worse
       baseline credit scores than the non-evicted group. Both groups experience declining credit scores,
       by about 12 credit points, in the 24 months prior to the filing date. Remarkably, the two groups'
       credit scores remain broadly parallel throughout the sample period, suggesting that an eviction
       does not have an additional scarring effect on credit scores for the evicted group. However, it
       takes 4-5 years for the two groups to return to their pre-filing peak.
          The top right panel of Figure 6 shows the event study for total balances in collections. Prior
       to the eviction case being filed, both evicted and non-evicted groups have over $2,750 of debt
       in collections, and both groups see roughly parallel increases in balances in collections. After
       eviction court, both groups experience a steep rise in their balances in collections ­ the evicted
       group by approximately $1,000, the non-evicted group by $750. While the gap in collections
       balances between the groups widens, the gap is small compared to their average pre-filing balances.
       The difference is also small compared to the overall large increase in collections observed for
  31
    There is a tradeoff between including a longer time series and introducing composition effects in the coefficients.
Appendix Table G.1 shows robustness to several alternative specifications that include restricting to a balanced panel,
adding individual fixed effects, and restricting the sample to individuals' first cases.


                                                         14
       both groups. In the five years after the case filing, the average collections balance never returns
       to the pre-filing average for either group.32
          An eviction may be mechanically related to collections debt if the defendant does not pay
       the money judgment associated with the eviction case. In this situation, the plaintiff can use
       the court process to collect the money, including obtaining a citation to discover assets, wage
       garnishment, and using a collections agency. In Appendix Figure G.3, we explore this possibility
       by presenting the collections event study separately for joint action and single action cases. This
       figure shows a broadly similar evolution of collections debt regardless of whether the plaintiff
       seeks a money judgment, suggesting the observed effect is not mechanical.
          The bottom two panels of Figure 6 depict the results for having an auto loan or lease and for
       having no revolving line of credit. The auto loan variable exhibits flat or slightly increasing trends
       in the run-up to eviction court, followed by a drop after filing, along with a widening gap between
       evicted and non-evicted tenants. This suggests a decrease in expenditures or consumption of
       durable goods. Non-evicted tenants also exhibit this pattern of decreased consumption following
       the filing, which shows that both groups of tenants are experiencing strain that coincides with
       the timing of the case.33 The bottom right panel of Figure 6 shows that both groups of tenants
       have limited access to credit in the run-up to eviction court. Prior to court, about 55 percent of
       the non-evicted group and 60 percent of the evicted group have no source of revolving credit
       such as a credit card. This rate notably increases for both groups following the court filing and
       the gap between evicted and non-evicted widens, suggesting that an eviction has an effect on
       credit access.
          We now turn to payday loans. The data includes single payment microloan inquiries and
       account openings. The inquiries and account openings include both online and storefront loans,
       and provide insight into the demand for cash advances among tenants in eviction court. The left
       panel of Figure 7 shows the event study for inquiries into payday loans, depicting a dramatic
       increase in the 3 years leading up to eviction filing, from about 1 percent per month to about 1.6
       percent per month, which is followed by an immediate decline for both groups after the filing
       date.
          Payday account openings also exhibit a striking increase in the run-up to eviction court.
       After the eviction filing, while payday account openings fall for both groups, the non-evicted
       group has higher long-run levels of payday loan openings relative to the evicted group. The fact
       that inquiries fall in parallel following eviction court but openings remain higher for non-evicted
  32
     Appendix Figure G.2 further disaggregates the collections event study into the four largest collections categories,
revealing that utilities, retail, and medical debt categories all increase $100 to $150, on average, in the 24 months prior
to filing, and continue to increase by another $50 to $100 in the 24 months after.
  33
    These descriptive results are not sensitive to how we define a court-ordered eviction. In Appendix Figure G.7 we
show event studies separately by whether a dismissal is "with prejudice," meaning the case is dismissed and the landlord
may not bring the case again with the same allegations. These event studies disaggregated by case outcome display the
same broad descriptive patterns.



                                                           15
tenants suggests that an eviction may have a negative effect on the probability of having a loan
approved.
   The event studies provide several important takeaways. First, regardless of the case outcome,
households in eviction court show signs of financial strain two to three years prior to having a
case filed against them ­ with credit scores falling, collections rising, and increased inquiries into
payday loans. Second, even though this analysis restricts the comparison to tenants in eviction
court, we still find that evicted tenants are negatively selected on prior financial outcomes, with
lower credit scores and higher total balances in collections four years before the filing of the cases.
Finally, the event studies do not support the hypothesis that an eviction generates large and
lasting financial strain, but instead suggest that eviction may exacerbate the initial decline and
slow the recovery.
   Appendix Figures G.3-G.5 reproduce the regressions behind Figure 6 in order to contrast
these descriptive patterns for several subgroups: (i) joint versus single action cases, (ii) individuals
without prior eviction cases versus individuals with prior cases, (iii) multi-headed versus single-
headed households (as determined by the number of names listed as defendants in the case), (iv)
subprime versus prime credit score two credit periods prior to filing. This sample division is
based on a credit score threshold of 600. These analyses of subgroups look similar to the main
effects with a few nuanced takeaways.
   First, the joint action cases reveal more significant impacts of an eviction on credit access
than single action cases. For example, there is a widening gap between evicted and non-evicted
tenants in having a source of revolving credit in the aftermath of the eviction filing date, which
is present for joint action cases but not single action cases. In addition, the impact of eviction on
having an auto loan is much larger for joint action cases than single action cases. These results
are consistent with a civil judgment affecting individuals' ability to borrow and to finance durable
goods purchases. Second, in the run-up to eviction court, those without prior eviction cases
have both higher levels and steeper growth in their demand for payday loans compared to those
with prior cases. Third, in contrast to multi-headed households, single-headed households have
a steeper rise in their lack of access to revolving credit following eviction court. Single-headed
households also appear to be harder hit in terms of durable goods consumption.
   Lastly, we compare defendants with subprime credit scores and defendant with non-subprime
credit scores 25-48 months before the case. Defendants with non-subprime credit scores have a
precipitous drop of 100 points in their credit score in the 24 months prior to filing. This decline
suggests an acute source of distress, such as a drop in income or an increase in expenditures.
Following eviction, these non-subprime borrowers experience a large ­ 200 percent ­ increase in
unpaid bills and a doubling in the probability of not having a credit card.




                                                  16
       DiD Estimates
       In Figure 6, evicted and non-evicted defendants exhibit similar pre-trends, suggesting that the
       event studies can be used to provide causal estimates of the impact of an eviction using a
       difference-in-differences design. Appendix Table 2 reports DiD estimates of the effect of eviction,
       comparing the difference between evicted and non-evicted tenants at 12, 36, and 60 month
       outcome horizons relative to the difference at r = -12. These estimates are based on the
       parametric specification presented in the event studies depicted in Figure 6.
           The DiD estimates reported in Table 2 provide magnitudes for what is observed in the event
       study figures, and Table G.1 explores the sensitivity of these estimates to including individual
       fixed effects, restricting the sample to a balanced panel, and restricting to those with no prior
       cases. Under the assumption of common trends, these tables confirm that an eviction has almost
       no effect on credit score and has a statistically significant 126 to 262 dollar effect on collections
       balances at the 36-month horizon. An eviction has a larger impact on access to credit, reflected
       in the decline in the probability of an auto loan of 1.1 to 1.5 percentage points at the 36-month
       horizon, and an increase in the probability of having no source of revolving credit by 1.4 to
       3.7 percentage points at the 36-month horizon. The negative effect on having a revolving line
       of credit or a car loan persists at the 60-month horizon. Overall, these results provide initial
       evidence that the impact of an eviction on financial strain is small, but may have a meaningful
       impact on having a credit card or auto loan.


       Analysis of residential moves
       For the event study analysis of residential moves, we modify Equation 5.1 so that r is now
       measured in years relative to the filing year, rather than months relative to the filing month. We
       drop the September 2010 period, so that the sample years are March 2005-2017 biennially, which
       allows us to interpret residential ZIP code moves over constant, 24-month intervals. For this
       analysis, we include only individuals who are observed 4 or more years prior to eviction filing;
       hence individuals are observed in years r = -5, -3, . . . , 5, 7 or r = -4, -2, . . . , 6, 8.34 We define
       a ZIP code move as a change in the individual's 5-digit ZIP code relative to the ZIP code 24
       months prior. We choose the baseline (omitted) years r = -5, -4. Thus, the coefficient on r in
       Equation 5.1 is the probability of moving from year r - 2 to year r for the non-evicted group. In
       the figures, as before, we add the non-evicted group mean in the base period to the coefficients
       for ease of interpretation.
           The left panel of Figure 8 presents the estimates of r and  + r + r , along with the 95
       percent confidence intervals. There are several patterns worth pointing out. First, 2-year ZIP
       code move rates are high, even several years prior to eviction filing. The non-evicted group has a
       move probability of nearly 45 percent over the period from r = -5 to r = -3, while the evicted
34
     We find qualitatively similar results if we restrict to individuals observed at least 3 years prior to filing.


                                                             17
group has around a 46 percent move probability over the same period. For comparison, the
percent of renters that move within a 2-year span in Cook County is approximately 24 percent,
according to our estimates based on the American Community Survey. Hence, tenants in eviction
court are a highly mobile population, and this is true long before the eviction case filing.
    Second, the point estimate spikes at r = 1 and peaks at r = 2, reflecting much higher ZIP code
move rates in the 1-2 years following eviction filing. In particular, the 2-year ZIP code move rate
jumps about 7.5 percentage points between the period from r = -2 to r = 0 and from r = -1
to r = 1. The evicted group has a higher move probability over the entire period represented in
Figure 8, and these estimates are statistically significant at the 5 percent significance level. The
gap in move rates between evicted and non-evicted is widest over the period from r = 0 to r = 2
­ a gap of around 3.5 percentage points, which is about 8 percent of the non-evicted group mean.
    These estimates reflect ZIP code-level moves, and may mask significant differences in move
probabilities within ZIP codes. Appendix J provides an alternative analysis using linked address
histories from InfoUSA. This alternative data source allows us to consider unit-level moves, but
suffers from high levels of missingness and lower match rates. In the InfoUSA data, we find that
more than 20 percent of observed moves in the matched sample are within ZIP code, suggesting
we underestimate overall mobility for both group.
    Overall, the results show both evicted and non-evicted groups have relatively high move
probabilities in both the run-up and the aftermath of eviction court, and it takes 5 years to
return to the pre-filing level. The figure also suggests that the difference in move rates of those
with an eviction order compared to those with a dismissal is small relative to the overall high
degree of housing instability for both groups.
    The right panel of Figure 8 re-estimates the event study but with a measure of neighborhood
quality as the outcome: the neighborhood (ZCTA-level) poverty rate. The main takeaways from
this panel are that households from higher poverty neighborhoods are more likely to be evicted,
and the gap between evicted and non-evicted widens slightly following eviction. Yet the overall
trend is downward for both groups after three years, indicating that over time both groups are
able to relocate to neighborhoods with lower poverty rates. Note that the only included controls
are calendar year fixed effects; hence the trend downward may reflect improvements over the
lifecycle.
    We report DiD estimates of neighborhood moves and neighborhood quality in Table 3 and
robustness results in Appendix Table G.2. The DiD regressions are the same regressions as those
underlying Figure 8, with estimated differences at several time horizons relative to the difference
in the year prior to eviction filing. The estimates reflect what we visually report in Figure 8,
that the effect of an eviction on neighborhood moves is small. There is a small effect on the
tenant's neighborhood poverty rate at one year after filing relative to the year prior to filing,
increasing the poverty rate by 0.20 off a base of 17.43, but this effect disappears three to five
years after filing.



                                                 18
6     Instrumental variable analysis
In this section, we present an IV strategy to address the bias resulting from selection and
simultaneity. We discuss how the assumptions that underlie the model are supported by the
institutional environment for court-ordered evictions, and provide empirical evidence in support
of these assumptions.


6.1     Empirical framework
Our empirical strategy exploits the random assignment of judges to eviction cases. Let Ei be an
indicator equal to 1 if the judge orders an eviction for household i, Zj (i) the stringency measure
of judge j assigned to i's case, and Yi the outcome of interest. To estimate the local average
treatment effect (LATE), we use two stage least squares (2SLS) with first and second stage
equations:

                                      Ei = Zj (i) + Xi  + i
                                      Yi = Ei + Xi  + i

Here Xi is a set of controls that includes district-year fixed effects and household characteristics.
    For judge leniency to be a valid instrument, several assumptions need to be satisfied. First,
the instrumental relevance condition needs to hold, which means that judge stringency must be a
relevant predictor of the case outcome. Second, we need exogeneity of the instrument, i.e., Zj (i)
and i are independent after conditioning on controls Xi . This assumption implies that judge
leniency affects outcome Yi only through the eviction order decision Ei .
    If the effect of eviction is heterogeneous across individuals, we also require monotonicity in
order to interpret the estimate as a local average treatment effect: i.e., those who are evicted
would also be evicted by a stricter judge, and those who are not evicted would also not be evicted
by a more lenient judge.
    Under these assumptions, the analysis will recover the local average treatment effect (LATE)
of an eviction: the effect of an eviction for tenants who could have received a different ruling
had their case been assigned to a different judge (Imbens and Angrist, 1994). The effects of
an eviction for this group of tenants is policy relevant, since changes in policy are likely to
affect marginal cases in which the judge's discretion makes a difference in the case outcome. In
addition, many recent policy proposals explicitly target the eviction court setting.


6.2     Measuring judge stringency
We estimate judge stringency by computing the yearly leave-out mean eviction rate for the initial
judge assignment, and then residualizing it by district-year fixed effects. We use a residualized
stringency measure to account for differences in case types across districts and changes in

                                                19
       regulation over time. Residualized stringency is constructed using all cases that meet the sample
       restrictions laid out in Section 3.3, and not just the linked sample.
          The histogram in Figure 5 plots the distribution of judge stringency across cases. The
       figure shows that there is a substantial amount of variation in our judge stringency measure. In
       particular, there is a 7 percentage point difference between the 10th percentile and 90th percentile
       of judge leniency. Appendix Section H.2 provides additional robustness checks, showing that the
       first stage does not change notably when we use an alternative procedure for assigning judges
       to cases, when we control for additional judge characteristics, or when we adopt a different
       threshold for the the minimum number of cases a judge must see in a given year for the case to
       be included in the sample.35


       6.3     Validating the empirical design
       This section provides evidence in support of the required assumptions for our research design to
       identify and interpret the LATE. In particular, we validate the random assignment of cases, and
       the relevance, exclusion, and monotonicity assumptions underlying the IV strategy.

       Random assignment. As discussed above, court cases are randomly assigned a room and
       hearing time when the court case is filed. Here, we provide additional empirical evidence that
       random assignment holds in practice. Table 4 shows that case characteristics and defendant
       characteristics predict the eviction outcome but do not predict the residual stringency of the judge
       assigned to the case. The first column presents a regression of the eviction outcome on case and
       defendant characteristics, and shows that all of the observed covariates are statistically significant
       predictors of an eviction outcome. The second column presents results from a regression of judge
       stringency on the same covariates, and shows that all covariates have small and statistically
       insignificant effects on the stringency of the judge assigned to the case. The landlord's total
       number of cases in the sample is not a significant predictor of judge stringency, lending support
       to the idea that even experienced landlords are unable to select a favorable judge.

       Relevance. Next we show that our IV regression has a strong first stage. The black line in
       Figure 5 shows the result of a local linear regression of an eviction order on judge stringency,
       while the histogram shows the underlying distribution of judge stringency in our data. The
       figure shows that there is a strong relationship between judge stringency and the case outcome.
       Appendix Table H.3 shows results for the corresponding linear regression. Stringency has a large
       and statistically significant impact on eviction, with a p-value of less than 0.0001. The F-statistic
       for the full first stage is 86.7 and the partial F-statistic on judge stringency is 1158.9, suggesting
       that the stringency instrument passes standard rule-of-thumb tests for weak instruments.
  35
    Appendix Section H.1 additionally shows that the IV estimates do not change substantially with alternative
constructions of judge stringency, or when using judge fixed effects as instruments.


                                                        20
          Appendix H.2 provides additional robustness checks on the first stage. In particular, Appendix
      Table H.4 shows that the first stage is not sensitive to the sample selection criteria, nor is it
      sensitive to controls for other potential dimensions of judge stringency (e.g., residual judge
      stringency in case length, granting continuances, judgment amount in joint action cases, and
      granting stays). In addition, the first stage is largely unchanged when using an alternative
      judge stringency measure based on the first judge observed in the case history rather than the
      judge assigned at filing. Lastly, we estimate the first stage using a split sample, using stringency
      constructed from single action cases to instrument for eviction in joint action cases, and the
      converse. Across all of these robustness checks, we find that the coefficient on residual stringency
      remains positive, similar to the main specification in magnitude, and is statistically significant
      with small standard errors. These checks provide evidence that our first stage is robust to
      additional controls, different sample-selection criteria, different construction of judge stringency,
      and split-sample estimation of stringency.

      Exclusion. In addition to requiring random assignment, our estimation strategy requires
      exclusion to hold, i.e., that judge stringency only affects tenant outcomes through the eviction
      order. As discussed above, judges make two key decisions: the eviction order and, in joint action
      cases, the judgment amount. Multi-dimensional sentencing makes it more challenging to isolate
      the impact of the component of interest, in this case, the eviction (see, e.g., Mueller-Smith
      (2015) and Bhuller et al. (2019)). Aside from the two main areas of judge discretion, judges may
      also influence other minor aspects of the case. For instance, judges may grant a continuance
      to give the defendant additional time to find legal assistance. Judges may also grant a stay of
      the eviction order, which provides evicted tenants more time to find new housing arrangements
      before the sheriff is permitted to carry out the order.
          We construct additional stringency measures with respect to the judgment amount, the
      propensity to grant a continuance, and the propensity to grant a stay of the order. Similar to
      the stringency measure for eviction orders, these stringency measures are calculated as leave-out
      means by judge-year and are residualized by district-year fixed effects.36 Exclusion will be
      violated if eviction stringency is correlated with the other three measures of stringency, the other
      measures affect outcomes, and they are not directly controlled for in the analysis. Appendix
      Table H.5 evaluates the correlation between the four residual measures of judge stringency. The
      correlations between the various residual stringency measures are small. The largest correlation
      is between eviction stringency and judgment amount stringency, which have a correlation of
      0.098. Column 1 of Appendix Table H.6 shows the first stage regression of eviction on judge
      eviction stringency controlling for the three other measures of judge stringency. While judgment
      amount stringency and continuance stringency are weakly statistically significant predictors of
   36
      Stringency for granting stays is calculated using only cases ending in an eviction order. Judgment amount stringency
is defined as the judgment amount minus the ad damnum amount and is only calculated for joint action cases ending in
an eviction order.


                                                           21
       eviction, the coefficient on eviction stringency is largely unchanged from our main specification.
       In the second column, we regress eviction stringency on the other three stringency measures and
       find that none are statistically significant predictors.37
           As we will show in Section 7, the IV results are largely unchanged when either controlling
       for other dimensions of judge stringency in the first and second stage, or including judgment
       amount as a second endogenous variable and instrumenting with judgment amount stringency.

       Monotonicity. For the IV estimates to be interpreted as local average treatment effects,
       we need the monotonicity assumption to hold. In our context, monotonicity requires that any
       defendant who is not evicted would also not be evicted by a more lenient judge and, conversely,
       that any defendant who is evicted would also be evicted by a more stringent judge. One test of
       the monotonicity assumption is that the first stage estimates should be non-negative for any
       subsample, e.g., by race or neighborhood income quartile. The data allow for detailed subsamples,
       including interactions between judge characteristics and individual characteristics.
           Appendix Table H.10 presents the coefficients from a regression of eviction on residual
       stringency and the controls used in Appendix Table H.3, but restricted to several different
       subpopulations. If judge stringency is negatively related to eviction for any subpopulation, it
       would provide evidence that monotonicity of judge leniency does not hold. The first row shows
       the coefficient from the main sample, while the remaining rows show the coefficient by case
       type, gender, attorney status, race, and landlord size. Across all subsamples, the coefficient on
       stringency keeps the same sign and does not vary widely, providing evidence that monotonicity
       is not violated.
           In Section H.4 of the Appendix, we provide additional tests of monotonicity by conditioning
       on both judge characteristics and defendant characteristics for a subset of judges who see the most
       cases in our data. For this exercise, we hand-collected additional demographic and background
       information for more than 150 judges. As shown in Appendix Table H.12, the coefficient is
       positive for all but three of these two-way interactions, which provides additional evidence that
       monotonicity is satisfied in this setting.38
  37
     Appendix Table H.7 additionally shows results from the regression of judgment amount on eviction stringency in
cases in which there is an eviction and a money judgment. Regardless of which controls are included, eviction stringency
is statistically insignificant, further suggesting that a judge's eviction stringency only affects the amount owed through
the eviction ruling.
  38
    The three instances in which the coefficient is not positive, the coefficient is statistically insignificant. All three of
these cases involve Hispanic judges, of which there are only 8, resulting in a substantially smaller sample. See Section
H.4 of the Appendix for more details.




                                                             22
       7      Results: IV analysis
       In the regressions that follow, the dependent variable is averaged for each individual over two
       periods: the 13-36 month period following the eviction filing month, and the 37-60 month period
       following the filing month. Our results are not sensitive to alternative choices of short and long
       horizons.


       Financial strain
       Table 5 presents the main evidence on the effects of eviction on tenants' financial strain for both
       the short run (panel I) and the long run (panel II). The OLS estimates presented in columns
       1-3 reflect cross-sectional differences between evicted and non-evicted tenants, conditional on
       covariates.39
           Following the court case, tenants who are evicted are more distressed than those who are
       not evicted. The first row of column 1 shows a gap of 16.7 credit score points (or about 0.2
       of a standard deviation). With additional controls in column 2, the credit score difference is
       cut almost in half, and the results on collections balances and having an auto loan exhibit a
       similar pattern. Column 3 reweights the OLS regression so that the regression sample matches
       the distribution of compliers based on observable characteristics.40 Column 4 presents the
       reduced-form regression of the outcome on residualized stringency, and column 5 presents the
       main IV specification, in which we instrument for eviction using residualized stringency. The
       IV specification shows a modest negative effect of eviction on credit score over both the 13-36
       month period (14.2 points) and the 37-60 month period (15.5 points). Both groups on average
       remain in the subprime category of creditworthiness following eviction court.
           We next examine the effect of eviction on access to credit, as measured by the tenant having
       no open revolving account. The majority of tenants ­ 55 percent of the non-evicted group and 61
       percent of the evicted group ­ have no open revolving line of credit in the 13-36 months following
       eviction. Our IV estimates show that an eviction increases the probability of having no open
       revolving account: 8.7 percentage points over the 13-36 month horizon, although statistically
       insignificant, and 14.7 percentage points over the 37-60 month horizon, and significant at the 5
       percent level. This effect is large, representing a 27 percent increase from the baseline non-evicted
       group mean, and suggests one channel through which an eviction impacts tenants is in reducing
       their access to credit.
  39
     All columns include controls for case type, ad damnum amount, gender, race, a cubic in age at filing date, dummies
for missing covariates, and district-year fixed effects. Columns 2-5 control for additional pre-filing measures of financial
strain; these are the individual means, over their pre-filing observations of credit score, collections debt, and an indicator
for having an auto loan.
  40
     Following Bhuller et al. (2019) and Dobbie et al. (2018), we predict the probability of eviction using our baseline
controls and divide the sample into 8 subgroups based on their predicted probability, where Dg is an indicator for
belonging to subgroup g . We then compute P r{Dg = 1|Complier}/P r{Dg = 1}, which are the weights used in column
3. See Appendix H.7 for more details.


                                                             23
   Turning next to collections balances, the OLS results show evicted tenants have approximately
664 dollars more in collections debt 13-36 months after eviction, conditional on controls. The
reduced form regression on stringency and the IV estimate, presented in columns 4 and 5, are
$134 and $209, respectively, statistically insignificant and small relative to the non-evicted mean
collections balances of $3,054. The standard error on the IV estimate is fairly large, however;
the 95 percent confidence interval is [-736, 1155], meaning we cannot rule out a causal impact
of eviction on collections debt of up to $1155 with 95 percent confidence, which is roughly a 0.26
standard deviation increase. Nevertheless, the IV point estimate aligns with the event study
depictions, and lend support to the finding of modest effects on unpaid bills.
   We also study the effect of eviction on durable goods consumption, which we proxy by using
an indicator for having an auto loan or lease. The IV estimate shows that an eviction causes
a decline in the probability of having an open auto loan or lease by 6.0 percentage points over
the 13-36 month period. This result is large in magnitude relative to the non-evicted mean of
20 percent and lends support to one of the key takeaways of the event studies, that durable
consumption declines as a result of an eviction.
   We next examine payday loan inquiries and openings. The OLS results in columns 1-3 reveal
that evicted tenants are approximately 1.01 percentage points less likely to have a payday inquiry
over the 13-36 months following the eviction filing, relative to a non-evicted group mean of 14.5
percent. This result may reflect that evicted tenants have lower demand for high interest loans
following eviction, e.g., because of moving into lower-rent units, or because of changes on the
supply side, due to lenders declining to lend to those with an eviction. The IV estimate for
payday inquiries is statistically insignificant but the confidence interval is somewhat large; over
the 13-36 month period, the confidence interval is [-1.68, 13.15], meaning we can rule out an
effect size of .37 of a standard deviation increase or larger with 95 percent confidence.
   The OLS estimates on payday account openings show that evicted tenants are about .56 to
.64 percentage points less likely to open a payday account in the 13-36 months following eviction
court, from a baseline non-evicted mean of 2.34 percent (about a 25 percent decrease). Compared
to the OLS estimate, the IV estimate has the opposite sign and is statistically significant at
the 10 percent level, implying that an eviction causes an increase in short term high-interest
borrowing of 2.92 percentage points (a 125 percent increase). The contrast with the OLS estimate
highlights the importance of a causal design in the eviction setting. One plausible interpretation
of this finding is that an eviction causes tenants to be cut off from traditional sources of credit
(seen in the increase in the probability of having no revolving source of credit) and seek payday
loans as an alternative. In the longer run, i.e., over the 37-60 month horizon, an eviction has a
-11.69 percentage point effect on the probability of an inquiry, statistically significant at the 1
percent level. The effect on the probability of an account opening is statistically insignificant,
although the large confidence interval prevents us from drawing strong conclusions.
   Appendix Tables H.14 and H.15 consider heterogeneity along several key dimensions: (i) joint



                                                24
action versus single action, (ii) multi-headed households versus single-headed households, (iii)
those without prior cases versus those with a prior case, and (iv) those living in above median
poverty neighborhoods versus those living in below median poverty neighborhoods. Somewhat
surprisingly, the negative effect of eviction on credit score is stronger among single action cases
compared to joint action cases; the IV estimate is -30.53 credit points relative to -7.37. This
result is unexpected because in single action cases, unlike joint action cases, the eviction does
not appear as a money judgment on the credit file and thus would not mechanically affect the
credit score. The effects on durable goods consumption are larger for joint action cases, however,
which suggests greater strain on households from losing a joint action case. This may be caused
by the obligation to pay the judgment amount, or because lenders who would underwrite an
auto loan can observe the money judgment on tenants' credit files. The negative consumption
effects are also larger for those with a prior case, for single-headed households, and for those in
higher poverty neighborhoods.
   It is important to consider whether the effect sizes we measure depend on our definition of
treatment. The control group in the main specification includes all dismissals. A particularly
strong form of dismissal is a dismissal with prejudice, which prevents the landlord from bringing
the same case with the same allegations against the tenant in the future. As a robustness check,
we perform our analysis after redefining the treatment as a dismissal with prejudice, relative
to all other case outcomes. The instrument is also redefined, so that residualized stringency is
based on dismissals with prejudice. Appendix Table H.16 shows the re-estimated results, with
the estimates changing sign due to the redefined treatment. The OLS estimates are similar in
magnitude, while the IV estimates are more imprecise than our main results, likely because
dismissals with prejudice are uncommon.
   As a final robustness exercise, we explore the sensitivity of the IV results to the exclusion
restriction. Recall that the IV regression requires an assumption that judge stringency affects
the financial strain outcomes only through the order for possession. Since judges may also decide
on the money judgment, there is a potential for the effect to run through the judgment amount
as well. Hence, following the approach of Bhuller et al. (2019), we construct a second stringency
measure based only on judgment amount, where dismissals receive a value of 0. We perform two
exercises: first, we control for this second stringency measure in both first and second stages
of our main IV regressions; second, we allow for two endogenous regressors (eviction order and
judgment amount) and instrument for these two measures using the two stringency measures.
   Appendix Table H.8, panel A, depicts the first stage with and without the second stringency
measure, showing that the relationship between our main stringency measure and the eviction
order is largely unchanged by including the second stringency measure as a control. Panel
B.I shows the reduced form regression of our three financial strain outcomes on the eviction
stringency, and then again with the second stringency measure added in. The results appear to
show the main effects running through our main eviction stringency measure rather than the



                                                25
       judgment amount stringency. Panel B.II controls for the judgment stringency in the first and
       second stage, and Panel B.III shows the two instrument, two endogenous regressors approach.
       Both panels show our main IV estimates to be unaffected when we include the second stringency
       measure, based on the judgment amount. The analysis of auto loans (columns 5 and 6) clearly
       shows that the eviction order itself, rather than the judgment amount, is the driver of reduced
       consumption.41


       Residential moves
       Table 6 presents the evidence for the effect of eviction on residential moves, neighborhood quality,
       and future eviction case filings. The sample is identical to the financial strain sample. For each
       individual the case filing ZIP code is the reference ZIP code. We examine the effect of eviction on
       having a different ZIP code at 13-36 months after filing and at 37-60 months. If the individual
       moves between filing and 13-36 months and moves back by the 37-60 month horizon, we code
       this as a move by 37-60 months. We also examine the effect on any future eviction filing from 1
       to 36 months after the case.
          Similar to the event studies in Section 5, the OLS analysis shows that evicted tenants have a
       higher probability of moving to another ZIP code: 13-36 months after the case filing, they are
       4.2 percentage points more likely to move ZIP codes (columns 1-3) compared to the non-evicted
       group, for which 57.8 percent moved ZIP codes. The LATE point estimate implies that an eviction
       increases the probability of moving ZIP codes by 8.4 percentage points, but it is statistically
       indistinguishable from 0, hence we cannot rule out that an eviction has no effect on moving
       to a different neighborhood. The 95-percent confidence interval is quite large and we cannot
       rule out that eviction increases the move rate by 21.9 percentage points or decreases the move
       rate by 5.1 percentage points. For the 37-60 month horizon, the OLS results are very similar
       while the IV results are small, negative, and statistically insignificant, with a short run effect of
       -1.6 percentage points off a base of 73.2 percent for the control group. Nevertheless, the point
       estimates for both the short and long run are aligned with the event study, which shows high
       move rates for both evicted and non-evicted tenants surrounding the eviction, and relatively
       small differences between evicted and non-evicted tenants over time.
          The OLS estimates also show that evicted tenants live in higher poverty neighborhoods
       relative to non-evicted tenants, and this is true both at 13-36 months and 37-60 months after
       filing. These OLS results line up with Desmond and Shollenberger (2015), who study survey
       data collected in Milwaukee. They find that renters who experienced a forced move (including
       eviction) relocate to poorer neighborhoods, as compared to those who move voluntarily. However,

  41
     The IV results provide an estimate of the effect of eviction for those whose cases could have had different outcomes
if assigned a different judge. Appendix Section I provides estimates of the marginal treatment effect of eviction for
outcomes related to financial strain. Following Brinch et al. (2017), we find that the effects of eviction are somewhat
larger for those with unobservables that make them more likely to be evicted, though the overall heterogeneity across
latent resistance to treatment is limited.


                                                           26
       the IV estimate of the effect of an eviction on tenants' neighborhood poverty rate 13-36 months
       after filing is -2.03 and statistically significant at the 10 percent level. The point estimate at
       37-60 months is similar in magnitude but no longer statistically significant.
           Using the credit bureau data, we can follow individuals across eviction cases, despite many of
       the defendants changing names due to marriage, divorce, or having a first name that exhibits
       slight variations across cases (e.g., "Jim Smith" versus "James Smith"). The last two rows of
       each panel of Table 6 examines whether being evicted has a causal effect on a future eviction
       filing. Being evicted has a large negative causal effect on having an eviction filing in the next
       3 years from any address (-16.3 percentage points off a base of 29.2). This result is driven by
       the fact that non-evicted tenants are more likely to face an eviction case at the same address
       in the future. The last row of each panel shows the effect of eviction on the probability of a
       future eviction filing from a different address, and shows no statistically significant effect and a
       near-zero point estimate. Taken together, these results provide some evidence against the idea
       that eviction contributes to a "slipperiness" of tenants' housing situation through an increase in
       future filings.42
           As a robustness check to the ZIP code level move results, Appendix J provides an alternative
       analysis using InfoUSA address histories. This alternative data allows us to consider unit-level
       moves, but suffers from high levels of missingness and a lower match rate. Using this data,
       the OLS results show that an eviction is associated with a 2 percentage point increase in the
       probability of being observed at a new address, an 8 percentage point reduction in the probability
       of being observed at the same address, and a 6 percentage point increase in having no updated
       information on address of residence in the two years after the case is filed. The IV estimates
       with this data are imprecise with no statistically significant effects.
           Using the InfoUSA data, we document two additional important facts. First, 27 percent
       of observed moves for the matched sample are within ZIP code, suggesting that the analysis
       above using moves across ZIP code are an underestimate of unit-level mobility. Second, the
       matched sample is 37 percent less likely to have an updated address in any given year compared
       to a random sample from Cook County, highlighting the difficulty of estimating the mobility of
       individuals at risk of eviction.


       8     Conclusion
       Using seventeen years of linked Cook County court records, this paper uses DiD and IV designs
       to study the causal effect of eviction on financial distress, residential mobility, and neighborhood
       quality. The paper draws two broad conclusions.
           First, we find that eviction negatively impacts credit access and durable consumption for
  42
    Note that if eviction makes it harder for tenants to get a new lease, tenants may be less likely to be the signatory
on a new lease, which may put downward pressure on the probability of a future eviction for the evicted group.


                                                          27
several years. However, when we consider the magnitude of these effects in the context of the
financial strain experienced by both evicted and non-evicted tenants in the years preceding an
eviction case, the effects are small. In addition, we do not find evidence of a causal impact on
debt in collections, residential mobility, or neighborhood poverty, and find a small impact on
credit score.
   Second, bias due to selection on levels and trends, if ignored, leads to the erroneous conclusion
that eviction has large impacts on financial distress. Using an additional panel of credit records
for a random sample of Cook County residents, we replicate analyses from existing studies,
showing that comparisons of evicted tenants to tenants not in eviction court (controlling for
observable characteristics) imply large effects attributed to eviction. In contrast, when we limit
the sample to tenants in eviction court, OLS regressions comparing evicted tenants to non-evicted
tenants produce much smaller estimates.
   This paper provides estimates of how an eviction affects financial distress and residential
mobility, but several important questions remain for future research. First, this analysis does not
address how policies aimed at reducing the number of evictions, such as making court proceedings
more tenant-friendly, may affect the equilibrium in the rental market. For example, landlords
may be less willing to rent to low income tenants. Second, we do not provide estimates of the
welfare impacts of an eviction on tenants, but rather the effects for a specific subset of observable
outcomes. Finally, we cannot directly speak to the effectiveness of policies targeting populations
at risk of eviction, such as emergency relief funds, or assistance programs for recently evicted
tenants.




                                                 28
References
Abadie, A. (2003). Semiparametric instrumental variable estimation of treatment response
  models. Journal of Econometrics 113 (2), 231­263.

Aizer, A. and J. J. Doyle (2015). Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Future Crime:
  Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , qjv003.

Avery, R. B., P. S. Calem, and G. B. Canner (2003). An overview of consumer data and credit
  reporting. Federal Reserve Bulletin (Feb), 47­73.

Berube, D. A. and D. P. Green (2007). The effects of sentencing on recidivism: Results from
  a natural experiment. SSRN Working Paper ID 999445, Social Science Research Network,
  Rochester, NY.

Bhuller, M., G. Dahl, K. Løken, and M. Mogstad (2019). Incarceration, Recidivism and
  Employment. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming .

Bhutta, N., P. Skiba, and J. Tobacman (2015). Payday Loan Choices and Consequences. Journal
  of Money, Credit and Banking 47 (2-3), 223­260.

Brevoort, K. P., P. Grimm, and M. Kambara (2015). Data Point: Credit Invisibles. Technical
  report, Consumer Finance Protection Bureau Office of Research.

Brinch, C. N., M. Mogstad, and M. Wiswall (2017). Beyond late with a discrete instrument.
  Journal of Political Economy 125 (4), 985­1039.

Burgard, S. A., K. S. Seefeldt, and S. Zelner (2012). Housing instability and health: findings
  from the Michigan Recession and Recovery Study. Social Science & Medicine (1982) 75 (12),
  2215­2224.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, and L. F. Katz (2016). The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods
  on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment. American Economic
  Review 106 (4), 855­902.

Chyn, E. (2018). Moved to Opportunity: The Long-Run Effects of Public Housing Demolition
  on Children. American Economic Review .

Collinson, R. and D. Reed (2019). The Effects of Eviction on Low-Income Households. Working
  Paper .

Crane, M. and A. M. Warnes (2000). Evictions and Prolonged Homelessness. Housing Studies 15,
  757­773.

Dahl, G. B., A. R. Kostøl, and M. Mogstad (2014). Family Welfare Cultures. The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 129 (4), 1711­1752.

Desmond, M. (2012). Eviction and the Reproduction of Urban Poverty. American Journal of
  Sociology 118 (1), 88­133.

Desmond, M. (2016). Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City. Crown Books.



                                             29
Desmond, M., W. An, R. Winkler, and T. Ferriss (2013). Evicting Children. Social Forces 92 (1),
  303­327.

Desmond, M. and M. Bell (2015). Housing, Poverty, and the Law. Annual Review of Law and
  Social Science 11 (1), 15­35.

Desmond, M. and C. Gershenson (2016a). Housing and Employment Insecurity among the
  Working Poor. Social Problems .

Desmond, M. and C. Gershenson (2016b). Who gets evicted? Assessing individual, neighborhood,
  and network factors. Social Science Research , 1­16.

Desmond, M., C. Gershenson, and B. Kiviat (2015). Forced Relocation and Residential Instability
  among Urban Renters. Social Service Review 89 (2).

Desmond, M., A. Gromis, L. Edmonds, J. Hendrickson, K. Krywokulski, L. Lillian, and A. Porton
 (2018a). Eviction Lab National Database: Version 1.0. Online database, Princeton University.

Desmond, M., A. Gromis, L. Edmonds, J. Hendrickson, K. Krywokulski, L. Lillian, and A. Porton
 (2018b). Methodology Report: Version 1.0. Methodology report, Princeton University.

Desmond, M. and R. T. Kimbro (2015). Eviction's Fallout: Housing, Hardship, and Health.
  Social Forces 94 (1), 295­324.

Desmond, M. and T. Shollenberger (2015). Forced Displacement From Rental Housing: Prevalence
  and Neighborhood Consequences. Demography 52, 1751­1772.

Diamond, R., T. McQuade, and F. Qian (2019). The Effects of Rent Control Expansion on
  Tenants, Landlords, and Inequality: Evidence from San Francisco. Journal of Political
  Economy 127 (3), 1063­1117.

Dobbie, W., J. Goldin, and C. S. Yang (2018). The Effects of Pre-Trial Detention on Conviction,
  Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges. American
  Economic Review 108 (2), 201­240.

Dobbie, W., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, and C. S. Yang (2017). Consumer Bankruptcy and Financial
  Health. The Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (5), 853­869.

Dobbie, W. and J. Song (2015). Debt relief and debtor outcomes: Measuring the effects of
  consumer bankruptcy protection. The American Economic Review 105 (3), 1272­1311.

Dobkin, C., A. Finkelstein, R. Kluender, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2018). The Economic Conse-
  quences of Hospital Admissions. American Economic Review 108 (2), 308­352.

Doran, K., J. Guzzardo, K. Hill, N. Kitterlin, W. Li, and R. Liebl (2003). No Time for Justice:
  A Study of Chicago's Eviction Court. Technical report.

Evans, W. N., J. X. Sullivan, and M. Wallskog (2016). The impact of homelessness prevention
  programs on homelessness. Science 353 (6300), 694­699.




                                              30
Fowler, K. A., R. M. Gladden, K. J. Vagi, J. Barnes, and L. Frazier (2015). Increase in Suicides
  Associated with Home Eviction and Foreclosure During the US Housing Crisis: Findings from
  16 National Violent Death Reporting System States, 2005-2010. American Journal of Public
  Health 105 (2), 311­316.

Frandsen, B. R., L. J. Lefgren, and E. C. Leslie (2019). Judging judge fixed effects. Working
  Paper 25528, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Frier, B. W. (1980). Appendix A: An Egyptian "Eviction Notice". In Landlords and Tenants in
  Imperial Rome. Princeton University Press.

Gennetian, L. A., M. Sciandra, L. Sanbonmatsu, J. Ludwig, L. F. Katz, G. J. Duncan, J. R.
  Kling, and R. C. Kessler (2012). The Long-Term Effects of Moving to Opportunity on Youth
  Outcomes. Cityscape 14 (2), 137­168.

Green, D. P. and D. Winik (2010). Using Random Judge Assignments to Estimate the Effects
  of Incarceration and Probation on Recidivism Among Drug Offenders. Criminology 48 (2),
  357­387.

Greiner, D. J., C. W. Pattanayak, and J. Hennessy (2012). The Limits of Unbundled Legal
  Assistance: A Randomized Study in a Massachusetts District Court and Prospects for the
  Future. 126, 901.

Hartman, C. and D. Robinson (2003). Evictions: The Hidden Housing Problem. Housing Policy
  Debate .

Heckman, J. J. and E. J. Vytlacil (2007). Chapter 71 econometric evaluation of social programs,
  part ii: Using the marginal treatment effect to organize alternative econometric estimators
  to evaluate social programs, and to forecast their effects in new environments. Volume 6 of
  Handbook of Econometrics, pp. 4875 ­ 5143. Elsevier.

Hothorn, T., K. H. K, and A. Zeileis (2006). Unbiased recursive partitioning: A conditional
  inference framework. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 651­674.

Hyman, B. (2018). Can displaced labor be retrained? evidence from quasi-random assignment
  to trade adjustment assistance. Working Paper 3155386, SSRN.

IHS (2018). Institute for Housing Studies: Foreclosure Filings Data.

Imai, K. and K. Khanna (2016). Improving Ecological Inference by Predicting Individual
  Ethnicity from Voter Registration Records. Political Analysis .

Imbens, G. W. and J. D. Angrist (1994). Identification and Estimation of Local Average
  Treatment Effects. Econometrica 62 (2), pp. 467­475.

Kennel, T. L. and M. Li (2009). Content and Coverage Quality of a Commercial Address List as
  a National Sampling Frame for Household Surveys. pp. 15.

Khanna, K., K. Imai, and J. Hubert (2017). Who are You? Bayesian Prediction of Racial
 Category Using Surname and Geolocation. Technical report, The Comprehensive R Archive
 Network.


                                              31
Kling, J., J. Liebman, and L. Katz (2007). Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.
  Econometrica 75 (1), 83­119.

Kling, J. R. (2006). Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings. The American Economic
  Review 96 (3), 863­876.

Krent, H. J., P. Cheun, K. Higgens, M. McElwee, and A. McNicholas (2016). Eviction Court
  and a Judicial Duty of Inquiry. Journal of Affordable Housing 24 (3), 547­564.

Lee, D. and W. van der Klaauw (2010). An Introduction to the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel.
  SSRN Electronic Journal .

Maestas, N., K. J. Mullen, and A. Strand (2013). Does Disability Insurance Receipt Discourage
 Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI Receipt. American
 Economic Review 103 (5), 1797­1829.

Marr, T. (2016). Millions of Renters Face Eviction: Why Today's Housing Market is Partially to
 Blame.

Mazumder, B. and S. Miller (2016). The Effects of the Massachusetts Health Reform on Household
 Financial Distress. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (3), 284­313.

Molloy, R. and H. Shan (2010). The Post-Foreclosure Experience of U.S. Households in the
 Current Housing Market Downturn. Working Paper .

Mueller-Smith, M. (2015). The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration. Working
 Paper .

PERC (2006). Giving Credit Where Credit is Due. Technical report, Political and Economic
  Research Council.

Phinney, R., S. Danziger, H. A. Pollack, and K. Seefeldt (2007). Housing Instability Among
  Current and Former Welfare Recipients. American Journal of Public Health 97 (5), 832­837.

Rojas, Y. and S.-A. Stenberg. Evictions and suicide: a follow-up study of almost 22 000 swedish
  households in the wake of the global financial crisis. 70 (4), 409­413.

Ruppert, D., S. J. Sheather, and M. P. Wand (1995). An effective bandwidth selector for local
  least squares regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association 90 (432), 1257­1270.

Sandel, M., R. Sheward, S. de Cuba, S. M. Coleman, D. A. Frank, M. Chilton, M. Black,
  T. Heeren, J. Pasquariello, P. Casey, E. Ochoa, and D. Cutts (2018). Unstable Housing and
  Caregiver and Child Health in Renter Families. Pediatrics .

Skiba, P. M. and J. Tobacman (2015). Do Payday Loans Cause Bankruptcy? Working Paper .

Sullivan's Judicial Profiles (2017). Sullivan's Judicial Profiles. Law Bulletin Publishing Company.

Turner, M., A. Lee, R. Varghese, and P. Walker (2008). You Score, You Win: The consequences
  of Giving Credit Where Credit is Due. Technical report, Political and Economic Research
  Council.



                                               32
Turner, M., P. Walker, S. Chaudhuri, and R. Varghese (2012). A New Pathway to Financial
  Inclusion: Alternative Data, Credit Building, and Responsible Lending in the Wake of the
  Great Recession. Technical report, Political and Economic Research Council.

Van Dijk, W. (2019). The Socio-Economic Consequences of Housing Assistance. Working Paper .




                                            33
                                  Table 1: Summary statistics: IV sample


                                                           Evicted                 Not Evicted               Random sample


 Person characteristics
  Age at case                                     39.990        (12.659)       40.251       (12.726)       45.713       (17.116)
  Female                                           0.641         (0.480)        0.638        (0.481)        0.501        (0.500)
  Black                                           0.517          (0.500)       0.480         (0.500)

 Case Characteristics
  Eviction order                                   1.000        (0.000)        0.000         (0.000)
  Ad Damnum Amount (1000s)                         2.629        (3.996)        2.333         (4.151)
  Joint Action                                     0.842        (0.365)        0.805         (0.396)
  Tenant Pro Se                                    0.970        (0.170)        0.945         (0.228)
  Landlord Pro Se                                  0.247        (0.431)        0.239         (0.426)

 Neighborhood Characteristics
  Median household inc. (1000s)                    47.622       (17.901)       50.028       (19.171)       48.162        (18.012)
  Poverty Rate                                    18.418         (9.782)      17.447         (9.788)      18.176          (9.762)
  Median Rent                                     965.304      (174.219)      987.655      (197.148)      971.870       (182.106)
  Pct. White                                       0.357         (0.291)       0.389         (0.294)       0.365          (0.292)
  Pct. Black                                       0.485         (0.376)       0.448         (0.371)       0.476          (0.374)

 Subsequent Outcomes (13-36 mo.)
  Credit Score                                    528.307       (67.987)      546.962      (80.024)       620.700       (106.213)
  No Open Revolving Account                         0.625        (0.480)       0.553        (0.493)        0.409          (0.489)
  Total bal. collections                         3,789.295    (4,780.772)    3,053.894    (4,391.669)    1,164.431     (2,886.026)
  Any Auto Loan or Lease                            0.140        (0.343)       0.199        (0.396)        0.125          (0.329)
  Any Payday Inquiry × 100                         13.609      (34.289)       14.536       (35.247)        7.441         (26.244)
  Any Payday Account × 100                          1.676      (12.836)        2.343       (15.126)        1.212         (10.940)

 Subsequent Eviction Cases
  Any Eviction Case (36 mo.)                       0.205        (0.404)        0.289         (0.453)
  Eviction Case at Dif. Address (36 mo.)           0.168        (0.374)        0.174         (0.379)

Notes: The table above presents means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of key variables in our linked credit bureau
sample used in the IV analysis. The random sample is restricted to those over age 21 with no open mortgage trade, and has
been reweighted to match the distribution of individuals across neighborhoods in the eviction sample. We randomly assign a
placebo eviction date to the random sample to compare financial outcomes. "Tenant Pro Se" is an indicator for the tenant
having no formal legal representation. "Landlord Pro Se" is an indicator for the landlord having no formal legal representation.
See notes in the text for the sample restrictions to the eviction court sample. Race is imputed using last name and Census
tract (Imai and Khanna, 2016; Khanna et al., 2017), but is unavailable for the random sample.




                                                               34
                    Table 2: DiD estimates: credit bureau outcomes


                              Credit score    Total Collections     Any Auto Loan       No Revolving Credit
                                   (1)                (2)                  (3)                     (4)

 12-Month Effect               -2.828             191.218              -0.012                   0.014
                                ( 0.369)           ( 22.971)            ( 0.002)                 ( 0.002)
 36-Month Effect               -2.175             157.990              -0.013                   0.015
                                ( 0.386)           ( 27.426)            ( 0.002)                 ( 0.003)
 60-Month Effect               -2.133                -0.982              -0.003                 0.009
                                ( 0.451)           ( 31.355)            ( 0.003)                 ( 0.003)
 Baseline non-evict mean         552.23            2,674.78               0.18                     0.49
 Number of individuals          251,036             252,718             254,578                  254,578
 Number of observations        1,302,930           1,310,057           1,320,322                1,320,322

Notes : The table above presents DiD estimates of the polynomials in Figure 6, at different time horizons
relative to r = -12. The regression is yit = t + 1 r + 2 r2 + 3 r3 + 4 r{r > 0} + 5 r2 {r > 0} + 6 r3 {r >
0} + 0 E + 1 E × r + 2 E × r2 + 3 E × r3 + 4 E × r{r > 0} + 5 E × r2 {r > 0} + 6 E × r3 {r > 0} + it . The
table includes standard errors of the DiD estimates, which are clustered at the individual level.




              Table 3: DiD estimates: moves and neighborhood quality


                                   Move Zipcode in Past 24 months         Neighborhood Poverty Rate
                                                    (1)                                 (2)

      12-Month Effect                              0.004                             0.202
                                                 ( 0.005)                            ( 0.066)
      36-Month Effect                              0.003                               0.127
                                                 ( 0.006)                            ( 0.085)
      60-Month Effect                              0.000                               0.090
                                                 ( 0.006)                            ( 0.103)
      Baseline non-evict mean                      0.43                               17.43
      Number of individuals                      115,023                             115,022
      Number of observations                     770,472                             790,598

     Notes : This table presents DiD estimates of the regressions underlying Figure 8, at different time
     horizons relative to the year prior to eviction filing. The table includes standard errors clustered at
     the individual level.




                                                       35
                 Table 4: Random assignment of judges

                                              (1)              (2)
                                            Evicted      Judge Stringency
             Landlord number              -0.00262            0.00003
             of cases                      (0.00045)         (0.00002)
             Joint Action                 0.04533             -0.00011
                                           (0.00700)         (0.00031)
             Ad Damnum Amount             0.00364             0.00002
             (1000s)                       (0.00037)         (0.00002)
             Age at case                  -0.00850            0.00005
                                           (0.00147)         (0.00009)
             Age2 /1000                   0.16616             -0.00076
                                           (0.03059)         (0.00174)
             Age3 /1000                   -0.00102            0.00000
                                           (0.00020)         (0.00001)
             Female                        -0.00485           -0.00004
                                            (0.00212)        (0.00013)
             Black                        0.02680             -0.00003
                                           (0.00227)         (0.00011)
             Missing female               -0.01549            -0.00012
                                           (0.00527)         (0.00033)
             Missing age                  -0.18362            0.00064
                                           (0.02413)         (0.00138)
             Number of observations         232,834           232,834
             Joint F-Test Stat.              41.843            0.468
             p-value                         0.000             0.879

Notes: The left column shows results for a regression of eviction status on case and
defendant characteristics. The right column shows results for a regression of residual
stringency on case and defendant characteristics. "Landlord number of cases" is the
number of eviction cases in which the landlord served as plaintiff in the sample. "Joint
Action" is an indicator for if the case was a joint action case seeking an eviction order
and a money judgment rather than a single action case seeking only a money judgment.
"Ad Damnum Amount" is the amount the landlord listed as owed by the defendant at
the time of filing. The "Black" indicator is based on a Bayesian prediction of race based
on last name and census tract. Both columns use the linked IV sample and include
district-year fixed effects.




                                            36
                                                Table 5: The effect of eviction on financial strain

                                                   Non-evicted mean                       OLS: Evicted                     RF: Stringency       IV: Evicted
                                                                                (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)                (5)
         I. Financial Strain: 13-36 mon.
         Credit Score                                    546.964           -16.706***       -8.821***       -8.715***           -9.067*           -14.151*
                                                        ( 80.025)            ( 0.426)        ( 0.378)        ( 0.369)          ( 4.822)           ( 7.459)
         No Open Revolving Account                         0.553             0.064***        0.038***        0.037***             0.056             0.087
                                                         ( 0.493)            ( 0.003)        ( 0.003)        ( 0.003)          ( 0.035)           ( 0.054)
         Total bal. collections                         3,054.056          664.343***      444.512***      442.562***           133.910            209.391
                                                       (4,391.713)          ( 24.453)       ( 22.989)       ( 23.345)         ( 308.343)         ( 482.336)
         Any Auto Loan or Lease                            0.199            -0.060***       -0.040***       -0.040***           -0.039*            -0.060*
                                                         ( 0.396)            ( 0.002)        ( 0.002)        ( 0.002)          ( 0.022)           ( 0.035)
         Any Payday Inquiry × 100                         14.513            -1.009***       -1.246***       -1.253***             3.669             5.738
                                                        ( 35.224)            ( 0.204)        ( 0.202)        ( 0.188)          ( 2.421)           ( 3.784)
         Any Payday Account × 100                          2.344            -0.641***       -0.605***       -0.562***            1.890*            2.915*
                                                        ( 15.129)            ( 0.074)        ( 0.072)        ( 0.069)          ( 0.976)           ( 1.523)
37




         II. Financial Strain: 37-60 mon.
         Credit Score                                    555.935           -15.898***       -7.772***       -7.773***           -9.923*           -15.460*
                                                        ( 81.929)            ( 0.455)        ( 0.410)        ( 0.402)          ( 5.172)            ( 8.105)
         No Open Revolving Account                         0.541             0.056***        0.034***        0.034***           0.094**            0.147**
                                                         ( 0.494)            ( 0.003)        ( 0.002)        ( 0.002)          ( 0.038)            ( 0.060)
         Total bal. collections                         2,965.622          534.060***      381.941***      374.248***          -126.018           -196.011
                                                       (4,436.617)          ( 27.958)       ( 26.124)       ( 25.832)         ( 365.032)         ( 566.201)
         Any Auto Loan or Lease                            0.199            -0.054***       -0.040***       -0.039***           -0.056*            -0.087*
                                                         ( 0.395)            ( 0.002)        ( 0.002)        ( 0.002)          ( 0.030)            ( 0.047)
         Any Payday Inquiry × 100                         13.176             -0.425**       -0.739***       -0.762***         -7.399***          -11.687***
                                                        ( 33.824)            ( 0.171)        ( 0.170)        ( 0.157)          ( 2.650)            ( 4.178)
         Any Payday Account × 100                          2.374            -0.475***       -0.436***       -0.419***            -0.223             -0.343
                                                        ( 15.225)            ( 0.068)        ( 0.067)        ( 0.063)          ( 0.971)            ( 1.493)
         Additional controls                                                                    Yes            Yes                Yes                Yes
         Complier re-weighted                                                                                  Yes

     Notes: The table above reports OLS and two-stage least squares results of the impact of eviction on measures of financial strain at 13-36 months after filing
     (panel I) and 37-60 months after filing (panel II). Columns 1-3 present OLS estimates of the financial strain outcome on an indicator for eviction. Column
     4 presents an OLS regression on stringency, which is the judge-year leave-out mean eviction rate after residualizing of district-year fixed effects. Column 5
     presents the two-stage least squares regressions, instrumenting for eviction with stringency. The dependent variable is listed in each row. All specifications
     control for district-year fixed effects, case type, ad damnum amount, a cubic in age at case, and indicators for the tenant being female, black, and for missing
     covariates. Columns with additional controls include pre-filing averages for credit score, collections balance, and auto loan or lease, and indicators for these
     pre-filing covariates being missing. Robust standard errors are clustered at the judge-year level.
                              Table 6: The effect of eviction on moves and neighborhood quality


                                                    Non-evicted mean                    OLS: Evicted                  RF: Stringency       IV: Evicted
                                                                                (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)               (5)
     I. Outcomes 13-36 months after filing
     Move Zipcode                                           0.578            0.042***      0.043***      0.043***           0.052             0.084
                                                           ( 0.494)          ( 0.002)      ( 0.002)      ( 0.002)          ( 0.043)          ( 0.069)
     Neighborhood poverty rate (×100)                       16.958           0.821***      0.421***      0.434***          -1.252*           -2.027*
                                                          ( 10.077)          ( 0.054)      ( 0.054)      ( 0.054)          ( 0.656)          ( 1.062)

     II. Outcomes 37-60 months after filing
     Move Zipcode                                           0.732            0.043***      0.040***      0.039***           -0.010            -0.016
38




                                                           ( 0.443)          ( 0.002)      ( 0.002)      ( 0.002)          ( 0.036)          ( 0.058)
     Neighborhood poverty rate (×100)                       16.674           0.866***      0.469***      0.472***           -1.052            -1.683
                                                          ( 10.119)          ( 0.068)      ( 0.068)      ( 0.068)          ( 0.760)          ( 1.213)

     III. Future Eviction Cases
     Any Eviction Case (36 mo.)                             0.292           -0.090***     -0.099***     -0.100***         -0.102***          -0.163***
                                                          ( 0.455)           ( 0.003)      ( 0.003)      ( 0.003)          ( 0.035)           ( 0.055)
     Eviction Case at Dif. Address (36 mo.)                0.175            -0.008***     -0.017***     -0.017***           0.004              0.007
                                                          ( 0.380)           ( 0.003)      ( 0.003)      ( 0.003)          ( 0.029)           ( 0.046)
     Additional controls                                                                      Yes           Yes              Yes                Yes
     Complier re-weighted                                                                                   Yes

      Notes: The table above presents OLS and two-stage least squares regressions of the effect of eviction on the probability of moving ZIP codes
      between the filing month and the outcome period. It also estimates the effect of eviction on the ZCTA-level poverty rate and on the probability
      of a future eviction filing. See Table 5 for details on the regression specification of each column and the controls. Robust standard errors are
      clustered at the judge-year level.
                         Figure 1: Evictions in Cook County, 2000-2016

        50000




        40000




        30000




        20000




        10000




           0
                2000         2002           2004    2006           2008         2010     2012          2014          2016


                  Evictions filed, Cook County     Evictions ordered, Cook County      Foreclosures filed, Cook County



Notes: This figure depicts yearly counts of evictions filed and ordered in Cook County, IL. For comparison, it also
depicts the number of foreclosure filings in Cook County, IL. Data on foreclosures is obtained from the data portal
maintained by the Institute for Housing Studies at DePaul University (IHS, 2018).




                                                              39
                                  Figure 2: Eviction rate in 2010




Notes: This figure depicts the locations of properties for which the court ordered an eviction in Chicago (indicated
as dots), along with the rate of evictions by census tract (indicated by the shaded regions). The rate is defined as
the number of evictions divided by the number of occupied rental units in the census tract (based on 2006-2010
American Community Survey 5-Year Data). Estimates exclude evictions of businesses and other non-residential
evictions. In 2010, the eviction rate from occupied rental units was approximately 2.46 percent. This estimate
uses occupied rental units as the denominator, which may omit houses that could be, or were previously, rented.
Using all housing units in the census tract, we find an eviction rate of 0.93 percent, which provides a conservative
estimate. There is substantial heterogeneity across tracts, with 9 tracts having eviction rates above 10 percent.




                                                        40
                    Figure 3: The eviction court process in Cook County



                            Time of randomization




                                                                         Order for possession   Money judgment
                                                                                (66%)               (74%)
                                                                Judge
                                                                (97%)
                                                                           Dismissal (34%)




        Landlord files court case          First hearing


                                                                        Order for possession    Money judgment
                                                                               (57%)                (53%)
                                                                Jury
                                                                (3%)
                                                                             Dismissal
                                                                               (43%)




Notes: This figure depicts the possible paths eviction cases can take through the court system. Percentages are
calculated for our baseline analysis sample.




                                                           41
                                                                  Figure 4: Selection into eviction court
                                                       0
                                                       -20
                      Diff in credit score (13-36 m)
                                                       -40
                                                       -60
                                                       -80
                                                       -100




                                                              1                    2                      3           4                     5

                                                                  1) Evicted VS Matched                          2) Evicted VS Matched (controls)
                                                                  3) Evicted VS Not Evicted                      4) Evicted VS Not Evicted (controls)
                                                                  5) Evicted VS Not Evicted (controls and lag)   95% CI




Notes: Column 1 plots the difference in credit score at 13-36 months after filing, for the court sample versus the random sample
(for which the filing date is assigned at random). Column 2 is reproduces column 1 with demographic controls (age, gender,
and year). Column 3 plots the difference in credit score at 13-36 months after filing, for evicted versus non-evicted in the court
sample. Column 4 reproduces column 3 with demographic controls. Column 5 reproduces column 4 with an additional control
for individual mean credit score over the pre-filing period. See Appendix Figure F.1 for a similar analysis of other outcomes.




                                                                                                     42
                                      Figure 5: Judge stringency


            40000



                                                                                                              0.68
            30000
    count




                                                                                                              0.64
            20000




            10000                                                                                             0.60




               0
                                                                                                              0.56
                                 -0.04
                                  -0.04                     0.00
                                                               0.00                   0.040.04
                                                       Stringency
                                                         Stringency

Notes: The figure above graphically depicts the first stage of the main estimation equation, showing how the
probability of eviction is affected by judge stringency. The histogram shows the density of year-specific judge
stringency for judges who see at least 10 cases per year, and is plotted along the left y-axis. The solid line plots
estimates of the first stage regression with eviction as the dependent variable, a local linear polynomial in judge
stringency, and district-year fixed effects. The plotted values are fitted values of eviction rate at the value of judge
stringency indicated on the x-axis and probability of eviction plotted along the right y-axis. Shaded area shows
the 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                          43
 Figure 6: Evolution of financial strain relative to the eviction filing month




Notes: The figure plots estimates of {r } and { + r + r } from the regression: yit = t +  × Ei + F         r =S r +
  F
  r =S r × Ei + it . The omitted month is -48. Overlaid is a parametric specification where the right hand side
variables include a cubic in relative month in the months leading up to eviction filing (r < 0), a cubic in relative
month for the months following eviction filing (r  0), and these two cubics interacted with eviction case outcome.




                                                        44
                                       Figure 7: Payday loans




Notes: The left panel shows the probability of an individual making a loan inquiry in a given month. The right
panel shows the probability of an individual successfully opening a new loan in a given month. The figure is
constructed as in Figure 6.




                Figure 8: Residential moves relative to the filing year




Notes: The figure depicts results from the regression: yit = t +  × Ei + F     r =S r +
                                                                                           F
                                                                                           r =S r × Ei + it , where
r is measured in years relative to the eviction filing year, and where yit is an indicator for having moved in the
past 24 months. The omitted years are -5 and -4. In addition to the sample criteria of Figure 6, we require the
individual be observed in the credit bureau sample 3 years prior to the eviction case and in all subsequent sample
credit bureau sample years, with non-missing 5 digit ZIP codes in each year. We drop the 2010 sample year for
ease of interpretation. Estimates are presented with 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                       45
