                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      DISSECTING SAVING DYNAMICS:
           MEASURING WEALTH, PRECAUTIONARY, AND CREDIT EFFECTS

                                      Christopher D. Carroll
                                           Jiri Slacalek
                                        Martin Sommer

                                       Working Paper 26131
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26131


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2019




We thank Andra Buca, Kerstin Holzheu, Geoffrey Keim, Jakub Rybák, Camilla Sacca and Joanna
Slawatyniec for excellent research assistance, and Ricardo Reis, John Duca, Karen Dynan, Robert
Gordon, Bob Hall, Mathias Hoffmann, Charles Kramer, David Laibson, Maria Luengo-Prado,
Bartosz Mackowiak, John Muellbauer, Valerie Ramey, David Robinson, Damiano Sandri and
Jonathan Wright for insightful comments. We are grateful to Abdul Abiad, John Duca, John
Muellbauer and Anthony Murphy for sharing their data. The views presented in this paper are
those of the authors, and should not be attributed to the International Monetary Fund, its Executive
Board, or management, nor to the European Central Bank, nor to the National Bureau of
Economic Research. An initial version of this paper was published as IMF Working Paper 12/219.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 International Monetary Fund, circulated with permission. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dissecting Saving Dynamics: Measuring Wealth, Precautionary, and Credit Effects
Christopher D. Carroll, Jiri Slacalek, and Martin Sommer
NBER Working Paper No. 26131
August 2019
JEL No. D14,E2,E21,E24,E44

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that an estimated tractable `buffer stock saving' model can match the 30-year decline in
the U.S. saving rate leading up to 2007, the sharp increase during the Great Recession, and much
of the intervening business cycle variation. In the model, saving depends on the gap between
`target' and actual wealth, with the target determined by measured credit availability and
measured unemployment expectations. Following financial deregulation starting in the late
1970s, expanding credit supply explains the trend decline in saving, while fluctuations in wealth
and consumer-survey-measured unemployment expectations capture much of the business-cycle
variation, including the sharp rise during the Great Recession.


Christopher D. Carroll                          Martin Sommer
Department of Economics                         International Monetary Fund
Mergenthaler 441                                700 19th Street N.W.
Johns Hopkins University                        Washington, D.C. 20431
Baltimore, MD 21218                             msommer@imf.org
and NBER
ccarroll@jhu.edu

Jiri Slacalek
European Central Bank
D-60640 Frankfurt am Main
Europe
jiri.slacalek@ecb.int




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26131
A GitHub Repo for Paper is available at https://github.com/llorracc/cssUSSaving
A HTML version of paper is available at http://econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/papers/cssUSSaving
                                           Figure 1 US Personal Saving Rate (`PSR')
          15




                                                                                                                                 6.00
                                                                                      Deviation from Start-of-Recession Value in %
                                                                                                                2.00    4.00
          10




                                                                                                      0.00
Percent




                                                                                              -2.00
           5




                                                                                     -4.00
                                                                                                                                        0   2   4        6       8      10       12     14    16   18      20
                                                                                                                                                         Quarters after Start of Recession

                                                                                                                                                Historical Range            Historical Mean        2007+
           0
               1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015

Notes: The left panel shows the personal saving rate, 1966q1­2015q4. The right panel shows the deviation of the saving
rate from its value at the start of recessions (in percentage points), over a historical range that includes all recessions
after 1960q1. Source: BEA.



1 Introduction
The start of the Great Recession marked a striking break in the behavior of the US
personal saving rate. After gradually declining over the previous 30 years, the saving rate
doubled during the recession (Figure 1(a)), and even 5 years later, exceeded its pre-crisis
level by 4 percentage points (Figure 1(b)). Surprising weakness of consumption growth
(relative to income growth) was a key element in explanations of why, year after year,
the recovery was weaker than forecasters expected. The "secular stagnation" hypothesis
of Summers (2013, 2015), Krugman (2013, 2014), Gordon (2015), and others is the most
provocative interpretation of these facts, but even skeptics of secular stagnation have
acknowledged that surprisingly weak consumption growth played a role in the anemic
recovery (Hamilton, Harris, Hatzius, and West (2016)).
   Standard consumption models incorporate several mechanisms that interact with
income dynamics to generate the saving rate; the channels that have received the most
attention include `wealth effects,' the availability of credit, and precautionary motives.1
But we are not aware of any work that has attempted to quantify the relative importance
of these channels using the full (secular and cyclical) variation in the available historical
data. Our contribution is to use a simple structural model of saving to construct such
a quantitative decomposition. Specifically, we estimate a tractable `buffer stock saving'

     1 The literature is large; see among many others the analyses of Carroll (1992) on precautionary saving during

recessions, Carroll, Otsuka, and Slacalek (2011), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011), Berger, Guerrieri, Lorenzoni, and Vavra
(2018) and others on wealth effects, and Muellbauer (2007) and Parker (2000) on credit availability and financial
liberalization. Some work (e.g., Hall (2011), Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017)) has
argued (though without much attempt at quantification) that a sudden sharp reversal of the credit-loosening trend played
a large role in the recent saving rise. Finally, a series of recent papers investigates the role of housing for the dynamics of
consumption (e.g., Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (forthcoming), Huo and Ríos-Rull (2016), Garriga and Hedlund
(2018), Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2017) and Gorea and Midrigan (2018)), but this work focusses on the dynamics
during the global financial crisis (rather than also covering `normal' recessions over the last several decades, as we do).




                                                                                 1
model (an extended version of Carroll and Toche (2009)) with explicit and transparent
roles for the three factors emphasized above (the wealth, credit, and precautionary
channels). The model's key intuition is that, in the presence of income uncertainty,
optimizing households have a target ratio of wealth to permanent income that depends
on the usual theoretical considerations (the coefficient of relative prudence, see Kimball
(1993); time preference; etc.) and on two features that have been harder to incorporate
into analytical models: The degree of labor income uncertainty and the availability of
credit.
   Over the historical period for which the necessary data are available, the structural
model is able to capture the bulk of the variation in the saving rate--with a fit better than
0.90 in the R2 sense.2 We find a statistically significant and economically important role
for all three explanatory variables. The trend decline in saving between the mid-1970s
and 2007 is explained by the continual easing of credit availability during the period
of gradual financial deregulation that began in the Carter administration (see Woolley
(2012) for the history) and extended to the brink of the Great Recession. Our measure
of credit supply (based on the Fed's Survey of Senior Loan Officers) shows a substantial
tightening during the Great Recession, the first sustained curtailment since the 1970s.
But according to the model's estimates, a larger contributor to the sharp increase in
the saving rate during the Great Recession was the collapse in household wealth, with
an increased precautionary motive (proxied by a measure of consumers' unemployment
expectations) playing the next most important role. We find that, contra Eggertsson
and Krugman (2012) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017), redit contraction as the least
important of the three factors.3
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the structural model
and its mechanics. Section 3 briefly describes our data sources; section 4 presents the
estimates of the model and the empirical decomposition of the saving rate. Section 5
compares our framework to the key competing frameworks for thinking about the saving
rate; section 6 concludes.


2 Theory: Target Wealth and Credit Conditions
Here we introduce the model that we will later estimate, a simple representative-
consumer buffer-stock saving model derived from Carroll and Toche (2009) (henceforth
CT). We extend the CT model to incorporate unemployment insurance, which gives
the model a mechanism to capture changes in credit availability (because borrowing is
assumed to be limited by the minimum possible income available to repay it).

    2 Below  we address the econometric challenges involved in evaluating this statistic.
    3 We  treat the three driving variables as exogenous inputs into our partial equilibrium model. This is unsatisfying,
because all three variables are to some degree endogenous to deeper forces; in particular, the collapse in asset prices in
the Great Recession is presumably at least partly attributable to the increase in uncertainty and perhaps to the credit
tightening. If there were anything approaching a consensus about the appropriate way to endogenize asset prices (of
stocks and, more recently, of housing) we would have preferred to do so, but no such consensus has emerged (see, e.g.,
the work we refer to in footnotes 1 and 7 for an overview). In this choice, we follow many papers (including Landvoigt
(2017) and recently Hubmer, Krusell, and Smith, Jr. (2018)), who model asset returns as exogenous (on exogeneity of
asset prices see also our discussion in section 2.4).




                                                            2
2.1 Essentials of the Tractable Model
Under most specifications of uncertainty, Constant Relative Risk Aversion utility inter-
acts with uncertainty in ways that rule out any transparent analytical formulation of
the forces at work. The assumption that makes the CT model tractable despite its use
of CRRA utility is that unemployment risk takes a particularly stark form: Employed
consumers face a constant probability of becoming unemployed, and, once unemployed,
can never become employed again. The sense in which the model is tractable is that
there is a closed form solution for the level of target wealth, and the full consumption
function (though numerical) can be constructed from the target almost instantaneously
using a simple difference equation.
   CT show that for the special case of logarithmic utility, the target `market resources'
ratio for an employed consumer (roughly, spendable wealth) is:
                                                                   
                                                  1
                    e  1+
                    m                                              ,                   (1)
                                    ( - r ) +  1 + (  +  - r )/
where  is the growth rate of labor income, r is the interest rate and  = - log  is the
time preference rate.
  A "Growth Impatience Condition" guarantees that the expression ( +  - r) in the
denominator is strictly positive. Using this fact, the equation has intuitive implications:
Target wealth is higher (the consumer saves more) when

   · The consumer is more patient (the time preference rate  is lower)

   · Unemployment risk       is higher (inducing a stronger precautionary motive)

   · Expected future income is lower (that is,  - r is smaller)

2.2 Determinants of Target Wealth
We modify the CT model by adding an `unemployment insurance' (UI) system that
relaxes the natural borrowing constraint. In the CT model, households accumulate
positive wealth to prevent zero consumption when they become unemployed. But, in
the model in this paper, employed households are willing to borrow, because they know
they will not starve even if they become unemployed; their consumption function shifts
to the left. However, such consumers will limit their indebtedness to an amount small
enough to guarantee that consumption will remain strictly positive even if they become
unemployed (so, it is the `natural borrowing constraint' that shifts).
   The budget constraint depends on the consumer's employment status. We denote
with lower-case m and c the levels of market resources M (market wealth plus current
income) and consumption C normalized by the corresponding period's pretax labor
income W (the product of individual labor productivity and the aggregate wage W);
  W grows by  = 1 +  per period. Next period's market resources ratio mt+1 is the
sum of current market resources mt net of consumption ct , augmented by the (growth-
adjusted) interest factor R/ and income. For the employed consumer (normalized)



                                            3
after-tax labor income is 1 -  , while for the unemployed consumer the unemployment
benefit is  (both expressed as a fraction labor income). The unemployment benefit  is
financed on a pay-as-you-go basis by a lump sum tax  . Under these assumptions the
(normalized) dynamic budget constraint is:
                       (mt - ct )R/ +      with prob.                             (unemployed in t + 1)
     mt+1 =                                                                                                        (2)
                       (mt - ct )R/ + 1 -  with prob. 1 -                           (employed in t + 1)
  Generalizing formula (1) for relative risk aversion  > 1 and allowing for UI benefits  ,
the employed consumer's target market resources ratio m   e can be written as a function
characterized by:4
                                    e = f
                                    m                 , CEA( ), R ,  ,  ,  , . . . .                               (3)
                                                (+)      (-)       (+) (-) (+) (+)

The target wealth m  e increases with unemployment risk , as consumers build up a
larger precautionary buffer of savings. An easing of credit conditions (which we denote as
`CEA')--an increase in the CEA index (modelled as an increase in  )--allows households
to borrow more and thus reduces the need to accumulate wealth for consumption
smoothing. A higher interest rate R increases the rewards to holding wealth and thus
increases the amount held. Faster expected growth of labor income  translates into a
lower wealth target because optimists consume more now in anticipation of their future
prosperity (the `human wealth effect'). Increasing risk aversion  raises target wealth in
a way that is qualitatively similar to the effects of an increase in uncertainty. And of
course, making the consumer more patient (increasing  ) increases target wealth.5

2.3 The Three Channels: A Graphical Exposition
Figure 2a shows the phase diagram for the CT model. The (concave) consumption
function is indicated by the thick solid locus, which is the saddle path that leads to the
steady state (at which both consumption and market resources, c and m, are constant).
Because the precautionary motive diminishes as wealth rises, the model says the saving
rate is a declining function of market resources, an implication of consumption concavity.
  This consumption function can be used directly to analyze the effects of the three
channels affecting the saving rate. For a consumer who starts with market resources
equal to the target, mt = m     e , the consequences of a pure negative shock to wealth,

    4 Specifically,   in online appendix A we show that the steady-state target wealth is:
                                                         ( + 1)(1 -  ) - 
                                                  e =
                                                  m                       ,
                                                             + 1 - R/
                                 (R )-1 -(1- ) 1/
where  = u R/,  =                                  and u is the (constant) marginal propensity to consume out of total
wealth for the unemployed consumer. The relationship holds under our estimated parameter values; some of these
relationships do not hold for all parameter values.
     5 Our final modeling assumption is that we can capture most of the variation in the saving rate by considering the

behavior of an economy populated by a single `employed' agent (who is always afraid of becoming unemployed but never
does). (Carroll and Jeanne (2009) show that the simulated behavior of an economy populated by a continuum of agents
who draw unemployment shocks as specified in the model ­ so that at any given time there is a population of employed
and of unemployed consumers ­ is very well represented by the behavior of the `representative employed consumer' we
use here).




                                                               4
                         Figure 2 Consumption/Saving Dynamics in a Simple Buffer Stock Model
    e
                                                                 


                                                                 
                                                                          e
                                                                          +1 = 0                                    Target
                                       e
                                       +1 =0   
                                                                                            t        t+1
                                   SS 
        e
        +1 =   0
                                                                                                    Wealth Shock
    e ()=Stable Arm                                                      ()




                                                             e                                                               
                                                                                                t                  

    (a) Consumption Function (Stable Arm of Phase Diagram)                            (b) A Wealth Shock




5
                                                                 t

                      New () 
                                                                          Overshooting
                                                                 
                                                                 t
                                  Orig ()
                                           e
                                           t+1 = 0
                              Orig Target



                                                                 
                                                                 t

                                                                                                                         Time
    -                                                                t
    (c) Relaxation of Natural Borrowing Constraint from 0 to h            (d) Saving After an Increase in Uncertainty
depicted in Figure 2b, are straightforward: Consumption declines upon impact, to a level
below the value that would leave m constant (the leftmost red dot); because consumption
is below permanent income, m (and thus c) rises over time back toward the original target
(the sequence of dots).
   From an initial borrowing limit of 0 that requires wealth to be positive (m must
be strictly greater than c), an expansion of unemployment benefits results in a more
generous natural borrowing limit h (implying minimum net worth of -h < 0) and
causes an immediate increase in consumption for a given level of resources (Figure 2c).
But over time, the higher spending makes the consumer's level of wealth decline, forcing
a corresponding gradual decline in consumption until wealth eventually settles at its
new, lower target level.6
   Figure 2d shows the consequences of a permanent increase in unemployment risk
for the dynamics of the personal saving rate (`PSR' henceforth), rather than the level
of consumption shown before. Qualitatively, the effects of a human-wealth-preserving
spread in risk are essentially the opposite of a credit loosening: On impact, the PSR
jumps upward, `overshooting' (cf. Dornbusch (1976)) the new target s     , followed by a
gradual decline toward s   (which is higher than the original s ). This nonmonotonic
adjustment of saving to shocks reflects the fact that, when target wealth rises, not only
is a higher level of steady-state saving needed to maintain higher target wealth, an
immediate further boost to saving is necessary to move from the current (inadequate)
level of wealth up toward the new (higher) target.

2.4 Comparison to Alternative `Structural' Models
We use this simple, partial-equilibrium framework (instead of a richer but less tractable
HA-GE model) because our goal is to estimate a unified structural saving model whose
"deep" parameters are jointly identified using both business-cycle-frequency fluctuations
AND long-term trends. Both cyclical and secular changes in the saving rate have been
large, and a model that matched one set of facts (secular, or cyclical) but had strongly
counterfactual implications for the other would not be a satisfying description of history.
   We are not aware of prior papers that attempt this. Essentially all of the "structural"
literature has focused on cyclical dynamics, using one of two frameworks:
   1. Complex Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian models (HANK) with serious treat-
      ments of uncertainty

   2. Simple spender­saver Two-Agent New Keynesian models (TANK)
  For the first class of models, the last decade or so has seen impressive progress in
the degree of realism achievable in the treatment of uncertainty, liquidity constraints,
household structure, and other first-order elements of households' microeconomic envi-
ronment. A flourishing literature today explores the implications of these complexities
for many questions; see Krueger, Mitman, and Perri (2016) for a survey. However, at
    6 Our setup thus reproduces the standard result from the literature on the effects of borrowing constraints; see, e.g.,

Carroll (2001), Muellbauer (2007), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017) and Hall (2011).




                                                            6
the current state of the art, estimating such a model would be a considerable challenge,
as estimation is generally several orders of magnitude more computationally demanding
than simulating a calibrated version (which is what the existing literature has done).
Furthermore, rich microfounded models have usually been optimized for the specialized
purposes of examining in great depth a single question (such as the mechanisms of
transmission of monetary policy, Kaplan, Moll, and Violante (2016)) rather than, as
we are attempting, to address a number of different causal mechanisms, over different
time horizons, simultaneously. Finally, even if such a rich HA-GE model could be
estimated, it is not clear that the extra microeconomic realism would be worth the cost
in transparency and tractability.
   Indeed, in advocating the use of TANK models, Debortoli and Galí (2017) argue
that the simplicity and transparency of models with only two agents more than make
up for their lack of fidelity to microeconomic facts. This point is reflected in the fact
that, at present, central banks and other entities that require a workhorse model for
current analysis, have (to our knowledge) not gone further than TANK models in their
incorporation of heterogeneity. Nonetheless, a major drawback of the TANK models is
that they allow no role for uncertainty either as an impulse or a propagation mechanism,
despite the large literature in recent years that has argued the uncertainty is a core
element of business cycle dynamics (see, e.g., cf. Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-
Eksten, and Terry (2018)).
   Our model occupies a middle ground. We have only a single agent (making our model
simpler in one respect even than the TANK models), but that agent's consumption
function is nonlinear (making it harder to analyze analytically). This nonlinearity brings
a major benefit, though, in providing a way to accommodate two mechanisms that do not
meaningfully exist in TANK models: Uncertainty and credit constraints. Furthermore,
like a TANK model, its parameters can be straightforwardly estimated to match targeted
macroeconomic facts (in our case, the saving rate).
   Likely because of its tractability and simplicity, our model (as introduced in a draft
version of this paper) has been found useful as a tool to understand saving dynamics
in a number of countries in addition to the US. The model has been used explicitly to
forecast consumption and the saving rate at the Bank of England (Burgess, Fernandez-
Corugedo, Groth, Harrison, Monti, Theodoridis, and Waldron (2013)). Mody, Ohnsorge,
and Sandri (2012) use a version of it to motivate an empirical exercise which concludes
that labor income uncertainty contributed by at least two fifths to the increase in the
saving rate in advanced economies during the Great Recession (consistent with our
structural estimates below). Trichet (2010) argues (referring to our model) that the
precautionary motive contributed to the high saving rate in advanced economies after
2008.

2.4.1 Why We Do Not Endogenize Asset Prices
Arguably a deeper problem, both with our paper and with the other literature cited
above, is the choice to take as exogenous some of the variation that we would most
urgently like to understand. In particular, our model's finding that a `wealth effect'



                                            7
explains part of the increase in saving in the Great Recession begs the question of what
caused the asset price movements that underlie the wealth effect (in stocks, housing
and bonds). If, as seems likely, an important driver of asset prices is the degree of
uncertainty (cf. Bekaert, Engstrom, and Xing (2009), Drechsler (2013)), then our method
will substantially underestimate the cyclical importance of uncertainty, attributing part
of uncertainty's true effect to developments (asset prices; credit availability) that are
themselves consequences of uncertainty.
   A vast literature has attempted to model asset pricing in general equilibrium. While
some progress has been made in understanding the cross-sectional heterogeneity of asset
holdings (cf. Gomes and Michaelides (2007)), for our purposes what is needed is a
model that can capture the cyclical and secular time series of returns. The extent
to which no consensus exists is highlighted by the diversity of the recent literature that
has sought to endogenize the precipitous decline of net worth and house prices during
the Great Recession. In this attempt, different authors have built into their models
a number of alternative mechanisms, including the presence of a exogenous but rare
Great-Depression-like state, exogenous shocks to expectations, or endogenous changes
in illiquidity of housing.7 The existence of this literature suggests that no single model
of asset pricing is adequate both for "normal" times and for the Great Recession; more
broadly, it seems fair to say that no single asset pricing model has come to be viewed
as robustly applicable to most times and places, or for both high-frequency cyclical
and low-frequency secular movements in asset prices. If we were to incorporate any
non-consensus model of asset pricing (and, at this point, all asset-pricing models are
non-consensus models), our paper would inevitably (and correctly) judged to be more
about the performance of that asset pricing model than anything else.8
   The exogeneity assumptions bring us to a final reason for using our tractable model,
which is that a central purpose of this paper has been to bring to light the existence of
some surprisingly simple empirical relationships between the saving rate and our three
explanatory variables. The construction of an elaborate model that required many pages
to set up and explain, and many more pages to estimate, might have drawn attention
away from the simplicity of the empirical foundations of the paper, in which the key
results are evident even in the OLS reduced form estimates. Our penultimate section
5 examines the empirical performance of our model in comparison with a number of
alternatives (including the reduced form model) and argues that our structural model
has advantages over any of them.

     7 In more detail, building on the literature on consumption disaster risk, Glover, Heathcote, Krueger, and Ríos-Rull

(2017) adopted a setup in which the aggregate shock includes a Great-Depression-like state. Related work attempted to
capture the dynamics of house prices during the last boom and (deep) bust. For example, Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante
(2017) show that changes in beliefs about future housing demand can match the volatile dynamics of house prices and
house price­rent ratios; but invoking unobservable changes in opinions about the future demand for assets is only a small
step from explicitly assuming that asset prices are exogenous. Garriga and Hedlund (2018) argue that an endogenous
decline in housing liquidity (induced by directed search to buy houses) amplifies recessions by contracting credit and
depressing consumption. The debate on the role of beliefs about house prices, changes in credit supply or mortgage
market arrangements includes important contributions of Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2017), Kaplan,
Mitman, and Violante (2017), Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (forthcoming), and Garriga and Hedlund (2018).
     8 Essentially the same points could be made about our choice to take credit supply as exogenous. Again, to the extent

that movements in credit supply are caused by movements in uncertainty, our estimates may seriously underestimate the
contribution of uncertainty to business cycle fluctuations.




                                                            8
3 Data and Measurement Issues
This section describes how we measure our key variables (shown in Figure 3).
   The saving rate is from the BEA's National Income and Product Accounts and is
expressed as a percentage of disposable income.
   Motivated by equation (2), we measure household's normalized market resources mt as
1 plus the ratio of household net worth to disposable income (Figure 3a). For net worth
we use data from the Federal Reserve's Financial Accounts; this variable is lagged by one
quarter to account for the fact that data on net worth are reported as the end-of-period
values.9
   Our measure of credit availability, which we call the `Credit Easing Accumulated'
index (CEA; Figure 3b) is adapted from work by John Muellbauer and various coauthors
(Muellbauer (2007), Duca, Muellbauer, and Murphy (2010) and Aron, Duca, Muellbauer,
Murata, and Murphy (2011); for a related approach, see Hall (2011)). It is constructed
using a question from the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey (SLOOS)
on Bank Lending Practices. The question asks about banks' willingness to make con-
sumer installment loans now as opposed to three months ago. To calculate a proxy for the
level of credit conditions, the scores from the survey were accumulated, weighting the
responses by the contemporaneous debt-to-income ratio to account for the increasing
trend in that variable, and normalizing the result to range between 0 and 1 to make
the interpretation of regression coefficients straightforward. We use the question on
installment loans because it is available since 1966; other measures of credit availability,
such as for mortgage lending, move closely with the index on consumer installment loans
over the sample period when both are available until 2008. While the two indices diverge
in the Great Recession and afterward, this corresponds to the period when there was
a massive shift of mortgage origination from banks (the respondents to the SLOOS)
to government sponsored entities (Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and others). That shift
brings into question the continued relevance of the direct SLOOS index of mortgage
lending conditions. There was no similar profound institutional change in the market
for installment lending, which is one reason it might reasonably be interpreted as a
consistent indicator of the overall credit environment (given its high correlation with
other credit supply indices in the period before the Great Recession).
   The CEA index is taken to measure the availability/supply of credit to a typical
household as it is affected by factors other than the level of interest rates--for example,
through constraints on loan-to-value or loan-to-income ratios, availability of mortgage
equity withdrawal and mortgage refinancing. The broad trends in the CEA index seem
to reflect well the key developments of the US financial market institutions, which we
summarize as follows: Until financial deregulation began in the late 1970s, consumer
lending markets were heavily regulated and segmented. After the phaseout of inter-
est rate controls beginning in the early 1980s, the markets became more competitive,
     9 Our simple model does not distinguish between the role of various wealth components and does not specifically look

into the role of housing wealth as distinct from other kinds of wealth. While in a reduced form approach it would be
straightforward to separately estimate the role of housing and financial wealth (as many papers estimating the wealth
effects on consumption have done), it would be much more challenging to estimate a structural model with portfolio
choice and illiquid housing.




                                                           9
                                                             Figure 3 Key Data Series




                                                                               1




     6.5
     6
                                                                               .8
                                                                               .6




     5.5
     5
                                                                               .4
                                                                               .2




     4.5
     4
                                                                               0
           1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995    2000    2005    2010            1970    1975    1980    1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010


              (a) Net Worth­Disposable Income Ratio                             (b) Credit Availability: `The Credit Easing Accumulated'
                                                                                                         (CEA) Index




10
                                        10
                                        8
                                        6
                                        4
                                        2
                                               1970    1975    1980    1985   1990   1995    2000    2005    2010


                                        (c) Expected Unemployment Risk Et ut+4 (Red) and Actual
                                                        Unemployment Rate (Black)
spurring financial innovations that led to greater access to credit. Technological progress
leading to new financial instruments and better credit screening methods (Pagano and
Jappelli (1993)), a greater role of nonbanking financial institutions, and the increased
use of securitization all contributed to the dramatic rise in credit availability from the
early 1980s until the onset of the Great Recession in 2007, at which point a substantial
drop in the CEA index was associated with the funding difficulties and de-leveraging of
financial institutions.10
   We measure a proxy Et ut+4 for unemployment risk t using re-scaled answers
to the question about the expected change in unemployment in the Thomson
Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers. In particular, we estimate
Et ut+4 using fitted values 4 u^t+4 from the regression of the four-quarter-ahead change
in unemployment rate 4 ut+4  ut+4 - ut on the answer in the survey, summarized
with the balance statistic UExpBSt :

                                    4 ut+4 = 0 + 1 UExpBS  t + t+4 ,
                                    Et ut+4 = ut + 4 u
                                                     ^t+4 .
The coefficient 1 is highly statistically significant, indicating that households do have
substantial information about the direction of future changes in the unemployment
rate. As expected, our Et ut+4 series is strongly correlated with unemployment rate
and predicts its dynamics (Figure 3c).
  Data for our empirical measure of credit conditions are available starting 1966q2, and
the data we use in estimation cover that date to 2011q4.
  We do not use data after 2011 for several reasons. First, personal saving rate statistics
are subject to large revisions until some five years after the first data release (after
the BEA receives much higher quality personal income data from the IRS). To quote
Nakamura and Stark (2007): "[M]uch of the initial variation in the personal saving rate
across time was meaningless noise."11 As their paper documents, it is not uncommon for
the saving rate to be revised by 3­5 percent of disposable income after several benchmark
revisions.
  Second, our index of credit availability is increasingly questionable after 2011 because
of the apparent divergence in credit conditions for installment and mortgage loans:
Various sources (including the Mortgage Credit Availability Index of the Mortgage
Bankers' Association; see also Bhutta (2015)) document continued tight credit conditions
after 2011. If, as this work suggests, mortgage credit remained tighter than indicated
by our installment loans index after 2012, that could explain part of the continued high
saving rate in the post-2012 period, which would be mispredicted by a mismeasured

    10 As a caveat, it is important to acknowledge that CEA might to some degree be influenced by developments from

the demand rather than the supply side of the credit market. But whatever its flaws in this regard, indexes of this sort
seem to be gaining increasing acceptance as the best available measures of credit supply (as distinguished from credit
demand).
The CEA index correlates strongly with measures financial reforms of Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2010), and
measures of banking deregulation of Demyanyk, Ostergaard, and Sørensen (2007) (see panel A of their Figure 1, p. 2786
and Appendix 1).
    11 In addition, there were substantial gyrations in the saving rate in 2012 due to a tax-related anomaly (in late 2012

income was boosted by accelerated and special dividend payments and by accelerated bonus payments in anticipation of
changes in individual income tax rates in 2013).




                                                           11
credit conditions index. Alternatively, saving attitudes may have changed after the
Great Recession due to the substantial shock of the Great Recession, perhaps because of
"scarring" effects (see, e.g., Malmendier and Shen (2018), Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor
(2015), Hall (2012)); for evidence that financial crises have much longer-lasting effects
than usual business cycle fluctuations, see Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). All of these are
reasons to worry about data from the post-Great-Recession period.


4 Structural Estimation
This section estimates the structural model of section 2 by minimizing the distance
between the saving rate implied by the model and its empirical counterpart.

4.1 Estimation Procedure
In more detail, the structural estimation proceeds as follows. We assume that households
observe exogenous movements in unemployment risk and credit availability h,12 and
that there are simple mappings from our credit availability index CEAt to the location of
the consumers' borrowing constraint ht and from measured unemployment expectations
Et ut+4 to t :13
                              ht = h(CEAt ) = CEA CEAt ,
                                                 ¯
                              t = (Et ut+4 ) =  + u Et ut+4 .                         (4)
  Collecting the parameters  = {, CEA ,      ¯ , u }, and the time-t observable variables
as zt = {mt , CEAt , Et ut+4 }, the model implies a "saving rate function" s(zt ; ) which
we aim to compare to the saving rates observed in the data, smeas  t  . Our objective is
                                           ^
therefore to find the parameter vector  that minimizes the distance between actual
saving rates and those implied by the model:
                                                         T
                                   ^ = arg min 1
                                                              smeas - s(zt ; ) .
                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                     (5)
                                                               t
                                               T        t=1

  Minimization of (5) is a non-linear least squares problem for which the standard
asymptotic results apply. The estimates have the asymptotic normal distribution:
                                                                                         -1
                          T 1/2 (^ - ) d N 0,  2 ×                  lim E(F F/T )             ,
                                                                   T 




    12 We assume that consumers consider the shocks to         and h to be permanent. This assumption is necessary for
us to be able to use our tractable model. While indefensible as a literal proposition (presumably nobody believes the
unemployment rate will remain forever where it is today), the high serial correlation of these variables means that the
assumption may not be too objectionable.
    13 We have also considered a model in which the CEA equation contains an intercept, h(CEA ) = 
                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                       ¯h + CEA CEAt . In
that model   ¯h is estimated to be insignificant and close to 0. But, as we discuss below, even our reduced model is close
to being linear; adding a constant to a nearly linear model only confuses matters. Theoretical considerations suggest that
if one of the two linear coefficients should be excluded, it is probably the one for the CEA equation, so we made that
choice. Our substantive conclusions are robust to this choice.




                                                             12
where the variance matrix can consistently be estimated with
                                                    -1
                                          ^F
                                     ^2 × F
                                            ^ T

for ^2 =   1   T
               smeas           ^ 2 and the T × 4 gradient matrix of the saving rate
                      - s(zt ; )
           T   t=1
                t
                     ^ evaluated at 
         ^ =  s(zt ; )
function F                           ^ (which is calculated numerically).


4.2 Estimates and the Model Fit
Table 1 presents the estimation results. The calibrated parameters--the quarterly real
interest rate r = 0.04/4, quarterly wage growth W = 0.01/4 and the coefficient of
relative risk aversion  = 2--are conventional and meet (together with the estimated
discount factor  ) the conditions sufficient for the problem to have a well-defined solution
(see Carroll and Toche (2009)).
   The estimated quarterly discount factor  = 1 - 0.0065 = 0.9935, or 0.974 at an annual
frequency, lies in the standard range. As for the horizontal shift in the consumption
function ht driven by credit availability, the estimates of the scaling factor CEA implies
that ht varies between 0 and 8.89/4  2.2, implying that financial deregulation resulted
at its peak in an availability of credit in 2007 that was greater than credit availability
at the beginning of our sample in 1966 by an amount equal to about 220 percent of
annual income (for an average household)--not an unreasonable figure given the now-
prevailing rule of thumb that homebuyers can afford a house costing three times their
annual income.
   The estimated intensity of perceived unemployment risk reflects that fact that the risk
in our setup is purely permanent: the estimated risk t ranges between 1.25 × 10-4 and
1.5 × 10-4 per quarter. The peak magnitude of t (of 1.5 × 10-4 ) implies that over the life
cycle of 50 years or 200 quarters, the workers face a probability of roughly 3 percent to
become (permanently) unemployed. Given the average aggregate unemployment rate of
roughly 6 percent in our sample and given that much of this risk is in reality transitory,
the estimated scaling of t seems broadly plausible. The estimated risk t is highly
counter-cyclical, reflecting movements in the unemployment rate, further magnified by
unemployment expectations.
   The quantitative interpretation of the coefficients in the model can be summarized
by calculating that a 20 percent increase in uncertainty (not out of line for a recession)
results in a roughly 1-percentage-point increase in the saving rate. A way to judge
the plausibility of this prediction is to consider a similar increase in uncertainty in a
microeconomically richer model, such as Carroll, Slacalek, Tokuoka, and White (2017).
A 20 percent increase in the variance of permanent shocks in that model predicts a
similar increase in the saving rate, as that implied by our estimates above.

4.3 What Drives the Saving Rate? A Decomposition
Time-variation in the fitted saving rate arises as a result of movements in its three
time-varying determinants: wealth, uncertainty and credit conditions; Figure 4.



                                            13
     Figure 4 The Structural Estimation: Main Results

15
                                                               Actual PSR
                                                               Fitted PSR




10




 5




 0
        1970    1975   1980   1985    1990    1995     2000    2005     2010

                 (a) Actual and Fitted Saving Rate
14
                                      Fitted PSR
                                      Fitted PSR excl. Uncertainty
12                                    Fitted PSR excl. Uncertainty and CEA


10


8


6


4


2


0
       1970    1975    1980   1985    1990   1995     2000     2005    2010

              (b) Decomposition of Fitted Saving Rate




                                     14
   Overall, the estimated structural model provides a good explanation for both low-
frequency and business-cycle variation in the saving rate (red line in Figure 4a). The
model matches both the 30-year decline in the saving rate before 2007 and the cyclical
increases in saving during recessions. For the Great Recession, Table 2 shows that the
model implies an increase in the saving rate of about 2.6 percentage points between the
2006­2007 period (immediately before the GR) and the 2009­2010 period (skipping the
transitional year of 2008). This matches exactly the 2.6 point measured change in the
saving rate. Of that 2.6 point change, the drop in wealth accounts for about half, with
the increase in uncertainty accounting for a bit more of the remainder than the decrease
in credit. (Recall also our earlier point that this decomposition understates the full role
of uncertainty, if the drop in asset prices or the tightening of credit were themselves
partly the result of increases in uncertainty).
   To gauge the relative importance of the three variables over the full sample, we
sequentially switch off the channels by setting the series equal to their sample means.14
The main takeaway is that the CEA is essential in capturing the trend decline in the
PSR between the 1980s and the early 2000s. The wealth fluctuations contribute to a
good fit of the model at the business-cycle frequencies, and the cyclical fluctuations in
uncertainty magnify the increases in the PSR during recessions, including in the Great
Recession.
   The implied estimates of the wealth effect on consumption are on the low end of the
range produced by existing empirical estimates, which lie between 0.02­0.07 (Carroll,
Otsuka, and Slacalek (2011), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011), Berger, Guerrieri, Lorenzoni,
and Vavra (2018) and many others). For example, during the Great Recession, of the
5-percentage-point increase in the saving rate the model (black circled line in Figure 4b)
ascribes roughly 3 percentage points to the drop in net worth, which amounted to roughly
200 percent of disposable income (Figure 3a), implying a marginal propensity consume
out of wealth (MPCW) of 3/200 = 0.015. The key reason for this contrast is that our
structural estimates attribute a substantial role to uncertainty and credit conditions.
This finding suggests that much of what has been interpreted as pure "wealth effects"
in the prior literature may actually have reflected precautionary or credit availability
effects that are correlated with wealth (a result in line with much of the household-
level evidence, including Hurst and Stafford (2004), Cooper (2013), Aruoba, Elul, and
Kalemli-Ozcan (2019) and others, who stress the role of credit availability and collateral
constraints). (This explanation is supported by our reduced form results in section 5.3,
in which the coefficient on wealth in the saving rate equation is substantially higher in
the univariate regression, than when controlling for uncertainty and credit conditions.)
   Finally, our simple model does not adequately account for household heterogeneity. In
a model like that of Carroll, Slacalek, Tokuoka, and White (2017), wealth shocks mostly
hit wealthy people who have low MPCs, while income shocks (like stimulus checks) hit
the whole population which includes many low-wealth people who have high MPCs. If
this is the right explanation, an RA model (ours included) is by its fundamental nature
    14 Note that the difference between the fitted series (red/grey line) and the fitted series excluding uncertainty (black

line) should be interpreted as the effect of time variation in unemployment risk rather than the total amount of saving
attributable to uncertainty.




                                                            15
incapable of reconciling the conflict. In addition, a substantial proportion of shocks to
net worth are driven by housing wealth, for which evidence suggests that the MPC is
likely lower than for liquid assets (including increases from income tax rebates; for a
compelling quasi-natural experiment on the size of housing wealth effects, see Kessel,
Tyrefors, and Vestman (2019)).


5 Empirical Evaluation of Alternative Models
Here we argue that our model has advantages over the chief alternatives that can be
readily evaluated.

5.1 Quadratic Utility
Since Hall (1978), an optimizing model with quadratic utility has been an influential
benchmark for aggregate consumption dynamics (especially once one understands that
linearized DSGE models are basically indistinguishable from the Hall model). The key
distinction from our theoretical model in section 2 is that, in contrast to CRRA utility,
under quadratic utility uncertainty has no effect on consumption dynamics; quadratic-
utility households do not engage in precautionary saving and do not have a wealth target
(other than the current level of wealth).
   The model without uncertainty turns out to be distinctly inferior to our buffer stock
saving model. We have already seen above in Table 1 that the intercept         ¯ and the
sensitivity to uncertainty u enter very significantly the unemployment risk equation (4)
of the structural model. This evidence is confirmed in a reduced form linear regression
estimation, where business-cycle variation in labor market uncertainty is strongly related
to the PSR, both on its own and controlling for other variables (columns 1 and 3 of
Table 3, respectively). The results imply that a 1 percentage point increase in expected
unemployment rate increases the saving rate by roughly 0.2­0.6 percentage points.15
   These results confirm a large body of complementary evidence on how uncertainty
affects aggregate consumption and saving going back to 1990s. Recently, the evi-
dence based on household-level data has shown that uncertainty is also important for
macroeconomic outcomes (Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten, and Terry
(2018), Kaplan and Violante (2018) and many others). These findings, mostly based
on `normal' (shallow) recessions, were further strengthened during the Great Recession
when (according to Krueger, Mitman, and Perri (2016) and the references in footnote 7)
uncertainty amplified the drop in house prices, employment and consumption.

5.2 Demographics and Saving
A long tradition of work, stemming from the seminal work of Modigliani and Brumberg
(1954), examines the implications of demographic change for saving using calibrations
    15 We have also considered other measures of uncertainty, such as financial market or economic policy uncertainty

(Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016)), but our measure of labor market uncertainty, which is much more closely tied to a
rigorous theory, also turns out to work better as a determinant of personal saving.




                                                        16
                                              Figure 5 Additional Data Series: Demographics, Government Saving and Inequality

                                                                                                                                                                   Government        Corporate      Personal




                 15
                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                           10




                       10
                                                                                                                                         0 5
                                                                                                                                      Percent




        5
                                                                                                                                           -5




      Share on Total, Percent
                                                                                                                                           -10




                 0
                                                                                                                                           -15
                                1960   1970       1980    1990                                     2000      2010                                1960            1970      1980   1990       2000   2010
                                                         Year                                                                                                                     Year


     (a) Share of Population Above 65 Years (Old-Age Dependency                                                                      (b) Government and Corporate Saving (as Fraction of GDP)
                                 Ratio)




17
                                                                                                                           Income                       Wealth




                                                             5              40
                                                                 10 15 20 25 30 35
                                                            Share of Top 1% on Total, Percent
                                                                            0
                                                                                                1960      1970      1980            1990            2000            2010
                                                                                                                                Year


                                                                                                  (c) Share of Top 1 Percent, Income and Wealth
and simulations of various life-cycle models (usually in an OLG setup). Overall, this
strand of work has concluded that at the higher frequencies (e.g., annual) demographic
changes do not substantially affect changes in saving because they are both small and
very slow-moving (Summers and Carroll (1987), Parker (2000) and many others).
   If demographic trends could provide a compelling explanation for the long-term decline
in the saving rate leading up to 2007, that might constitute a plausible alternative
to our story based on increased credit availability in the era of financial deregulation.
But Auerbach, Cai, and Kotlikoff (1991) and related papers argued persuasively in the
early 1990s that the first-order implication of demographics was that there should be a
sustained rise in the saving rate for many years until the baby boom generation hit its
peak earnings years around 2000­2005, and a declining saving rate thereafter. This is
precisely the opposite of the actual pattern (the baby boom generation began exiting the
"high-saving" phase of life and entering the supposedly "low-saving" retirement phase
during exactly the interval when the saving rate stopped declining and then rose).
   This point is roughly captured in Figure 5a which plots the old-age dependency ratio,
which began rising faster around 2010 when large numbers of baby boomers began
reaching retirement age. In Table 3, column 2 we estimate that the coefficient on the
old-age dependency ratio is negative, which would suggest that the increase in the share
of people older than 65 years should have reduced the saving rate, so the correlations
go the wrong way for a demographic story (confirming the large prior literature after
Auerbach, Cai, and Kotlikoff (1991) that failed to find meaningful demographic effects).16

5.3 Reduced-Form vs Structural Models of Saving
We now ask to what extent the main features of the structural model of section 2 can
be summarized in a simple reduced-form linear regression:
                           st = 1 + m mt + CEA CEAt + Eu Et ut+4 + t .                                              (6)
This specification can be readily estimated using OLS estimators (Table 3, column 3)
and, at a minimum, can be interpreted as summarizing basic stylized facts about the
data.
  We have mentioned (in section 5.1) that the estimates of the "Baseline" model (6)
are significant and explain more than 90 percent of variation in the saving rate. As
expected from the structural model, the point estimates indicate a strong negative
correlation of saving with net wealth and credit conditions, and a positive correlation
with unemployment risk.
  The coefficient on the Credit Easing Accumulated index is highly statistically signifi-
cant with a t-statistic of more than 14. (Of course, this t-statistic should be taken with

    16 For China a separate strand of work (e.g., Curtis, Lugauer, and Mark (2015) and Imrohoroglu and Zhao (2018)) uses

a newer generation of these models to investigate the implications of demographic change. This work typically argues that
demographic change did substantially contribute to the massive increase in saving (from around 5 percent in the 1970s
to more than 25 percent in the 2010s). On the other hand, the importance of population aging in cross-country studies
of household saving (for example, Bloom, Canning, Mansfield, and Moore (2007) and Bosworth and Chodorow-Reich
(2007)) appears to be largely driven by the experience of Japan and Korea--countries well ahead of the United States in
the population aging process.




                                                          18
a several grains of salt given the obvious trends in both variables, and the cautionary
literature about regressions of trends on trends; but aside from demographics (which go
the wrong way), there are no other variables that are core constituents of standard saving
models that have had powerful trends like this, so the case for spurious correlation is
weaker than it sometimes is). The point estimate of CEA implies that increased access
to credit over the sample period until the Great Recession reduced the PSR by about
8 percentage points of disposable income. In the aftermath of the Recession, the CEA
index declined between 2007 and 2010 by roughly 0.11 as credit supply tightened,
contributing roughly 0.64 percentage point to the increase in the saving rate. Finally,
once the three variables are included jointly, the time trend ceases to be significant
(column 4).
   Given how well the baseline linear reduced-form model captures the saving rate, one
might wonder what value is added by construction of the structural model we proposed
earlier. A first point to make here is that when we simulate the estimated version
of our model and perform linear regressions on the corresponding generated data, the
                                          ¯ 2 is 0.975). Essentially, therefore, the difference
result is very close to being linear (the R
between the two approaches is that the OLS regression puts no restrictions at all on the
linear relationships between the variables, while the structural estimation puts stringent
requirements that those linear relationships be tightly constrained to the small subset of
nearly linear relationships that is a good approximation to the structural theory. The fact
that the R ¯ 2 from the structural estimation is essentially the same as for the unrestricted
model (both of them round to 0.91) was by no means inevitable and indicates that the
structure imposed by the model does no violence to the data.

5.3.1 Why Estimate a Structural Model When OLS Works Fine?
Because structural estimation restricts empirical relationships to those that are compat-
ible with a theory, structural models by their intrinsic nature fit the data worse than
an unrestricted data-fitting exercise; the advantages of structural modeling (articulated
below) can nevertheless make such estimation worth the sacrifice in data-fitting ability.
In the case at hand, however, the structural model fits the data nearly as well as an
unrestricted OLS regression. Thus, in our context, the case for structural modeling is
stronger than in the usual case where there is a significant penalty in data-fitting ability.
   Some of the advantages of having a structural model are:

   · If the structure imposed is one that has considerable backing from other contexts
     or kinds of data, it is less likely that the fit of the model to the data is spurious
     (in the sense of failing to capture any reliable or causal economic relationship).

   · The structural model can provide insights that could not be obtained from the
     reduced form model. For example, the "overshooting" result implied by the struc-
     tural model might have important consequences for business cycle dynamics even
     if the fit of the structure that embodies those dynamics is statistically inferior to
     the reduced form fit.




                                              19
   · The structural model has implications for ways to test the ideas using data other
     than those on which it was estimated. In this case, for example, the structural
     model would suggest that it would be useful to look at regional or local data in
     which the endogeneity of aggregate asset prices and credit conditions could be
     controlled for by looking at differences in unemployment expectations and saving
     responses across regions in an aggregate economy where most of the movements
     in the other explanatory variables are not region-specific.

5.4 Further Robustness Checks
Columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 summarize the correlations of the personal saving rate
with two variables that some theories suggest might be related to it: government saving
(Figure 5b) and income inequality (Figure 5c).
   Column 5 reports that there is indeed a negative correlation between government
and personal saving, though the size of the coefficient, -0.15, implies only a modest
crowding out. More than a support for the Ricardian equivalence--the hypothesis that
households observing higher government saving should save less themselves (as they
should expect lower taxes in the future)--the finding seems to reflect reverse causality
between private and public saving, the fact that during recessions government saving
falls (e.g., due to higher outlays on unemployment insurance), while personal saving rises
for precautionary reasons (see work of Elmendorf and Mankiw (1999) and many others).
   Finally, in column 6 we evaluate whether growing income inequality (shown in Fig-
ure 5c) has resulted in an increase in the aggregate saving rate: Microeconomic evidence
points to high personal saving rates among the higher-permanent-income households
(Carroll (2000); Dynan, Skinner, and Zeldes (2004)), whose share on total income has
been rising. Having experimented with numerous measures of the top shares of Piketty
and Saez (2003), we find little evidence of a substantial and statistically significant
correlation between saving and income inequality.


6 Conclusions
We show that a simple representative-consumer model of buffer stock saving can match
most of the time-series variation in the aggregate US personal saving rate over the past
50 years. In the model, saving depends on the gap between the `target' and actual
wealth, with the target determined by credit availability and uncertainty.
  We estimate that these three factors--credit availability, shocks to household wealth,
and movements in income uncertainty proxied by unemployment risk--have all been
important in driving the saving rate. In particular, the relentless expansion of credit
supply between the early-1980s and 2007 (likely largely reflecting financial innovation
and liberalization), along with higher asset values and consequent increases in net wealth
(possibly also partly attributable to the credit boom) encouraged households to save less
out of their disposable income. At the same time, the fluctuations in wealth and labor
income uncertainty, for instance during and after the burst of the information technology



                                           20
and credit bubbles of 2001 and 2007, can explain the bulk of business cycle fluctuations
in personal saving.
   The model we estimate could be extended to analyze the implications of the `over-
shooting' of saving in response to business-cycle shocks. For example, the model suggests
that in a recession an optimizing government might want to counteract the part of the
consumption decline that reflects overshooting. In an economy rendered non-Ricardian
by liquidity constraints and/or uncertainty, the existence of precautionary saving thus
provides a potential rationale for counter-cyclical fiscal policy.
   More generally, the simple buffer stock saving model we estimate could provide in-
sights into the current debate about the role household heterogeneity for macroeconomic
outcomes. The model is both easy to solve and provides a setup to meaningfully analyze
the effects on uncertainty on the macro-economy. Consequently, the model could be
a useful middle ground between a setup with a realistic but complex description of
household heterogeneity (HANK) and a simple two-agent spender­saver setup (TANK)
that cannot accommodate roles for credit availability or uncertainty.




                                           21
References
Abiad, Abdul, Enrica Detragiache, and Thierry Tressel (2010): "A New Database
 of Financial Reforms," IMF Staff Papers, 57(2), 281­302.

Aron, Janine, John V. Duca, John Muellbauer, Keiko Murata, and Anthony
 Murphy (2011): "Credit, Housing Collateral, and Consumption: Evidence from Japan, the
 U.K., and the U.S.," Review of Income and Wealth.

Aruoba, S Boragan, Ronel Elul, and Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan (2019): "How Big is
 the Wealth Effect? Decomposing the Response of Consumption to House Prices," FRB of
 Philadelphia Working Paper.

Auerbach, Alan J., Jinyong Cai, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff (1991): "U.S.
 Demographics and Saving: Predictions of Three Saving Models," Carnegie­Rochester
 Conference Series on Public Policy, 34(1), 135­156.

Baker, Scott R, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J Davis (2016): "Measuring economic
 policy uncertainty," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4), 1593­1636.

Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Yuhang Xing (2009): "Risk, uncertainty, and
  asset prices," Journal of Financial Economics, 91(1), 59­82.

Berger, David, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, and Joseph Vavra (2018):
  "House Prices and Consumer Spending," Review of Economic Studies, 85(3), 1502­1542.

Bhutta, Neil (2015): "The Ins and Outs of Mortgage Debt During the Housing Boom and
 Bust," Journal of Monetary Economics, 76(C), 284­298.

Bloom, David E., David Canning, Richard K. Mansfield, and Michael Moore
  (2007): "Demographic Change, Social Security Systems and Savings," Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 54, 92­114.

Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and
  Stephen J. Terry (2018): "Really Uncertain Business Cycles," Econometrica, 86(3), 1031­
  1065.

Bosworth, Barry, and Gabriel Chodorow-Reich (2007): "Saving and Demographic
 Change: The Global Dimension," working paper 2, Center for Retirement Research, Boston
 College.

Burgess, Stephen, Emilio Fernandez-Corugedo, Charlotta Groth, Richard
 Harrison, Francesca Monti, Konstantinos Theodoridis, and Matt Waldron
 (2013): "The Bank of England's Forecasting Platform: COMPASS, MAPS, EASE and the
 Suite of Models," working paper 471, Bank of England.

Carroll, Christopher D. (1992): "The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some
 Macroeconomic Evidence," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1992(2), 61­156,
 http://econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/BufferStockBPEA.pdf.




                                           22
        (2000): "Why Do the Rich Save So Much?," in Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic
  Consequences of Taxing the Rich, ed. by Joel B. Slemrod. Harvard University Press, http:
  //econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/Why.pdf.

           (2001):  "A Theory of the Consumption Function, With and Without
  Liquidity Constraints," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3), 23­46, http:
  //econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/ATheoryv3JEP.pdf.

Carroll, Christopher D., and Olivier Jeanne (2009): "A Tractable Model of
 Precautionary Reserves, Net Foreign Assets, or Sovereign Wealth Funds," NBER Working
 Paper Number 15228, http://econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/papers/cjSOE.

Carroll,   Christopher     D.,   Misuzu    Otsuka,     and    Jiri Slacalek
 (2011):   "How Large Are Financial and Housing Wealth Effects?           A
 New Approach," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 43(1), 55­79,
 http://econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/papers/cosWealthEffects/.

Carroll, Christopher D., Jiri Slacalek, Kiichi Tokuoka, and Matthew N. White
 (2017): "The Distribution of Wealth and the Marginal Propensity to Consume," Quantitative
 Economics, 8, 977­1020, At http://econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/papers/cstwMPC.

Carroll, Christopher D., and Patrick Toche (2009):                        "A Tractable
 Model of Buffer Stock Saving,"       NBER Working Paper                 Number 15265,
 http://econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/papers/ctDiscrete.

Cooper, Daniel (2013): "House Price Fluctuations: The Role of Housing Wealth as
 Borrowing Collateral," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(4), 1183­1197.

Curtis, Chadwick C., Steven Lugauer, and Nelson C. Mark (2015): "Demographic
 Patterns and Household Saving in China," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
 7(2), 58­94.

Debortoli, Davide, and Jordi Galí (2017): "Monetary policy with heterogeneous agents:
 Insights from TANK models," Manuscript.

Demyanyk, Yuliya, Charlotte Ostergaard, and Bent E. Sørensen (2007): "U.S.
 Banking Deregulation, Small Businesses, and Interstate Insurance of Personal Income,"
 Journal of Finance, 62(6), 2763­2801.

Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976): "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
 Political Economy, 84(6), 1161­1176.

Drechsler, Itamar (2013): "Uncertainty, time-varying fear, and asset prices," The Journal
 of Finance, 68(5), 1843­1889.

Duca, John V., John Muellbauer, and Anthony Murphy (2010): "Credit Market
 Architecture and the Boom and Bust in the U.S. Consumption," mimeo, University of
 Oxford.

Dynan, Karen E., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes (2004): "Do the Rich
 Save More?," Journal of Political Economy, 112(2), 397­444.



                                           23
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman (2012): "Debt, Deleveraging, and the
  Liquidity Trap: A Fisher­Minsky­Koo Approach," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  127(3), 1469­1513.

Elmendorf, Douglas, and N. Gregory Mankiw (1999): "Government Debt," in
  Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1, Part C, chap. 25,
  pp. 1615­1669. Elsevier, 1 edn.

Favilukis, Jack, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh (2017): "The
  Macroeconomic Effects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk Sharing in
  General Equilibrium," Journal of Political Economy, 125(1), 140­223.

Garriga, Carlos, and Aaron Hedlund (2018): "Housing Finance, Boom­Bust Episodes,
 and Macroeconomic Fragility," mimeo, University of Missouri.

Glover, Andrew, Jonathan Heathcote, Dirk Krueger, and José-Víctor Ríos-
 Rull (2017): "Intergenerational Redistribution in the Great Recession," updated
 version of working paper 16924, National Bureau of Economic Research, https:
 //www.sas.upenn.edu/~dkrueger/research/RecessionNew.pdf.

Gomes, Francisco, and Alexander Michaelides (2007): "Asset pricing with limited risk
 sharing and heterogeneous agents," The Review of Financial Studies, 21(1), 415­448.

Gordon, Robert J (2015): "Secular stagnation: A supply-side view," American Economic
 Review, 105(5), 54­59.

Gorea, Denis, and Virgiliu Midrigan (2018): "Liquidity Constraints in the U.S. Housing
 Market," mimeo, New York University.

Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni (2017): "Credit crises, precautionary
 savings, and the liquidity trap," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3), 1427­1467.

Hall, Robert E. (1978): "Stochastic Implications of the Life-Cycle/Permanent Income
 Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, 96, 971­87, Available
 at http://www.stanford.edu/~rehall/Stochastic-JPE-Dec-1978.pdf.

         (2011): "The Long Slump," AEA Presidential Address, ASSA Meetings, Denver.

         (2012): "Quantifying the Forces Leading to the Collapse of GDP after the Financial
  Crisis," Manuscript, Stanford University.

Hamilton, James D, Ethan S Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D West (2016):
 "The equilibrium real funds rate: Past, present, and future," IMF Economic Review, 64(4),
 660­707.

Hubmer, Joachim, Per Krusell, and Anthony A. Smith, Jr. (2018): "A
 Comprehensive Quantitative Theory of the U.S. Wealth Distribution," mimeo, Yale
 University.

Huo, Zhen, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull (2016): "Financial Frictions, Asset Prices, and
 the Great Recession," Staff Report 526, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.



                                             24
Hurst, Erik, and Frank Stafford (2004): "Home Is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage
 Refinancing and Household Consumption," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 36(6),
 985­1014.

Imrohoroglu, Ayse, and Kai Zhao (2018): "The Chinese Saving Rate: Long-Term Care
  Risks, Family Insurance, and Demographics," Journal of Monetary Economics, 96(C), 33­
  52.

Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor (2015): "Leveraged Bubbles,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 76(S), 1­20.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti (forthcoming):
  "Credit Supply and the Housing Boom," Journal of Political Economy.

Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni L. Violante (2017): "The Housing Boom
 and Bust: Model Meets Evidence," working paper 23694, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante (2016): "Monetary Policy
 According to HANK," Working Paper 21897, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L. Violante (2018): "Microeconomic Heterogeneity and
 Macroeconomic Shocks," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3), 167­194.

Kessel, Dany, Björn Tyrefors, and Roine Vestman (2019): "The Housing Wealth
 Effect: Quasi-Experimental Evidence," Available at SSRN.

Kimball, Miles S. (1993): "Standard Risk Aversion," Econometrica, 61(3), 589­611.

Krueger, Dirk, Kurt Mitman, and Fabrizio Perri (2016): "Macroeconomics and
 Household Heterogeneity," Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2, 843­921.

Krugman, Paul (2013): "Secular stagnation, coalmines, bubbles, and Larry Summers," New
 York Times, 16, 2013.

        (2014): "Four observations on secular stagnation," Secular stagnation: Facts, causes
  and cures, pp. 61­68.

Landvoigt, Tim (2017): "Housing Demand During the Boom: The Role of Expectations and
  Credit Constraints," The Review of Financial Studies, 30(6), 1865­1902.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Leslie Sheng Shen (2018): "Scarred Consumption," working
 paper 24696, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi (2011): "Household Balance Sheets,
 Consumption, and the Economic Slump," Manuscript, University of California at Berkeley.

Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Brumberg (1954): "Utility Analysis and the
 Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data," in Post-Keynesian
 Economics, ed. by Kenneth K. Kurihara, New Brunswick, NJ. Rutgers University Press.




                                            25
Mody, Ashoka, Franziska Ohnsorge, and Damiano Sandri (2012): "Precautionary
 Savings in the Great Recession," IMF Economic Review, 60(1), 114­138.

Muellbauer, John N. (2007): "Housing, Credit and Consumer Expenditure," in Housing,
 Housing Finance and Monetary Policy, pp. 267­334. Jackson Hole Symposium, Federal
 Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Nakamura, Leonard I., and Thomas Stark (2007):          "Mismeasured Personal
 Saving and the Permanent Income Hypothesis,"        Working Papers,    http:
 //philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/publications/working-papers/2007/wp07-8.pdf.

Pagano, Marco, and Tullio Jappelli (1993): "Information sharing in credit markets,"
  The Journal of Finance, 48(5), 1693­1718.

Parker, Jonathan A. (2000): "Spendthrift in America? On Two Decades of Decline in the
  U.S. Saving Rate," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1999, Volume 14, NBER Chapters,
  pp. 317­387. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez (2003): "Income Inequality in the United States,
  1913­1998," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 1­39.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009): "The Aftermath of Financial
 Crises," American Economic Review, 99(2), 466­72.

Summers, Lawrence (2013): "On secular stagnation," Reuters Analysis & Opinion, 16.

Summers, Lawrence H (2015): "Demand side secular stagnation," American Economic
  Review, 105(5), 60­65.

Summers, Lawrence H., and Christopher D. Carroll (1987): "Why is U.S.
  National Saving So Low?," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1987(2), 607­636,
  http://econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/NatSavSoLow.pdf.

Trichet, Jean-Claude (2010): "Luncheon Address: Central Banking in Uncertain Times:
 Conviction and Responsibility," Proceedings, Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole,
 pp. 243­266.

Woolley, John T. (2012): "Persistent Leadership: Presidents and the Evolution of U.S.
 Financial Reform, 1970-2007," Presidential Studies Quarterly, 42(1), 60­80.




                                         26
                           Table 1 Calibration and Structural Estimates

                                      st = s {mt , CEAt , Et ut+4 };  ,
                                              ht = CEA CEAt ,
                                                 ¯
                                             t =  + u Et ut+4 .

                   Parameter        Description                                Value
                   Calibrated     Parameters
                 r                 Interest Rate                               0.04/4
                 W                 Wage Growth                                 0.01/4
                                   Relative Risk Aversion                         2
                  Estimated Parameters  = {, CEA ,   ¯ , u }
                             Discount Factor             1 - 0.0065
                                                            (0.0005)
                 CEA         Scaling of CEAt to ht           8.8943
                                                            (0.8403)
                 ¯                                                         
                             Scaling of Et ut+4 to t         1.2079 × 10-4
                                                            (0.2757 × 10-4 )
                                                                           
                 u           Scaling of Et ut+4 to t         2.6764 × 10-4
                                                            (0.6490 × 10-4 )
                 ¯2
                 R                                           0.906
                 DW stat                                     0.780
                                    Sample average of CEAt                  0.4289
                                    Sample average of Et ut+4               0.0620

Notes: Quarterly calibration. Estimation sample: 1966q2­2011q4. { ,  ,  } = Statistical significance at {10, 5, 1}
percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) were calculated with the delta method. Parameter estimates imply sample
averages of 3.82 and 0.000137 for ht and   t,   respectively.




                                                                27
 Table 2 Actual and Explained Change of the Saving Rate: Structural and Reduced
                             Form Models, 2006/07­2009/10


                                                 Model Decomposition
          Variable                        Structural          Reduced Form              Actual st
          mt                                   1.3        -0.89 × -1.19 = 1.1
          CEAt                                 0.6        -7.91 × -0.12 = 1.0
          Et ut+4                              0.7            0.20 × 4.6 = 0.9
          Explained/Actual st                  2.6                                3.0          2.6

Notes: The table shows the change of the personal saving rate between the two-year averages of years 2006­2007 and
2009­2010 (in percentage points) implied by the structural model, the baseline reduced form model of Table 3 and in
actual data.




                                                       28
                                 Table 3 Reduced-Form Regressions

                           st = 0 + m mt + CEA CEAt + Eu Et ut+4 +  Xt + t
                                                           Reduced-Form               Additional Variables
Model              Uncertainty    Demographics        Baseline      Time Trend         Gov Sav          Ineq
0                    11.750           29.504         17.157           15.535         17.588          18.553
                     (0.462)          (5.257)         (1.589)         (2.004)         (1.589)         (1.804)
m                                     -1.596         -0.894           -0.618         -0.862          -1.321
                                       (0.362)        (0.261)         (0.341)         (0.269)         (0.410)
CEA                                   -4.444         -7.909           -4.156         -8.149          -9.545
                                       (1.451)        (0.556)         (2.098)         (0.565)         (1.249)
Eu                    0.551             0.264          0.202            0.347          0.028           0.181
                     (0.059)          (0.068)         (0.064)         (0.105)         (0.074)         (0.065)
t                   -0.055                                            -0.025
                     (0.002)                                           (0.015)
old                                   -0.861
                                       (0.365)
gov sav                                                                              -0.152
                                                                                     (0.063)
inc share                                                                                              0.190
                                                                                                      (0.144)
¯2
R                      0.910            0.918          0.911            0.914           0.916          0.913
F stat p val           0.000            0.000          0.000            0.000           0.000          0.000
DW stat                0.761            0.848          0.732            0.769           0.682          0.771

Notes: Estimation sample: 1966q2­2011q4. { ,  ,  } = Statistical significance at {10, 5, 1} percent. Newey­West
standard errors, 4 lags.




                                                      29
Supplemental Materials




                     30
A Extension of Derivation of Target Wealth to
  Include Unemployment Insurance
This appendix introduces an unemployment insurance system into the model of Carroll and
Toche (2009) (which assumes that income for unemployed/retired households is zero). The
UI system guarantees a minimum (positive) level of income to the unemployed. For ease
of modelling we assume that the unemployment insurance benefit is a constant proportion
of the labor income that the unemployed would counterfactually earn in the first year of
unemployment if they had not become unemployed.
   In the perfect foresight context, receiving a constant payment with perfect certainty is
equivalent to receiving a lump sum "severance" payment whose value is equal to the PDV of
the stream of future UI payments. Thus, for simplicity, we assume S =  · W, which means
individuals will receive one-period severance payment S in the amount of a certain ratio  to
labor income of the period when they first lose their jobs. After that, they will not receive any
unemployment insurance benefit.
   The only modifications of the decision problem are to add the severance payment and a
corresponding lump-sum tax into the dynamic budget constraint (DBC) of employed consumers
in Carroll and Toche (2009),

                        (mt - ct )R/ +                with prob.                (unemployed in t + 1)
             mt+1 =
                        (mt - ct )R/ + 1 -            with prob. 1 -              (employed in t + 1)

where we denote with lower-case m and c the levels of market resources (market wealth
plus current income) and consumption normalized by the corresponding period's pretax labor
income W. We let  = × S to ensure a balanced budget for the unemployment insurance
system.17
   Following Carroll and Toche (2009), we have the following condition derived from the Euler
equation,
                                                  -              -
                                            ce              cu
                       1 = - R (1 - ) t+1             +      t+1
                                                                      .
                                             cet             cet

Superscripts e and u represent the two possible employment states.
   To find the ce = 0 and me = 0 loci, we let ce         e   e     e      e   e
                                                  t+1 = ct  c and mt+1 = mt  m . Given
 u        u   u  u
ct+1 = mt+1  ( is the MPC of an unemployed consumer), combined with the modified DBC
above, we have (for R  R/):
                                                                                        -
                                                            u (R(me - ce ) +  )
                          1 = - R (1 - ) +                                                    .
                                                                   ce




   17 Each period, proportion    of employed consumers lose their jobs, i.e., the "exit rate" in the current labor market
is . In order to raise a corresponding amount of revenues, we need to assume that there is a "birth rate" of       of new
employed consumers, which means a same proportion of consumers are entering the labor market each period. Combined
with the assumption that  = × S , the severance payment and the severance payment are balanced.




                                                          31
Rearranging terms, the ce = 0 locus can be characterized as:
                                 
                                            1/
                        (R )-1 - (1 - )                    ce
                                                 =                    .
                                                     R(me - ce ) +  u

Given the modified DBC of employed consumers, the me = 0 locus becomes:

                               me = R(me - ce ) + (1 -  ).

                                                                                         e,
Given the last two equations, we are able to obtain the exact formula for target wealth m
                                    e                u
which is the steady state value of m . Defining   R , following Carroll and Toche (2009),
we have:
                           e + 
                          m                       1- 
                               R
                                 = (1 - R-1 )m
                                             e +         e
                                                        =c
                           +1                       R
                      1   1         1            
                        -     me =     1-  -
                      R +1         R           +1
                                   (  + 1)(1 -  ) - 
                              me =                    .
                                        +1-R
Clearly, target wealth decreases when the severance payment becomes more generous and it
can even be negative if we make the severance ratio  large enough.




                                            32
                              Figure 6 Alternative Measures of Credit Availability
              1.5




                                                                                            1
                                                                                            Abiad et al. Index of Financial Liberalization
                                                                                                                                .9
   CEA/Debt-Income Ratio
                    1




                                                                                                                  .8
     .5




                                                                                            .6     .7
              0




                           1970   1975   1980   1985   1990    1995   2000   2005   2010

Legend: Debt­disposable income ratio: Thin black line, CEA index: Thick red/grey line, the Abiad, Detragiache, and
Tressel (2010) Index of Financial Liberalization: Dashed black line. Shading--NBER recessions.
Sources:  Federal Reserve, accumulated scores from the question on change in the banks' willingness to
provide consumer installment loans from the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices,
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/snloansurvey/; Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2010); US Financial
Account (Flow of Funds), Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.



B Comparison of Alternative Measures of Credit
  Availability
Figure 6 compares three measures of credit availability: our baseline CEA index, the Index of
Financial Liberalization constructed by Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2010) for a number
of countries including the United States, and the ratio of household liabilities to disposable
income.
   The Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel index is a mixture of indicators of financial devel-
opment: credit controls and reserve requirements, aggregate credit ceilings, interest rate
liberalization, banking sector entry, capital account transactions, development of securities
markets and banking sector supervision. The correlation coefficient between this measure and
CEA is about 90 percent.
   For comparison, the figure also includes the ratio of liabilities to disposable income (from
the Flow of Funds), which is however determined influenced by the interaction between credit
supply and demand.




                                                          33
C Reduced Form Regressions with Saving Rate
  Generated by the Structural Model

  Table 4 Reduced-Form Regressions with Saving Rate Estimated by the Structural
                                         Model

                           st = 0 + m mt + CEA CEAt + Eu Et ut+4 +  Xt + t
                                                           Reduced-Form               Additional Variables
Model              Uncertainty   Demographics         Baseline      Time Trend         Gov Sav          Ineq
0                    11.689           18.994         16.254           16.093         16.215          16.330
                     (0.182)          (1.126)         (0.636)         (0.710)         (0.633)         (0.646)
m                                     -0.912         -0.756           -0.729         -0.759          -0.780
                                       (0.110)        (0.099)         (0.113)         (0.099)         (0.117)
CEA                                   -7.316         -8.085           -7.713         -8.064          -8.174
                                       (0.292)        (0.112)         (0.621)         (0.114)         (0.309)
Eu                    0.555             0.237          0.223            0.238          0.239           0.222
                     (0.025)          (0.018)         (0.017)         (0.030)         (0.021)         (0.016)
t                   -0.055                                            -0.002
                     (0.001)                                           (0.004)
old                                   -0.191
                                       (0.071)
gov sav                                                                                 0.014
                                                                                       (0.014)
inc share                                                                                              0.010
                                                                                                      (0.033)
¯2
R                      0.975            0.989          0.988            0.988           0.988          0.988
F stat p val           0.000            0.000          0.000            0.000           0.000          0.000
DW stat                1.167            2.331          2.213            2.219           2.237          2.217

Notes: Estimation sample: 1966q2­2011q4. { ,  ,  } = Statistical significance at {10, 5, 1} percent. Newey­West
standard errors, 4 lags.




                                                      34
