                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          CHOICE AND CONSEQUENCE:
                ASSESSING MISMATCH AT CHICAGO EXAM SCHOOLS

                                      Joshua D. Angrist
                                       Parag A. Pathak
                                     Román Andrés Zárate

                                      Working Paper 26137
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26137


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




We are grateful to Miikka Rokkanen for his contributions to this project. Our thanks to the
Chicago Public Schools, the Noble Network, and an anonymous large urban school district for
graciously sharing data, to Clemence Idoux and Ignacio Rodriguez for excellent research
assistance, and to MIT SEII program managers Annice Correia, Eryn Heying, and Anna Vallee
for invaluable administrative support. We thank Will Dobbie, Glenn Ellison, Amy Finkelstein,
Michael Greenstone, Peter Hull, Chris Walters and seminar participants at Chicago, MIT, and
Princeton for helpful input. Financial support from Arnold Ventures is gratefully acknowledged.
Pathak also thanks the National Science Foundation and the W.T. Grant Foundation for research
support. Angrist's daughter teaches at a charter school. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Joshua D. Angrist, Parag A. Pathak, and Román Andrés Zárate. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Choice and Consequence: Assessing Mismatch at Chicago Exam Schools
Joshua D. Angrist, Parag A. Pathak, and Román Andrés Zárate
NBER Working Paper No. 26137
August 2019
JEL No. D47,I21

                                          ABSTRACT

The educational mismatch hypothesis asserts that students are hurt by affirmative action policies
that place them in selective schools for which they wouldn't otherwise qualify. We evaluate
mismatch in Chicago's selective public exam schools, which admit students using neighborhood-
based diversity criteria as well as test scores. Regression discontinuity estimates for applicants
favored by affirmative action indeed show no gains in reading and negative effects of exam
school attendance on math scores. But these results are similar for more- and less-selective
schools and for applicants unlikely to benefit from affirmative-action, a pattern inconsistent with
mismatch. We show that Chicago exam school effects are explained by the schools attended by
applicants who are not offered an exam school seat. Specifically, mismatch arises because exam
school admission diverts many applicants from high-performing Noble Network charter schools,
where they would have done well. Consistent with these findings, exam schools reduce Math
scores for applicants applying from charter schools in another large urban district. Exam school
applicants' previous achievement, race, and other characteristics that are sometimes said to
mediate student-school matching play no role in this story.

Joshua D. Angrist                                Román Andrés Zárate
Department of Economics, E52-436                 Institute on Behavior & Inequality (briq)
MIT                                              razarate@mit.edu
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and IZA
and also NBER
angrist@mit.edu

Parag A. Pathak
Department of Economics, E52-426
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
ppathak@mit.edu
1        Introduction

The educational mismatch hypothesis predicts poor outcomes for the beneficiaries of diversity pref-
erences if those benefitting are ill-prepared for the sort of education provided by selective schools.
Proposed by Sander (2004) as a cause of racial gaps in bar exam passage rates, the mismatch
hypothesis has inspired a large and expanding literature on the consequences of affirmative action
in college admissions (see, e.g., Sander and Taylor (2012) and Arcidiacono and Lovenheim (2016)).
The debate here is more than academic: mismatch arguments were prominent in the 2016 Fisher
v. University of Texas Supreme Court case, in which the court upheld the constitutionality of
affirmative action policy at the University of Texas.1
        Public discussion of mismatch has focused on higher education, but the same issues arise for
admission to selective public high schools, often called exam schools. Like selective colleges, exam
schools offer high-achieving students the opportunity to attend public schools with similarly bright
classmates, experienced teachers, additional courses and clubs, and perhaps other resources beyond
those available to students at non-selective public schools. Because public exam schools select their
students using entrance exams and course grades, criteria that disadvantage minority applicants,
affirmative action (AA) is seen by many as necessary for exam school diversity.
        In the 1970s and 1980s, exam schools in Boston, Chicago, and San Francisco guaranteed exam
school seats for minorities after these districts came under court control as a consequence of de-
segregation efforts. US courts have since treated the issues raised by affirmative action in exam
school admissions and higher education similarly. The landmark 1978 Bakke decision outlawed
racial quotas in college admissions. Since the 1990s, exam school admissions have likewise moved
to de-emphasize race.2 But the question of whether minority exam school applicants are indeed
well-served by affirmative action policies remains.
        This paper assesses the case for mismatch arising from affirmative action at exam schools in
the mostly nonwhite Chicago Public School (CPS) district. Affirmative action in Chicago lowers
admissions cutoffs for applicants from lower-income neighborhoods and raises them elsewhere. We
use exam school cutoffs to construct regression discontinuity (RD) estimates of exam school effects
that compare applicants who are just above and below neighborhood-specific cutoffs. These results
    1
     During the court proceedings, Justice Antonin Scalia stated: "There are those who contend that it does not
benefit African-Americans to get them into the University of Texas, where they do not do well, as opposed to having
them go to a less-advanced school, a slower-track school where they do well."
   2
     The U.S. Supreme Court ruled against Seattle and Louisville's race-based public school admissions systems in
2007.



                                                        2
show statistically significant negative effects of exam school attendance on math scores.3
       Applicants from the most disadvantaged neighborhoods face markedly lower cutoffs. Like the
population affected by affirmative action, these low-tier applicants enter exam schools with scores
well below those of most admitted students. But the extent of this sort of "preparedness mismatch"
varies across school selectivity and with individual student background. Chicago's system for
centralized exam school assignment allows us to construct instrumental variables estimates around
a wide range of cutoffs, for applicants from different tiers. These results show similar effects of
enrollment at more and less selective schools and for applicants more and less likely to benefit from
affirmative action, a pattern of findings inconsistent with the mismatch hypothesis.
       High-tier applicants who clear admissions cutoffs have baseline achievement close to the median
at their offered school, while low-tier applicants are well below the median. This observation leads
to a direct test of Sander (2004)'s formulation of mismatch, which argues that the gap between
applicant credentials and those of the median student in his or her school determine match quality.4
Estimates from models allowing effects to differ according to whether applicants have scores above
or below those of the median student provide evidence on this claim. Although not definitive, this
direct test of mismatch suggests forces other than mismatch lie behind negative exam school effects.
       Mixed evidence for "preparedness mismatch" motivates our exploration of alternative explana-
tions of CPS exam school effects. Many of Chicago's exam school applicants who are not admitted
end up in another non-traditional sector. The most important alternatives are charter and magnet
schools, both of which use lotteries to select their students. This allows us to combine the RD design
generated by exam school admissions with lottery variation in a three-sector model. This model
isolates non-traditional sector effects relative to a traditional (mostly neighborhood school) coun-
terfactual. Multi-sector estimates reveal that negative exam school effects are driven by diversion
away from the Noble Network of charter schools. Noble is a high-performing, "No-Excuses"-style
charter management organization (CMO). Because Noble enrollment boosts achievement sharply,
the diversion away from Noble induced by an exam school offer reduces test scores.5
   3
     Barrow et al. (2016) report RD estimates of the effects of Chicago exam school offers. We comment on these
results below. Other related studies of American exam schools include Abdulkadiro   glu et al. (2014) and Dobbie and
Fryer (2014). These studies mostly find no effect of exam school attendance on achievement or college attendance.
   4
     Sander (2004) writes: "If there is a very large disparity at a school between the entering credentials of the
median student and the credentials of students receiving large preferences, then the credentials gap will hurt those
the preferences are intended to help. A large number of those receiving large preferences will struggle academically,
receive low grades, and actually learn less in some important sense than they would have at another school where
their credentials were closer to the school median."
   5
     Other examples of this sort of sectoral or program-operator substitution appear in studies by Heckman et al.
(2000), Kline and Walters (2016), Angrist et al. (2013), and Chabrier et al. (2016). Kirkeboen et al. (2016) explore



                                                         3
    Finally, we report briefly on exam school effects for a sample of applicants enrolled in charter
middle schools in a second large urban district. This district has three exam schools and a high-
performing charter sector that mostly embraces No-Excuses-style pedagogy. Exam school applicants
enrolled in a charter school at the time of application typically remain in the charter sector if they
fail to win an exam school seat. Consistent with our Chicago findings, exam school offers reduce
achievement for this district's charter-originating exam school applicants.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses institutional background related
to Chicago's exam school sector. Section 3 describes our data and presents descriptive statistics.
Section 4 reports exam school enrollment effects identified by RD tie-breaking in the CPS centralized
match. The methodology here is an application of Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2017b). Section 5 isolates
the leading non-traditional exam school alternatives--magnet and charter schools--and shows how
charter school effects determine exam school effects. Section 6 sketches a formal model of mismatch
and shows that a simple additive model of school effects fits the CPS data remarkably well. Results
for a second large urban district are discussed in Section 7. Section 8 concludes.


2     Institutional Background

2.1    Exam Schools and Affirmative Action in Chicago

CPS is the third largest American school district, with more than 600 schools and roughly 400,000
students. As in many urban districts, most CPS students are black or Hispanic and from low-income
families. CPS high school students attend neighborhood schools by default, but can choose other
schools and programs. Choice options include exam schools (known locally as selective enrollment
schools), magnet schools, charter schools, military academies, and career academies.
    In the years covered by this study, CPS operated nine exam schools.6 Exam schools offer their
students a curriculum emphasizing honors and Advanced Placement (AP) courses. Not surprisingly,
exam school students are higher-achieving than most of their public school peers. Chicago's most
selective exam schools, Northside and Payton, are frequently listed as among the best U.S. public
high schools. In the 2016 U.S. News & World Report ranking, for example, Northside was ranked
39, while Payton was 41st.
substitution patterns and their consequences across college majors.
   6
     These are Brooks College Prep High School, Jones College Prep High School, King College Prep High School,
Lane Tech High School, Lindblom Math and Science Academy, Northside College Prep High School, Payton College
Prep High School, Westinghouse College Prep High School, and Whitney M. Young Magnet High School. South
Shore International High School opened in 2013 and Hancock College Prep High School opened in 2015.


                                                      4
       Selective enrollment applicants apply by ranking the exam schools to which they wish to be ad-
mitted. Until the 2010­2011 admissions cycle, applicants could rank up to four schools. Applicants
have since been able to rank up to six schools. The selective school admissions formula assigns
equal weight to entrance test results, a standardized test taken in middle school, and to letter
grades earned in 7th grade. These criteria generate a composite score running from 0 to 900 that
schools use to rank applicants. The most selective schools admit students with composite scores
above about 800; the least selective admit students with scores as low as 650, typically around the
66th quantile in the applicant composite score distribution.
       Chicago's school choice system grew out of a 1980 desegregation consent decree in which the
district agreed to promote school integration and to increase access for black and Hispanic students
by offering diverse school choice options. Initially, the choice system considered race. But in
2009, in response to a federal court decision vacating the original consent decree, CPS adopted an
affirmative action plan for selective schools based on the characteristics of the census tracts where
applicants live. This system remains in place.
       Chicago's system of residential preferences has been seen as a model for race-neutral admissions
at selective schools (see, e.g., Kahlenberg (2014)). Federal guidelines on acceptable alternatives to
promote diversity at selective K-12 schools also resemble Chicago's plan (see OCR (2011)).7 The
Chicago system assigns each census tract a score equal to the sum of its percentile rank on five
dimensions: median family income; a measure of adult educational attainment; home ownership
rates; and the prevalence of single-parent households and non-native English speakers.8 These
scores are then used to assign tracts to one of four tiers, so that roughly a quarter of CPS students
live in each tier. Barrow et al. (2016) reproduce a map of Chicago's census tracts by tier. Higher-
income tracts, in tier 4, are on the city boundary, while the most disadvantaged, in tier 1, are
concentrated in the southern and western parts of the city center.
       Since 2009, the CPS exam school admissions process has used a version of the deferred ac-
ceptance (DA) algorithm, now used for school assignment at CPS's other schools and around the
country. The exam school implementation of DA reflects tier-based affirmative action. Specifically,
the CPS exam-school assignment mechanism allocates a fixed share of seats, called merit seats, us-
ing composite scores only, while remaining seats are split equally across tiers. In 2011, for example,
   7
    Ellison and Pathak (2016) quantify the allocative efficiency of race-neutral affirmative action plans and compare
Chicago's new plan with alternatives.
  8
    Since 2010, the index has included measures of local-area school performance.




                                                         5
70% of seats were assigned within tiers and the rest were merit seats.9
       DA for school assignment considers school priorities over students (such as tier) as well as
applicant preferences. As noted by Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2017b), however, the CPS system can
be represented as DA without priorities by dividing each school into 5 sub-schools, one containing
merit seats and the other four containing equal numbers of tier-reserved seats. Applicants who
rank a school are first considered for merit seats and then for the seats reserved for their tier. DA
without priorities is called serial dictatorship (SD). An important feature of SD (and DA) is that
admission decisions are determined solely by a set of school-specific cutoffs (Abdulkadiroglu et al.,
2017a). CPS's version of DA therefore produces distinct cutoffs for each school and tier.10
       Figure 1 reports the Fall 2011 cutoffs for each school and tier. At Northside and Payton, the
most selective schools, students from tier 4 neighborhoods needed almost 900 points (the maximum
score) to get in. By contrast, cutoffs for students from tier 1 neighborhoods are about 100 points
lower. These differences are represented by the dots in the figure. The figure also shows that cutoffs
for these schools in a system without affirmative action would be near the tier 3 cutoff of 860. Tier
1 and 2 applicants with scores between the cutoff for their tier and 860 are admitted because of
affirmative action.
       The median composite score for admitted students, also plotted in Figure 1, provides a point
of comparison for tier-specific cutoffs. At Northside, for example, the median for those admitted
exceeds the cutoffs for tiers 1-3. Admitted applicants from these lower-SES tiers are therefore
especially likely to have scored below the school median, a gap that becomes a possible source of
mismatch. Payton cutoffs show a similar pattern.
       Lower down the hierarchy of exam school selectivity, at Lane, Young, and Jones, gaps between
the tier 4 and tier 1 cutoffs are also about 100 points. Cutoffs at Brooks show an interesting reversal:
tier 3 applicants must clear a higher bar than applicants from (higher-SES) tier 4. This reflects
differences in demand for these schools across tiers. Similarly, at the three least selective exam
schools (King, Lindblom, and Westinghouse), affirmative action considerations generate a cutoff
   9
     Dur et al. (2016) detail the CPS implementation of DA further.
  10
     Chicago implements tier reservations by running DA after splitting each school into merit and tier seats. Ap-
plicants are first considered for merit seats at schools they rank; if rejected at school s, they apply to school s seats
for their tier. Dur, Pathak, and Sonmez (2016) show that this implies that tier cutoffs are lower than cutoffs for
merit seats, so cutoffs for merit seats can be ignored in our description of assignments. Provided every school is
over-subscribed, this DA implementation is the same as SD for a market without priorities, where applicants from
tier t rank tier-t seats at s immediately below merit seats at s, as if these seats were at a different school. This can
be seen by noting that when schools are over-subscribed, an applicant from tier t is never assigned to seats reserved
for other tiers. As a result, applicants can be processed in order of their composite score as in SD and need only
be considered at merit seats and the tier seats allocated to their tier. Chicago isn't quite SD because not all exam
schools are always over-subscribed for each tier. But SD replicates 99.7 % of assignments in our sample.


                                                           6
for tier 2 and 3 applicants higher than for tier 4. Typically, however, applicants from lower tiers
must clear a lower cutoff for exam school admission. If students from disadvantaged neighborhoods
are less prepared for the rigors of an exam school education, this reduction in admissions standards
might produce mismatch.


2.2      Non-Traditional Exam School Alternatives

The two most important non-traditional alternatives for Chicago's exam school applicants (as
measured by enrollment) are magnet schools and charter schools. Magnet schools enroll applicants
district-wide and offer arts programs, agricultural science courses, and International Baccalaure-
ate programs. In the period covered by our sample, CPS had four magnet high schools: Chicago
High School for Agricultural Sciences, Clark Academic Prep, Curie Metropolitan, and Von Steuben
Metropolitan. Cullen et al. (2006) use lotteries to estimate the achievement consequences of atten-
dance at a Chicago magnet school in 2000, uncovering little evidence of a magnet impact.
       Magnet schools admit students through school-specific lotteries, though low-tier and nearby
applicants have a higher chance of winning a seat. Applicants must earn a minimum qualifying
score on grade 7 achievement tests. Siblings of enrolled students are subject to a separate sibling
lottery. Students who live within 2.5 miles of a school participate in a proximity lottery that
allocates up to 40% of non-sibling seats. Remaining capacity is divided equally into four tier-
specific lotteries. Seats are offered to applicants with the highest lottery numbers for their tier.
Unlike exam schools, magnet offers are decentralized, so applicants may get more than one.
       Charter schools are autonomous publicly-funded schools that operate in a framework known as
a charter. The first Illinois charter school opened in 1996. Illinois charters are typically approved
by local school districts, though some are granted by the state. Charters usually run for 5 years
and must be certified by the Illinois State Board of Education. Current law restricts Chicago to 75
charters, but allows expansions by charter schools established before 2003.
       The Noble Network of Charter Schools is one of Chicago's most visible charter providers, en-
rolling 40% of Chicago's 9th grade charter students. Founded in 1999, the Network started with
a single campus, Noble Street College Prep, but has expanded rapidly since 2006. In the years
covered by our study, Noble had nine additional campuses.11 With the exception of Gary Comer
College Prep, which includes a middle school, Noble runs high schools spanning grades 9­12.
  11
    These are Chicago Bulls College Prep, Gary Comer College Prep, Golder College Prep, Johnson College Prep,
Muchin College Prep, Pritzker College Prep, Rauner College Prep, Rowe-Clark Math & Science Academy, and UIC
College Prep. Since 2014, Noble Network has added six schools.


                                                     7
         Noble Network pedagogy is similar to that of other "No Excuses" charter schools, emphasiz-
ing extended instruction time, discipline and comportment, and data-driven feedback and teacher
training. Noble Network schools attract attention inside and outside Chicago. The network was
awarded an expansion grant from the U.S. Department of Education in 2015, one of only 12 Charter
Management Organizations to be so recognized. Using data and admissions lotteries for applicants
to the flagship campus for 2003-5, Davis and Heller (2019) find large positive effects of Noble at-
tendance on college attendance. In other work, we've seen promising achievement results for No
Excuses charters in Boston (Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2011; Angrist et al., 2013), Denver (Abdulka-
diroglu et al., 2017a), New Orleans (Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2016), and New York City (Dobbie and
Fryer, 2013). Dobbie and Fryer (2015) also report encouraging results for effects of No Excuses
charter attendance on teen pregnancy and involvement in the criminal justice system.12
         Any Chicago resident student who completes 8th grade can apply to as many Noble campuses
as they like, and may receive multiple Noble offers. Seats at oversubscribed campuses are assigned
by (school-specific) lotteries. Students who not receiving a lottery offer go onto a randomly-ordered
waitlist. Some Noble campuses are typically under-subscribed. Applicants with siblings enrolled
at a Noble school are automatically admitted there.


3         Data and Descriptive Statistics

Data provided by CPS data contain information on enrollment, test scores, exam school admission,
and magnet school admission. We also obtained application and admissions records from the
Noble Network. Our CPS files cover the 2009­2010 to 2014­2015 school years. The files include
information on students' school and grade, as well as demographic information such as gender, race,
free/reduced price lunch status, and special education status.
         Our analysis looks at school attendance effects on PLAN and ACT scores for exam school
applicants enrolled in CPS at the time of application. PLAN is a preliminary ACT test, typically
taken in 10th grade. ACT is a college readiness assessment taken as part of the CPS Prairie State
Achievement exams (PSAE), usually administered in 11th grade, and required of all high school
students until recently. Eighth grade Illinois State Achievement Test (ISAT) scores in math and
reading provide a baseline achievement control. Scores are standardized to be mean zero and have
    12
    Our tabulations of school climate data from Illinois State Board of Education report cards (available ar
https://www.illinoisreportcard.com) show that other Chicago charters have fewer students taking advanced courses,
higher student absenteeism and chronic truancy rates, and are less likely to share features of the No Excuses model.



                                                         8
unit standard deviation in the CPS population each year. We use the first score available for
students who repeat an exam. The restriction to applicants enrolled in CPS ensures that exam
school students are compared to students attending other within-district choice options and reduces
loss to follow-up. The Data Appendix details sample construction further.
    The exam and magnet school admissions files cover three application cohorts, from 2009­2010 to
2011­2012, the beginning of the tier-based affirmative action period. These files record applicants'
ranking of schools, their residential tier, and school offered. Each applicant's composite score
appears in the applicant file; it's these that determine the cutoffs discussed above. For each magnet
applicant, we also observe magnet school lottery numbers, and whether an applicant had sibling
priority, or participated in the proximity or tier lottery. Noble Network admissions files cover Noble
Network applicants from 2009­2010 to 2011-2012. These files record campuses applied to, Noble
lottery numbers (one for each school), and lottery outcomes (offer or waitlist). Noble files also
identify applicants admitted via sibling priority.
    Most CPS students are nonwhite, and most are poor enough to qualify for a subsidized lunch.
These and other comparisons of student characteristics by school sector appear in Table 1. Exam
school students are less likely to be non-white or poor, and have higher baseline scores, than other
CPS students. Magnet students are more likely to be Hispanic and less likely to be black than
the CPS population; they also have baseline scores above those of other CPS students, but their
baseline scores are well below those of incoming exam school students. Charter students are more
likely to be black and less likely to be Hispanic than are other CPS students. They also have
lower baseline scores than the typical CPS 9th grader. Noble enrolls a lower proportion of black
students than do other charter schools, but a higher proportion of Hispanics. Noble students also
have baseline scores above those of other charter students, but below the CPS average.


4     The Case for Mismatch

4.1   RD Estimates

We're interested in the achievement consequences of exam school attendance for affirmative action
beneficiaries and other exam school applicants. As detailed in Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2017b), the
CPS exam school assignment mechanism generates a regression-discontinuity (RD) research design
that identifies exam school effects. In combination with instrumental variables derived from magnet
and charter school lotteries, we can use this variation to estimate a variety of school sector effects.


                                                     9
       As in other RD designs, exam-school RD compares applicants across a set of cutoffs. The CPS
assignment mechanism can be modeled as a serial dictatorship that generates cutoffs s (t), for each
school s and tier t. Cutoffs are tier-specific because applicants compete for seats reserved for their
tier, only after merit seats are assigned. Following Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2017a), let i = (                  i , ti )

denote applicant i's type, where          i   is the applicants ranking of schools and ti is her tier. The
composite score used for admissions is denoted by ri ; this is the RD running variable.
       Let S denote the set of schools ranked by applicants of type . In serial dictatorship, the
probability an applicant is offered a seat at any of these schools is the probability the applicant has
a composite score that clears the most forgiving (that is, the lowest) of the these schools' cutoffs.
Formally, the qualifying cutoff faced by applicant i, denoted q (i ), and the school that identifies it,
s (i ), are defined as:
                                               q (i ) = min {s (ti )},
                                                       sSi

                                        s     
                                         i = s (i ) = arg min{s (ti )},
                                                           sSi


where ti fixes applicant tier.13 As in other nonparametric applications of RD research designs,
we look at applicants near the relevant qualifying cutoff. A dummy variable indicating any exam
school offer to applicants of type i in this window can be coded as


                                                Di = 1[ri  q (i )].


Conditional on suitable running variable controls, this any-offer dummy is an instrument for any-
exam-school enrollment, Ci , measured in years.
       Benchmark just-identified fuzzy RD estimates come from the following first- and second-stage
equations,


                                 Ci = Di + 1 (si , ti ) + Xi 1 + h(ri ) + i                                      (1)

                                  Yi = Ci + 2 (si , ti ) + Xi 2 + g (ri ) + i ,                                  (2)


where si and ti are the school and tier determining q (i ), with corresponding fixed effects 1 and
  13
    Abdulkadiro    glu et al. (2017b) adopt the convention that a lower admissions score is more favorable, in which
case q (i ) is the maximum cutoff for schools in S .




                                                         10
2 . The running variable control function in the first stage is


                                h(ri ) = 0 (s                 
                                             i , ti )ri + 1 (si , ti ) max{0, ri - q (i )},            (3)


with an analogous parametrization, denoted g (ri ), included in the second stage. Coefficients 0
and 1 also vary freely with si and ti . Xi includes baseline covariates (race, gender, lunch status,

and baseline math and reading scores).
       The running variable control function described by equation (3) implements a local linear es-
timation strategy with slope changes at each school-tier cutoff. Bandwidths around these cutoffs
are computed using the Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) procedure. Because the probability of
an exam school offer varies across schools, years, and tiers, we compute cutoff-specific bandwidths
using the sample that faces risk around each cutoff. Bandwidths are also computed separately for
each outcome variable.14 Equations (1) and (2) include dummies indicating the school and tier
generating q (i ). The parameters in these equations also vary by application year, which ranges
from 2009 to 2011. The estimation sample contains the set of students with running variable values
in the bandwidths around the relevant qualifying cutoff.
       An applicant who clears the admissions cutoff at the most-forgiving exam school for her tier
spends more time at an exam school than an applicant who scores just below this cutoff. This can
be seen in the first stage estimates reported in Panel A of Table 2, which show that cutoff-clearing
marginal applicants spend roughly an additional 0.6 years at an exam school prior to taking the
PLAN test in grade 10 and an additional 0.9 years prior to taking the ACT in grade 11. Second
stage estimates of equation (2), reported in Panel B in the table, are negative; those for math are
also statistically significant.


School-Specific Offer Instruments

We also use dummies for individual school offers as instruments for Ci . In a serial dictatorship,
applicant i from tier ti obtains an offer at school s by clearing s (ti ) and failing to get an offer from
a higher ranked school. Individual school offer dummies, Dis , can therefore be written
                                
                                1[ri  s (ti )]
                                
                                                         ~ = 0 for all s
                                                    if Dis                        ~
                                                                       ~  S where s           i   s,
                        Dis =
                                0
                                
                                                     otherwise.
  14
       Estimates using variations on this bandwidth selection scheme are similar.



                                                            11
Because applicants receive a single offer, we have


                                                     Di =        Dis ,
                                                             s


where s indexes exam schools. The full set of individual school offers can be used as instruments for
Ci in an over-identified fuzzy RD two-stage least squares (2SLS) setup. The first-stage for school-
specific offers likely differs by school, so we expect the resulting over-identified 2SLS estimates to
be more precise than those using a single "any-offer" instrument.
      An important piece of the school-specific offer strategy is control for differential risk of an offer
by applicant type. In a match governed by serial dictatorship, applicants to school s face two
sources of variation in offers. First, applicants must qualify for a seat at s by clearing the school-s
cutoff. Second, qualified applicants to s may be seated elsewhere by qualifying at a higher-ranked
choice. Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2017b) use this fact to show that in an local-to-cutoffs empirical
strategy of the sort widely used to exploit RD-type variation, the probability of receiving an offer
at a CPS exam school is either 0, 1, or 0.5; this is the local-to-cutoffs SD propensity score for an
offer at s. The theoretical appendix sketches this result.
      This understanding of assignment risk under SD motivates a 2SLS empirical strategy that uses
school-specific offers as instruments for exam school attendance, controlling for the propensity score
for each. The resulting 2SLS procedure estimates  in the system


                               Ci =        s Dis +         s (pis ) + Xi 1 + h(ri ) + i                (4)
                                       s              s

                                Yi = Ci +          s (pis ) + Xi 0 + g (ri ) + i .                     (5)
                                               s


The first stage here, equation (4), includes a full set of Dis dummies indicating offers at exam
school s; pis is the relevant propensity score with effect s and s . Xi includes baseline covariates
(race, gender, lunch status, and baseline math and reading scores). The first stage also includes
running variable controls of the form


                               h(ri ) = 0 (ti )ri +        1s (ti ) max{0, ri - s (ti )},              (6)
                                                       s


with g (ri ) defined similarly in (5).15 This model is estimated in a sample of applicants close to
 15
      Coefficients 0 and 1 vary freely with tier ti and year.



                                                            12
at least one school-specific cutoff. As detailed in the theoretical appendix, applicants to school s
face non-degenerate risk at s if they're in the school-s bandwidth or the bandwidth around the
lowest (easiest-to-clear) cutoff among the cutoffs for schools they prefer to s. We use the same
cutoff-specific bandwidths as for the qualifying-cutoff RD.
    As can be seen in Panel C of Table 2, over-identified estimates using school-specific offers
are slightly more precise but otherwise similar to the just-identified estimates reported in Panel
B. Although the precision gain from multiple instruments seems unimpressive, the availability of
multiple instruments is useful for the analysis that follows.16
    It's also noteworthy that the overidentification test statistics associated with equation (4) and
(5) generate a decisive rejection for one math outcome and marginal rejection for another. Rejection
implies that the underlying instruments used one-at-a-time produce statistically distinguishable IV
estimates. Mismatch is a potential source of effect heterogeneity in this context: we might expect
exam school effects to be lower or more negative when identified by offers to elite schools than when
identified by offers from less selective schools.


4.2    Exam School Effects By School Type and Tier

Figure 1 shows that affirmative action beneficiaries who were offered seats at more selective exam
schools are likely to have composite scores further from those of the median student at these schools.
Mismatch may therefore be especially important at elite schools. To investigate differential effects
by school selectivity, we distinguish enrollment effects at the four most selective schools (Northside,
Payton, Young and Jones) from effects at other schools. Multiple school offers can be used to
distinguish exam school treatment effects at different types of schools. To that end, let C1i denote
years of elite exam enrollment, while C2i counts years enrolled at non-elite exam schools. A two-
  16
     The appendix reports results from an exploration of threats to a causal interpretation of the estimates in Table
2. Follow-up scores are available for around 83% of the sample. Appendix Table A1 shows that exam school offers
are largely unrelated to the probability of observing an outcome test score. Attrition is therefore unlikely to induce
selection bias (for the theory behind this claim, see, e.g., Angrist (1997)). Table A2 presents encouraging evidence of
covariate balance by offer status.




                                                          13
endogenous-variable model identifies separate causal effects of elite and non-elite enrollment:


                       C1i =       1s Dis +       1s (pis ) + Xi 1 + h1 (ri ) + 1i ,
                               s              s

                       C2i =       2s Dis +       2s (pis ) + Xi 2 + h2 (ri ) + 2i ,
                               s              s

                         Yi = 1 C1i + 2 C2i +          s (pis ) + Xi 0 + g (ri ) + i ,               (7)
                                                   s


where the first-stage effects vary for the two types of exam schools. The parameter 1 is the causal
effect of exposure to an elite school environment and 2 is a non-elite exam school effect. The
running variable controls are as in equation (6).
   Estimates of elite and non-elite exam school effects using school-specific offer instruments, re-
ported in Panel A of Table 3, are broadly similar to those from the single-effect model. In this case,
however, we also see a substantial negative and statistically significant decline in PLAN reading
scores due to elite enrollment, as well negative effects for math. The estimates in Table 3 are
not consistent with the mismatch hypothesis: only one out of three negative effects are more pro-
nounced at elite schools. The p-values in the table also show the elite/non-elite gap in estimated
effects on PLAN reading to be marginally significant.
   Another take on the mismatch story looks a different groups of applicants, distinguishing those
most likely to benefit from affirmative action from others. We identify AA-affected applicants by
running the CPS match with no tier reservations, comparing the sample of applicants seated at an
exam school in this scenario to the sample seated in the (actual) match with tier reservations. The
results of this comparison, detailed in appendix Table A3, show that 65% of beneficiaries reside in
tier 1 and a further 33% are from tier 2.
   Exam school effects by tier are computed by replacing the distinction between years of enroll-
ment at elite and non-elite schools in equation (7) with endogenous variables distinguishing effects
of exam school exposure for applicants in tiers 1 and 2 from enrollment effects on applicants in
tiers 3 and 4. The instruments in this case are a full set of school-specific offers interacted with tier
(for a total of 36 instruments; as before, the model controls for tier main effects). Here too, the
estimates are inconsistent with mismatch. The lower panel of Table 3 shows larger and more neg-
ative estimates for low-tier applicants only for ACT math (though no contrast in estimated effects
by tier reported in column 3 is significantly different from zero). These findings are also broadly
consistent with the statistically significant negative reduced form effects of CPS exam school offers


                                                       14
on letter grades and selective college enrollment for low-tier applicants reported in Barrow et al.
(2016).
   Appendix Table A3 compares characteristics of the AA-affected group with those of exam
school compliers. The AA-affected are almost all low-tier residents. But AA-affected and exam-
offer compliers are about equally likely to be minority, low income, and to have baseline scores
above those of all exam school applicants (this score gap exceeds that for compliers). Figures not
reported in the table show that, among applicants for whom AA yields an additional offer, a little
over half are exam-offer compliers. At the same time, among low-tier exam-offer compliers, about
a third get an improved offer by virtue of AA. For tier 1 compliers, the proportion AA-affected hits
55%. Results for exam offer compliers therefore seem likely to indicative of effects on applicants
affected by AA cutoff changes.
   Finally, we look at exam treatment effects interacted with applicant position relative to the
median, an analysis motivated by Sander (2004). These results are generated by replacing the
two endogenous variables in equation (7) with years of exam enrollment and exam years times
an indicator for above-median baseline scores (the above-median dummy is switched on when an
applicant scores above the median at the exam school where they enroll). In this specification, large
positive interaction terms support mismatch, especially when large enough to suggest achievement
gains for high baseline achievers. The model with interaction terms is identified using school-specific
offers and school-specific offers interacted with tier dummies as instruments.
   As can be seen in Table 4, enrollment effects from the interacted model are close to those
estimated without interaction terms. For example, these are estimated to be -0.099 for PLAN
math and -0.059 for ACT math (ignoring interactions, that is, for below median applicants).
Estimates adding tier-offer interactions to the instrument list appear in Panel B of Table 4. Other
than a modest precision increase in Panel B, the estimates with and without tier interactions
in the instrument list are similar. Estimates of the above-median interaction term are mostly
positive, but marginally significant only for ACT math and only in Panel B (an estimate of 0.036).
Moreover, these positive interactions terms are too small to imply a positive exam school effect
for high-baseline applicants. On balance, therefore, the results in this table offer little support for
preparedness-mediated mismatch suggested by Sander (2004).




                                                  15
5         Diagnosing Diversion

5.1        Counterfactual Destinies

The results in Table 3 seem inconsistent with the mismatch hypothesis. And the tests of Sander-
style mismatch in Table 4 fail to uncover evidence of strong preparedness interactions or positive
effects for high achievers. It seems likely, therefore, that negative exam school effects are generated
by forces other than mismatch. We show here that negative exam school effects reflect diversion :
exam school offers divert many applicants away from high-performing high schools in the Noble
Network. Students who enroll at Noble instead of an exam school do better as a result, so exam
school offers reduce achievement. The first step in this argument establishes Noble schools as a
leading counterfactual "destiny" for offer-affected applicants denied an exam school seat.
         The population of interest in this context consists of offer-compliers, that is, those who en-
roll in an exam school when offered a seat but not otherwise.                    To formalize this, let Wi 
{exam, traditional, charter, magnet, other} denote the sector in which applicant i enrolls in the
year in which she takes the ACT test (the last category is divided into smaller non-traditional
sectors). Define potential sector enrollment variables W1i and W0i , indexed by exam offers Di as


                                         Wi = W0i + (W1i - W0i )Di .


Potential exam school enrollment under alternative offer scenarios can now be written Cdi =
1{Wdi = exam}; d = 0, 1. We're interested in E [1{W0i = j }|C1i > C0i ]. This is the counter-
factual sector distribution for exam-offer compilers in the scenario where they're not offered an
exam school seat. As in Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2016), we estimate these counterfactual destinies
by applying results in Abadie (2002).17
         As can be seen in the first bar plotted in Figure 2, the most common counterfactual destiny is a
traditional CPS school. But the charter sector, followed by magnet schools, is the most important
destiny outside the traditional sector. Roughly a quarter of exam school offer compliers enroll in a
charter school when not offered an exam school seat. The outlined portion of the charter segment
shows that Noble schools account for over half of the charter sector counterfactual. Since applicants
from tier 1 and tier 2 are disproportionately likely to benefit from AA, we also tabulate destinies
    17
    Our procedure amounts to 2SLS estimation of a version of (2) with (1 - Di )1{Wi = j } as the outcome variable
and (1 - Di ) as the endogenous variable. Some applicants are non-compliant because they fail to take offers; In the
language of Angrist et al. (1996), these are never-takers. Other applicants (always-takers) find an exam school seat
even when not offered one through the official match.


                                                        16
for applicants from low tiers; these are appear in the second bar. The destiny distribution for these
applicants shows charter and Noble shares similar to those for the sample as a whole.18
       Motivated by the large number of exam school applicants who end up in these two non-
traditional sectors when not offered an exam school seat, we compute destinies for the subsample
of exam school applicants who also apply to magnet school or Noble schools. Even for the 26% of
exam applicants who apply to a magnet school, charter schools remain the most important alter-
native after traditional public schools. And for the 13% of exam school offer compliers who also
apply to the Noble Network, a Noble school is the dominant counterfactual destiny.
       A graphical exam school RD hints at the importance of diversion. Figure 3 plots enrollment and
ACT math scores against the exam school admissions composite centered at applicants' qualifying
cutoffs (positive values indicate qualification for admission), after regression-adjusting for applicant
risk sets. In the sample of applicants who apply to exam and magnet schools, exam offers boost
exam enrollment while decreasing magnet exposure sharply. This is apparent in the left side of
Panel A in the figure. At the same time, the right-hand side of this picture shows a small downward
shift in ACT math scores. Among applicants to both exam and Noble schools, sector substitution
is even more pronounced: the drop in Noble exposure at the qualifying cutoff is almost as large
as the increase in exam school exposure. The right-hand side of this figure also shows a marked
decrease in test scores at the cutoff.


5.2      Multi-sector Models

We evaluate the hypothesis that exam school effects are explained by sector substitution using a
multi-sector model with three endogenous variables. Let Ci , Mi , and Ni denote years of exam,
magnet, and Noble enrollment, respectively. The magnet and Noble sectors both admit students
via decentralized single-school lotteries. As in other decentralized lotteries, applicants may apply to
more than one school. Since the likelihood of getting an offer is higher for applicants who apply to
multiple schools, the multi-sector model controls for the set of schools applied to (risk set controls
are included with other baseline covariates).
       For each magnet applicant, we code an offer instrument, Dim , indicating offers at over-subscribed
schools (defined as those where some students received an offer, while others didn't), in risk strata
determined by residential proximity, tier, sibling status, and cohort. Focusing on over-subscribed
  18
    "Outside CPS" in Figure 2 refers to enrollment in the test year. Some of those missing when not offered a seat
return, while some of those offered a seat exit later, leading to the balanced attrition rates by offer status seen in
Appendix Table A1.


                                                         17
schools yields a stronger first stage. Likewise, for each Noble applicant, we code an offer instrument,
Din , for any applicant who is offered a seat at an oversubscribed campus in risk strata determined
by sibling status and cohort.19
       A multi-sector model identified by three offer instruments can be described by this four-equation
setup:


              Ci =       cs Dis + cm Dim + cn Din +                 cs (pis ) + Xi 1c + hc (ri ) + ci
                     s                                      s

             Mi =        ms Dis + mm Dim + mn Din +                      ms (pis ) + Xi 1m + hm (ri ) + mi
                     s                                              s

              Ni =       ns Dis + nm Dim + nn Din +                     ns (pis ) + Xi 1n + hn (ri ) + ni
                     s                                          s

              Yi = c Ci + m Mi + n Ni +            s (pis ) + Xi 0 + g (ri ) + i ,                            (8)
                                               s


where  's are three first-stage coefficients and  's are three sector effects. As in (7), this model
includes exam-school offer propensity score and running variable controls, and a vector of covariates,
Xi , that includes dummies for magnet and Noble risk sets. This model is estimated in the sample
of exam school applicants who also apply to either a magnet or Noble school.
       The multi-sector first stages reported in Table 5 show that the offer of a seat in each sector
boosts enrollment in the sector offered, while reducing enrollment elsewhere. For instance, an exam
sector offer increases exam enrollment by about 0.94 years before taking the ACT (this differs from
the estimate in Table 2 because the sample here includes exam school applicants that also applied
either to magnet or Noble campuses and because the model measures effects relative to students not
offered a seat in any of these three sectors. Magnet and Noble offers increase own-sector enrollment
by about 0.70 years.
       The estimates in the first column of Table 5 show that magnet and Noble offers reduce exam
school attendance about equally. At the same time, exam offers pull applicants away from Noble
schools a little more than from magnet schools (compare -0.20 and -0.13 in columns 2 and 3 of the
first row of the table). Exam and Noble offers reduce magnet attendance similarly (compare -0.13
and -0.11 in column 2). Exam and magnet offers reduce Noble enrollment, but exam offers pull
students away from Noble much more strongly than do offers from magnets (compare -0.200 and
-0.067 in column 3).
  19
    Appendix Tables A1 and A2 report statistics related to attrition and balance for the magnet and Noble research
designs.



                                                       18
   As a benchmark, Table 6 reports single-sector estimates of exam school effects analogous to
those reported in Table 2, computed in the sample used to estimate the multi-sector model. These
appear in odd numbered columns in the table. The math effects here are somewhat more negative
than those reported in Table 2. For example, the estimated effect of exam school years on ACT
math, reported in column 5 is -0.120 in Panel A (compared with -0.058 in Table 2). The over-
identified estimates reported in Panel B of Table 6 again show a modest increase in precision. The
modest increases in negative magnitudes seen here are likely attributable to larger cross-sector
substitution in the sample including only exam school applicants who also applied to a magnet or
Noble school.
   2SLS estimates of multiple sector effects, reported in even-numbered columns in Table 6, suggest
that negative effects of exam school exposure on math scores and PLAN reading are explained by
the combination of large gains from Noble enrollment and exam-induced substitution away from
this sector. In column 2, for example, the Noble estimate ranges from 0.37 to 0.43, while the
associated exam school estimates are small and not significantly different from zero. This pattern
repeats in columns 5 and 6, with large positive effects of Noble exposure and a commensurate
decline in exam school effects, to the point where the latter are not significantly different from zero
in the multi-sector model.
   Estimates from the just-identified version of this model, reported in Panel A, suggest magnet
schools may also boost PLAN math. But these estimates are considerably smaller than the corre-
sponding Noble effects and are not significantly different from zero in Panel B. Estimates in columns
4 and 8 suggest that Noble attendance boosts reading as well as math. Single-sector estimates of
exam school effects on PLAN reading effects in column 3 are also negative (equal to -0.136 and
statistically significant in Panel A and -0.064 in Panel B). Though not always significantly differ-
ent from zero, these estimates can be explained by the combination of individual sector effects in
column 4 and substitution patterns like those in Table 5.
   Consistent with the estimated effects on reading in Tables 2, 3, and 4, the benchmark estimates
in column 7 for ACT reading show no evidence of an exam school effect. Estimates of the multi-
variate model in column 8 show positive Noble effects, but these are not large enough for sector
small enough for sector substitution to generate a negative estimate in column 7, when Noble and
magnet enrollment are ignored.




                                                  19
6     Mismatch vs. Diversion

6.1   Theoretical Framework

The estimates in Table 6 suggest exam school effects are driven primarily by the quality of schools
attended by applicants not offered an exam school seat. This section considers the possibility
that exam-Noble substitution accounts for all effect heterogeneity observed in our data, including
variation across subgroups defined by tier and baseline achievement. This strong and simple null
hypothesis is measured against an alternative that allows for possible match effects.
    Our exploration of treatment effect heterogeneity is motivated by the distinction between school
quality and student-specific match effects in the Ellison and Pathak (2016) model of human capital
production. This model postulates a production function that depends on student background
(ability or preparedness) and a match component that decreases in the distance between prepared-
ness and curriculum difficulty. In particular, suppose that the expected outcome for student i of
preparedness level ai is described by:


                               V (ai , qs , s ) = f (ai , qs ) -  (ai - s )2 ,                   (9)


where qs is school quality, s is curriculum characterized by the median preparedness of the students
school s serves, and  parameterizes the relative importance of student-curriculum matching. Let


                                                ai = xi ,


where xi is a fully saturated description of discrete applicant characteristics.
    This production function yields a testable distinction between school quality effects common to
all students and a set of interaction terms generated by mismatch. To see this, suppose that the
non-match-related component of human capital production is


                                   f (ai , qs ) = qs + ai = qs + xi .                          (10)


The mismatch term in (9) can now be written


                                  (xi  - s )2 = xi 2 + xi 1 s +           s,                   (11)




                                                     20
where xi 2 =  xi xi  , 1 = -2, and               s    = 2
                                                        s.

    Combining terms in (10) and (11) produces a linear-in-parameters specification,


                                     yis = (qs +      s)   + xi [ + 2 ] + s xi 1

                                         = µs + xi  + s xi 1 ,                                                  (12)


where µs = qs +       s   and  =  + 2 . Equation (12) casts mismatch as a source of interactions
between school selectivity (s ) and applicant characteristics related to ability or preparedness.
School quality effects, by contrast, are additive, contributing to a school-specific intercept.20
    We test for mismatch using an empirical model that omits interaction terms but allows for
differing first-stage effects of exam school offers on Noble enrollment. Specifically, we ask whether
subgroup variation in the Noble first stage explains heterogeneous exam school offer effects. This
test is constructed via 2SLS estimation of versions of


                                  Yi =       Cis µs + Xi  +             Cis Xi s + i ,                          (13)
                                         s                          s


where Cis indicates enrollment at school s with quality effect µs . Coefficient s parameterizes
student-school interactions. Equation (13) is identified by using Dis and Dis Xi as instruments for
Cis and Cis Xi , respectively.
    Suppose that matching matters little, so school quality effects are the same for all students, and
captured by µs . When s = 0, the reduced form becomes:


                    E [Yi |Xi , Dis , Din , Dim ] =         E [Cis |Xi , Dis , Din , Dim ]µs + Xi .             (14)
                                                       s


Suppose further that only Noble attendance matters, a sector with common school effect µn . Let
Zi be any instrument that changes Noble enrollment. Equation (14) then simplifies to:


                                 E [Yi |Xi , Zi ] = µ0 + E [Ni |Xi , Zi ]µn + Xi .                              (15)


Finally, let Z (X ) and Z (X ) denote the reduced form and first-stage for an X -specific Noble effect
  20
     The school quality component of the production function described by (10) need not be additive. Charter schools,
for example, might boost achievement more for low-ability students than for others. On the other hand, the absence
of substantial school/student interactions of any sort weighs against mismatch.




                                                             21
identified by instrument Z . Differencing by Zi , we obtain:


                       Z (Xi ) = (E [Ni |Xi , Zi = 1] - E [Ni |Xi , Zi = 0])µn = Z (X )µn .         (16)


      Equation (15) implies that the reduced form effect of instrument Zi for each Xi and any Zi is
driven by the corresponding covariate-specific Noble first stage generated by Z . In other words,
the covariate-specific reduced form effect of any offer should be proportional to the corresponding
covariate-specific first stage effect. The slope of the line linking offer-status differences outcomes to
the corresponding differences in average years enrolled at Noble is the causal effect of interest, µn .


6.2      Covariate Heterogeneity Explained

The proportionality hypothesis embodied in equation (16) is tested in two ways. First, we use both
exam and Noble offers as instruments for a Noble effect, asking whether the resulting IV estimates
are similar. As can be seen in Panel A of Table 7, use of Noble offers to instrument Noble exposure
generates large precisely estimated effects on math ranging from about 0.34 to 0.41. Effects on
PLAN reading are also large at about 0.35, while the ACT reading effect is a marginally significant
0.148. The sample here is the same as that used for the multi-sector estimates reported in Tables
5 and 6.
      Estimates using exam school offers to instrument Noble enrollment, reported (with standard
errors) in the second pair of rows in Table 7, are remarkably similar those using Noble offers.
Compare, for example, 0.33 with 0.41 for PLAN math and 0.46 with 0.34 for ACT math. Not
surprisingly, the estimates using exam offers to instrument Noble enrollment are less precise than
those constructed using Noble instruments, but both sets of estimates show large and at least
marginally significant effects on the same three outcomes for which exam school effects are most
pronounced in Tables 2-4.
      The overidentification test statistic associated with a 2SLS procedure that uses both sorts of
offers as instruments yields a formal test of offer-IV equality.21 As can be seen in the third pair
of rows in Table 7, 2SLS estimates generated by this procedure fall in between those using either
offer type alone. The p-values arising from overidentification tests associated with these estimates
offer no hint of divergence between estimates using Noble and exam school offers as instruments.
      A second exploration of the proportionality hypothesis embodied in (16) instruments Noble
 21
      Angrist and Pischke (2009) discusses this interpretation of overidentification tests.



                                                            22
enrollment using offer instruments interacted with covariates. Here, the overidentification null
hypothesis is equality of IV estimates generated for different covariate subgroups. To implement
this, we instrument Noble enrollment using Din and a set of 9 offer-covariate interactions for lunch
status (interactions for free and reduced-price), race (interactions for black and Hispanic), gender,
baseline test scores (an interaction for low), and tier dummies (interactions for Tiers 1-3). With 9
interactions and an offer main effect in the instrument list, the overidentification test has 9 degrees
of freedom.
    The covariate interaction strategy built around Noble offers generates estimates much like those
using a single Noble offer dummy. Compare, for example, the estimate of approximately 0.35 for
PLAN math in the first pair of rows in Panel B of Table 7 with 0.41 at the top of the table.
Estimates for the remaining three outcomes at the top of Panels A and B are also about as close.
With one exception, the overidentification test statistics associated with these estimates show little
evidence of effect heterogeneity.
    Panel B of Table 7 also reports estimates computed using an instrument list that interacts exam
offers with the same covariate subgroups. Because the F statistics here are low enough to raise
concerns about finite-sample bias, this part of the table shows LIML estimates rather than 2SLS.
Although LIML estimates of Noble effects on PLAN scores are less precise than the corresponding
just-identified estimates using exam offers, the LIML estimates in Panel B are remarkably to those
generated by a single exam offer dummy.22 Here, the over-identification p-values are mostly lower
than the p-values generated by interacting Noble offers with covariates. This partly reflects the
relative imprecision of IV estimates using exam offers interacted with covariates to instrument
Noble enrollment.
    Finally, the bottom of Table 7 reports the results of combining both offer types and the associ-
ated sets of covariate interactions in a single 2SLS procedure using 20 instruments. The resulting
estimates fall between the corresponding exam-offer and Noble-offer estimates constructed using
covariate interactions as instruments. The over-identification test statistic associated with these
estimates has 19 degrees of freedom. None of the test statistics generated by this specification offer
evidence against the proportionality hypothesis. In other words, across subgroups, both Noble and
exam offer reduced form effects can be explained by the corresponding first stage effects of these
offers on Noble enrollment, with little evidence of heterogeneity beyond this.
  22
     Angrist and Pischke (2009) discuss the approximate unbiasedness of LIML when instruments are weak. Reduced
precision in moving from the just-identified to the over-identified model interacting exam offers with covariates is a
consequence of the switch to LIML.



                                                         23
         This remarkable homogeneity is visible in Figure 4, which offers a graphical representation of
the specification with 20 instruments. Specifically, the figure plots covariate-specific reduced form
estimates for ACT math against the corresponding first stage estimates for Noble exposure, con-
structed using both exam and Noble offer instruments. Red numbers in the figure label results
using the Noble offer instrument, while black numbers label those using exam offers. Each reduced
form and first stage estimate in the figure is fit one-at-a-time for a variety of (overlapping) covariate
cells. For example, points labeled with "1" show first stage and reduced form estimates for appli-
cants who qualify for a free lunch. Solid dots in the figure plot results using any-offer instruments
across all covariate cells.23
         Consistent with the substitution patterns in Table 5, the Noble lottery instrument generates
large positive first stages for Noble enrollment and a corresponding set of positive reduced form
estimates. At the same time, first-stage effects of exam offers on Noble enrollment are mostly
negative, as are the reduced form estimates corresponding to these. Importantly, however, the
points from both research designs fall roughly along a straight line with a slope equal to about
0.36.24 This "visual IV" estimate indeed appears to rationalize the collection of reduced form and
first stage estimates plotted in the figure, whether driven by Noble or exam school offers.


7         Exam Schools Elsewhere

A brief examination of the effects of exam school attendance for schools in a second (anonymous)
large urban district (LUD) generates results remarkably consistent with those from Chicago. Like
Chicago, most LUD students are nonwhite. LUD exam schools also admit students using a central-
ized assignment DA-based scheme similar to that used in the CPS match. And LUD has a robust
charter sector, with many schools following the same sort of "No Excuses" practices characteristic
of the Noble network. Our analysis of LUD looks at exam school effects for applicants who originate
in charter middle schools. These applicants are very likely to have character enrollment destinies
when not offered an exam school seat.
         The analysis sample for this investigation includes applicants who applied for an exam school
seat from 2003 to 2015. Outcome variables come from statewide math and English assessments,
    23
    All estimates in the figure control for covariate-group main effects.
    24
    This estimate comes from a weighted fit, with weights given by the reciprocal of the homoskedastic sampling
variance of the reduced form estimates. Note that reduced form and first stage estimates in mutually exclusive
covariate splits, such as for men and women, average to the any-offer effects plotted in the figure. The slope reported
in the text therefore omits the any-offer estimates.



                                                          24
with scores standardized to the district mean and standard deviation. Our analysis focuses on
students enrolled in a charter school at the time they applied for an exam school seat. Two-thirds
of the exam-school offer compliers in this group end up in a charter high school when not offered an
exam school seat. The research design for LUD controls for non-random variation in exam school
offer risk in a 2SLS setup analogous to that described by equation (5) for CPS.
    2SLS estimates of exam school effects for the sample of charter-originating LUD applicants show
that exam enrollment reduces math scores by around 0.2 standard deviations per year of enrollment.
This can be seen in Table 8, which reports results from tests taken at the end of the first school year
after application and from a larger sample that includes test scores from additional assessments.
The negative 2SLS estimates for math reported in Table 8 are substantial and significantly different
from zero, mirroring than those from Chicago. This increase in magnitude likely reflects the fact
that the estimates here are for a group especially likely to have a charter destiny.


8    Conclusions

Diversity concerns have long taken center stage in public discussion of exam school access (see, e.g.,
Boston Latin Needs More Diversity, 2016 and Confronting Segregation in NYC Schools, 2017). The
mismatch hypothesis is a touchstone in this debate. It stands to reason that academic preparedness
would mediate exam school effects. Yet, our findings show that, as far as achievement goes, exam
school value-added is driven by alternative schooling options rather than by measures of applicant
preparedness. More generally, we find little in the way of match effects of any kind. Remarkably, a
simple additive model with constant charter, exam, and magnet effects rationalizes the pattern of
achievement gaps for applicants who have applied to more than one sector.
    The test score effects reported here are echoed in studies of CPS exam school effects on other
outcomes. In particular, Barrow et al. (2016) show that tier 1 applicants to CPS exam schools are
substantially less likely to attend a selective college when they cross an exam school admissions
cutoff. At the same time, Davis and Heller (2019) report positive college effects for Noble's flagship
campus in 2003-05. It therefore seems likely that Noble enrollment explains negative exam school
effects on college selectivity as well as on test scores.
    Chicago is not alone among large urban districts in featuring important exam and charter
sectors. It's noteworthy, therefore, that data from another large urban district show evidence of
the same sort of consequential sector substitution among exam school applicants originating in



                                                   25
charter schools. These results suggest that policies focused solely on selective school diversity,
rather than school quality in the form of causal value-added, may do little to increase learning for
disadvantaged groups.




                                                26
References

Abadie, A. (2002). Bootstrap Tests for Distributional Treatment Effects in Instrumental Variable
  Models. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97(457):284­292.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., Angrist, J., Dynarski, S., Kane, T., and Pathak, P. (2011). Accountability and
  Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston's Charters And Pilots. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 126(2):699­748.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., Angrist, J. D., Hull, P. D., and Pathak, P. A. (2016). Charters Without Lot-
  teries: Testing Takeovers in New Orleans and Boston. American Economic Review, 106(7):1878­
  1920.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., Angrist, J. D., Narita, Y., and Pathak, P. A. (2017a). Research Design meets
  Market Design: Using Centralized Assignment for Impact Evaluation. Econometrica, 85(5):1373­
  1432.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., Angrist, J. D., Narita, Y., and Pathak, P. A. (2019). Breaking Ties: Regression
  Discontinuity Designs Meets Market Design. IZA Discussion Paper 12205.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., Angrist, J. D., Narita, Y., Pathak, P. A., and Zarate, R. A. (2017b). Regression
  Discontinuity in Serial Dictatorship: Achievement Effects at Chicago's Exam Schools. American
  Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 107(5).

Abdulkadiroglu, A., Angrist, J. D., and Pathak, P. A. (2014). The Elite Illusion: Achievement
  Effects at Boston and New York Exam Schools. Econometrica, 82(1):137­196.

Angrist, J. (1997). Conditional independence in sample selection models. Economics Letters,
  54(2):103­112.

Angrist, J., Pathak, P., and Walters, C. (2013). Explaining Charter School Effectiveness. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(4):1­27.

Angrist, J. and Pischke, J.-S. (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics. Princeton University Press,
  Princeton.

Angrist, J. D., Imbens, G. W., and Rubin, D. B. (1996). Identification of causal effects using
  instrumental variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91(434):444­455.


                                                27
Arcidiacono, P. and Lovenheim, M. (2016). Affirmative Action and the Quality-Fit Tradeoff. Jour-
  nal of Economic Literature, 54(1):3­51.

Barrow, L., Sartain, L., and de la Torre, M. (2016). The Role of Selective High Schools in Equalizing
  Educational Outcomes: Heterogeneous Effects by Neighborhood Socioeconomic Status. Federal
  Reserve Bank of Chicago, WP 2016-17.

Boston Globe (2016). Boston latin needs more diversity. Boston Globe editorial, September 28.

Chabrier, J., Cohodes, S., and Oreopoulous, P. (2016). What Can We Learn from Charter School
  Lotteries? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(3):57­84.

Cullen, J. B., Jacob, B. A., and Levitt, S. (2006). The Effect of School Choice on Participants:
  Evidence from Randomized Lotteries. Econometrica, 74(5):1191­1230.

Davis, M. and Heller, B. (2019). No Excuses Charter Schools and College Enrollment: New Evidence
  from a High School Network in Chicago. Education Finance and Policy, 14(3):414­440.

Dobbie, W. and Fryer, R. (2013). Getting beneath the Veil of Effective Schools: Evidence from
  New York City. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(4):28­60.

Dobbie, W. and Fryer, R. (2014). The Impact of Attending a School with High-Achieving Peers:
  Evidence from the New York City Exam Schools. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 6(3):58­75.

Dobbie, W. and Fryer, R. (2015). The Medium-Term Effects of High-Achieving Charter Schools
  on Non-Test Score Outcomes. Journal of Political Economy, 123(5):985­1037.

Dur, U., Pathak, P. A., and S¨
                             onmez, T. (2016). Explicit vs. Statistical Preferential Treatment in
  Affirmative Action: Theory and Evidence from Chicago's Exam Schools. NBER Working Paper
  22109.

Ellison, G. and Pathak, P. A. (2016). The Efficiency of Race-Neutral Alternatives to Race-Based
  Affirmative Action: Evidence from Chicago's Exam Schools. NBER Working Paper 22589.

Heckman, J., Hohmann, N., Smith, J., and Khoo, M. (2000). Substitution and Drop Bias in Social
  Experiments: A Study of an Influential Social Expeirment. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  115:651­694.


                                                 28
Imbens, G. and Kalyanaraman, K. (2012). Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression Discon-
  tinuity Estimator. Review of Economic Studies, 79(3):933­959.

Kahlenberg, R. (2014). Elite, Separate, and Unequal: New York City's Top Public Schools Need
  Diversity. NY Times, June 22.

Kirkeboen, L., Leuven, E., and Mogstad, M. (2016). Field of Study, Earnings, and Self-Selection.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(3):1057­1111.

Kline, P. and Walters, C. (2016). Evaluating Public Programs with Close Substitutes: The Case
  of Head Start. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131:1795­1848.

New York Times (2017). Confronting Segregation in New York City Schools. New York Times
  editorial, May 15.

OCR (2011).         Guidance on the Voluntary Use of Race to Achieve Diversity and Avoid
  Racial Isolation in Elementary and Secondary Schools.           Memorandum of U.S. Depart-
  ment of Justice and U.S. Department of Education, Office of Civil Rights, Available
  at: http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/guidance-ese-201111.pdf and Last accessed:
  April 15, 2017.

Sander, R. H. (2004). A Systematic Analysis of Affirmative Action in American Law Schools.
  Stanford Law Review, 57(2):367­483.

Sander, R. H. and Taylor, S. (2012). Mismatch: How Affirmative Action Hurts Students It's
  Intended to Help, and Why Universities Won't Admit it. Basic Books.




                                              29
                              Figure 1: Chicago Admission Cutoffs by Tier (2011)
              900
              850
              800
     Cutoff
              750
              700
              650
              600




                                        e




                                                                                                         de
                           om




                                                     s




                                                                                               n
                                                                                   ng
                                                                          s
                                                            ne
                  ng




                                                ok




                                                                       ne
                                       s




                                                                                             to
                                    ou




                                                                                                       si
                                                                                  u
                                                          La
                Ki


                         bl




                                                                                            y
                                                 o




                                                                    Jo


                                                                               Yo




                                                                                                     th
                                                                                         Pa
                                              Br
                                 gh
                       nd




                                                                                                   or
                               tin
                     Li




                                                                                                  N
                             es
                          W




                                     No AA                    Tier 1                  Tier 2
                                     Tier 3                   Tier 4                  Median Student


Note: This figure shows the admission cutoffs for each tier at each exam school in Chicago in 2011, along with the cutoff
that would have obtained without tier-based AA. The grey bars indicate the median admissions score among those offered
a seat.
                                              Figure 2: Enrollment Destinies
                   100
                   80 60
                 Percent
               40  20
                   0




                             All Applicants    Low-tier Applicants (50%) Magnet Applicants (26%)       Noble Applicants (13%)

                                                   Outside CPS                 Traditional CPS (including CTE)

                                                   Contract                    Military academy

                                                   Magnet                      Charter

                                                   Noble




Note: This figure shows the enrollment destinies of exam school compliers when not offered an exam school seat. Enrollment
compliers are applicants who attend an exam school when offered a seat but not otherwise. The 1st bar plots non-exam
destinies for all rejected exam school applicants, and the 2nd bar plots for low-tier applicants. The 3rd bar plots non-exam
destinies for rejected exam school applicants who also applied to a magnet school. The 4th bar plots non-exam destinies
for rejected exam school applicants who also applied to a Noble school. Destinies are estimated as in Abdulkadiro    glu et al.
(2014). Enrollment rates are measured in the fall of the year of the ACT math test. A student who does not take ACT math
is counted as Outside CPS.
                                                         Figure 3: Effects at Qualifying Cutoffs

                                                 Panel A: Magnet and Exam School Applicants
                         .6




                                                                                                  .6
                         .4




                                                                                                  .4
                         .2




                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                             Score effect
            Enrollment

                         0




                                                                                                0
                         -.2




                                                                                                  -.2
                         -.4




                                                                                                  -.4
                         -.6




                                                                                                  -.6




                               -100   -50              0                50             100                  -100   -50          0           50   100
                                                Running variable                                                         Running variable

                                      Exam enrollment              Magnet enrollment                                            ACT math



                                                   Panel B: Noble and Exam School Applicants
                         .6




                                                                                                  .6
                         .4




                                                                                                  .4
                         .2




                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                             Score effect
            Enrollment

                         0




                                                                                                0
                         -.2




                                                                                                  -.2
                         -.4




                                                                                                  -.4
                         -.6




                                                                                                  -.6




                               -100   -50              0                50             100                  -100   -50          0           50   100
                                                Running variable                                                         Running variable

                                      Exam enrollment              Noble enrollment                                             ACT math




Note: The left side of this figure plots enrollment at exam, Noble, and magnet schools near qualifying (exam-school) cutoffs
against the exam school running variable. Applicants who clear their qualifying cutoff are offered an exam school seat. The
right side plots ACT math against tie-breaker over the same range. All variables are plotted after partialing out risk sets.
The x-axis in both columns is centered at the qualifying cutoff for each applicant. Plotted points are averages in 10-point
windows; lines in the plots are estimated conditional mean functions smoothed using local linear regression (LLR).
                          Figure 4: Covariate VIV for the Effects of Noble Enrollment on ACT Math



                                                          Noble Offers
                  .4




                                                                               7
                                                                               112
                                                                                                         6
   Reduced Form




                                                                       105
                                                                        11     9   13
                              Exam Offers                                 8
                  .2




                                                                     14
                                                                      2
                                                                                4
                                                                                        3



                                               3
                  0




                                          14
                               2     7
                                     10  12
                                                   6


                                     148 9
                                    13
                                     5
                               11
                  -.2




                        -.5                    0                .5                          1                       1.5
                                                       Noble Years First stage

                                               90% significant FS          90% significant RF


                                       1-Free lunch 2-Reduced lunch 3-Non-F/R lunch
                                          4-Black 5-Hispanic 6-Whites and Asians
                                    7-Female 8-Male 9-High Baseline 10-Low Baseline
                                          11-Tier 1 12-Tier 2 13-Tier 3 14-Tier 4


Note: This is a visual instrumental variables (VIV) figure that plots reduced form effects of exam school and Noble offers
on ACT math against first stage effects of exam school and Noble offers on Noble years, separately for a set of 14 covariate-
defined groups. Exam offer effects are plotted in black; Noble offer effects are plotted in red. Covariate-specific estimates are
computed one at a time. Estimates for all applicants are plotted with dots, these are omitted from the VIV calculation. The
slope of the solid line through these estimates is 0.362, a VIV estimate of the effects of Noble enrollment, using offer-covariate
interactions as instruments.
                                            Table 1. CPS 9th Graders by Sector
                                   Traditional             Exam            Magnet             Charter            Noble
                                     schools              schools          schools            schools          Network
                                        (1)                 (2)              (3)                 (4)               (5)
Black                                 0.444                0.332            0.295              0.578             0.437
Hispanic                              0.428                0.304            0.553              0.370             0.520
White                                 0.075                0.233            0.092              0.022             0.016
Asian                                 0.033                0.086            0.043              0.013             0.012
Female                                0.489                0.578            0.489              0.480             0.510
Free lunch                            0.753                0.448            0.725              0.788             0.763
Reduced price lunch                   0.084                0.114            0.100              0.098             0.128
Special education                     0.166                0.091            0.139              0.178             0.157
Tier 1                                0.267                0.166            0.176              0.337             0.349
Tier 2                                0.284                0.204            0.315              0.301             0.299
Tier 3                                0.264                0.274            0.300              0.248             0.241
Tier 4                                0.186                0.355            0.209              0.114             0.111
Baseline math                         -0.033               1.445            0.078              -0.289            -0.149
Baseline reading                      -0.034               1.242            0.087              -0.232            -0.080
N                                    89,542                9,020            5,477              17,828            7,146
Notes: This table reports average characteristics of 9th grade CPS students attending traditional, exam, magnet, charter, and
Noble Network schools between 2010 and 2012 (applying for seats in 2009-11). Students are assigned the tier for the census
tract of their residence, as recorded in CPS enrollment files. Baseline scores are standardized to the CPS test-taking
population.
               Table 2. Fuzzy RD (2SLS) Estimates of Exam School Enrollment Effects
                                           PLAN                                 ACT
                                   Math             Reading              Math        Reading
                                    (1)                (2)                (3)          (4)
                               Panel A: First stage for any exam offer
Clears qualifying cutoff        0.645***           0.613***            0.906***     0.952***
                                  (0.025)            (0.025)            (0.036)      (0.037)

                                     Panel B: 2SLS using exam offer
Exam years                        -0.087***           -0.053             -0.058***            -0.003
                                    (0.032)          (0.038)               (0.022)            (0.023)

N                                   16,451             16,855              17,826             16,889

                               Panel C: 2SLS using school-specific offers
Exam years                       -0.091***           -0.059             -0.056***              0.005
                                   (0.031)           (0.037)              (0.021)             (0.023)

Overid (DF=8) p-value                  0.02              0.08                 0.00               0.42
F                                      77.0              74.5                 73.0               73.1
N                                     17,528            17,708               18,805            18,162
Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates of exam school exposure effects for applicants applying 2009-
11. The endogenous variable is years of enrollment between application and test date. The first stage for
any exam school offer is reported in Panel A; the corresponding 2SLS estimates appear in Panel B. These
models are identified by variation around the qualifying cutoff. The estimates in Panel C use a full set of
school-specific offers as instruments, controlling for offer risk. All models include the set of baseline
covariates listed in Table A2. Models in Panels A and B also include school-by-tier-by year fixed effects
and school-by-tier-by year running variable controls. Models in Panel C also include year-by-tier fixed
effects and year-by-tier running variable controls as described in the text. The table also shows the first
stage F statistic for over-identified models. Bandwidths use the formulas in Imbens and Kalyanaraman
(2012). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.
                                    Table 3. Exam Effects by School Type and Tier
                                                          PLAN                            ACT
                                                  Math             Reading         Math                     Reading
                                                   (1)                 (2)           (3)                      (4)
                                             Panel A: Effects by school type
Elite exam years enrolled                       -0.086**           -0.107**       -0.043*                    0.006
                                                 (0.038)            (0.045)       (0.023)                   (0.026)
Non-elite exam years enrolled                  -0.092***             -0.050     -0.061***                    0.006
                                                 (0.031)            (0.037)       (0.021)                   (0.023)

p-value (elite=non-elite)                        0.79                0.05                 0.23                0.99
F (elite exam)                                  206.3               198.9                214.7               213.8
F (non-elite exam)                               91.6                87.5                 85.2                86.9
N                                               17,529              17,709               18,805              18,162

                                                 Panel B: Effects by tier
Estimates for low tier applicants               -0.073*             -0.063              -0.074**             0.008
                                                (0.042)            (0.052)               (0.030)            (0.031)
Estimates for high tier applicants             -0.094**             -0.055                -0.024             -0.007
                                                (0.042)            (0.049)               (0.028)            (0.031)

p-value (low tier = high tier)                    0.72                0.91                 0.22                0.72
F (low tier)                                      10.8                10.2                 10.1                10.4
F (high tier)                                     11.7                11.7                 11.2                11.4
N                                                17,528              17,708              18,805              18,162
Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates of the effects of exam school exposure for applicants applying 2009-11
using school-specific offers as instruments for any exam school enrollment. Panel A splits enrollment effects by
school type, distinguishing between effects of the number of years enrolled in an elite exam school (Northside,
Payton, Young, and Jones) and effects of the number of years enrolled in a non-elite exam school (King, Lindblom,
Westinghouse, Brooks, and Lane). Panel B splits applicants by tier, distinguishing effects of years enrolled for
applicants in tiers 1-2 from effects of years enrolled for applicants in tiers 3-4. Estimates in this panel add
instruments by interacting school-specific offers with tier dummies. All models include the set of baseline
covariates listed in Table A2, year-by-tier fixed effects, and year-by-tier running variable controls, as described in the
text. The table also reports Angrist and Pischke first-stage F statistics for models with multiple endogenous
variables and the p-value for a test of subgroup effect equality. Robust standard errors appear in parentheses. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
                          Table 4. Exam Effects for Applicants Above and Below the Median
                                                       PLAN                                                   ACT
                                              Math              Reading               Math                             Reading
                                               (1)                 (2)                 (3)                               (4)
                                      Panel A: 2SLS using school-specific offers
Exam years                                 -0.099***            -0.062*            -0.059***                            0.007
                                             (0.032)             (0.038)             (0.021)                           (0.024)
Exam years x above median                     0.024               0.044               0.011                             -0.003
                                             (0.039)             (0.045)             (0.023)                           (0.025)

p-value (exam years+interaction=0)                   0.10                  0.75                   0.12                   0.89
F (exam years)                                       87.6                  85.5                   82.2                   82.7
F (exam years x above median)                        86.0                  72.4                   87.2                   89.0
N                                                   17,462                17,646                 18,740                 18,099

                          Panel B: 2SLS using school-specific offers interacted with tier dummies
Exam years                                  -0.092***               -0.063*                -0.054***                    0.003
                                              (0.030)                (0.036)                 (0.020)                   (0.022)
Exam years x above median                      0.028                  0.041                 0.036**                     -0.003
                                              (0.028)                (0.033)                 (0.016)                   (0.019)

p-value (exam years+interaction=0)                    0.10                   0.62                    0.48                  1.00
F (exam years)                                        22.0                   21.3                    20.9                  21.1
F (exam years x above median)                         37.5                   35.4                    36.1                  38.4
N                                                    17,462                 17,646                  18,740               18,099
Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates of the effects of exam school exposure in models with an interaction term for applicants
whose baseline scores are above those of the median student enrolled in the exam school attended. Estimates in Panel A use school-
specific offer dummies as instruments. Estimates in Panel B use school-specific offers interacted with tier dummies. All models
include the set of baseline covariates listed in Table A2, year-by-tier fixed effects, and year-by-tier running variable controls, as
described in the text. The table also reports p-values for tests of whether effects for applicants above the median are zero. The table
also reports Angrist and Pischke first-stage F statistics for models with multiple endogenous variables. Robust standard errors
appear in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
                Table 5. First Stage Estimates for Multi-Sector Models
                                   Exam Years       Magnet Years       Noble Years
                                        (1)               (2)                (3)
Clears qualifying cutoff             0.938***        -0.131***          -0.200***
                                      (0.058)          (0.037)            (0.042)
Magnet lottery offer                -0.197***         0.673***            -0.067*
                                      (0.053)          (0.070)            (0.036)
Noble lottery offer                 -0.178***        -0.110***           0.724***
                                      (0.055)          (0.032)            (0.077)

N                                        6,954              6,954               6,954
Notes: This table reports first stage estimates for three enrollment variables, exam years,
magnet years, and noble years, estimated in the ACT math sample. The instruments are
dummies indicating any exam offer (determined by clearing the qualifying cutoff), lottery
offers at over-subscribed magnet schools, and lottery offers at over-subscribed Noble
schools. First stage equations include running variable controls and risk set dummies for
exam, magnet, and Noble offers, as described in the text, and the covariates listed in Table
A2. All models include school-by-year-by-tier running variable controls. Robust standard
errors appear in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%.
                                                     Table 6. 2SLS Estimates of Sector Effects
                                                           PLAN                                                       ACT
                                             Math                       Reading                         Math                     Reading
                                        (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
                                                  Panel A: Any exam offer (clears qualifying cutoff)
Exam years                            -0.080        0.079        -0.136**        -0.040       -0.120***        0.014       -0.020        0.028
                                     (0.051)       (0.063)        (0.060)       (0.078)         (0.037)       (0.042)     (0.036)       (0.046)
Magnet years                                       0.171*                        0.075                         0.076                     -0.025
                                                   (0.088)                      (0.103)                       (0.059)                   (0.061)
Noble years                                       0.433***                     0.345***                      0.373***                   0.125*
                                                   (0.087)                      (0.103)                       (0.056)                   (0.067)

p-value (exam = magnet)                              0.23                           0.20                          0.24                          0.35
p-value (exam = Noble)                               0.00                           0.00                          0.00                          0.09
N                                     6,372         6,372           6,516          6,516          6,954          6,954          6,582          6,582

                                                            Panel B: School-specific offers
Exam years                          -0.167***        -0.049        -0.064        0.004          -0.108***        -0.019          0.006         0.044
                                      (0.048)       (0.064)       (0.054)       (0.077)           (0.032)       (0.040)         (0.033)       (0.045)
Magnet years                                         0.119                       0.036                           0.032                         -0.017
                                                    (0.084)                     (0.102)                         (0.055)                       (0.062)
Noble years                                        0.369***                    0.372***                        0.338***                      0.169***
                                                    (0.088)                     (0.104)                         (0.054)                       (0.062)

p-value (exam = magnet)                               0.02                          0.69                         0.26                            0.25
p-value (exam = Noble)                                0.00                          0.00                         0.00                            0.02
F (exam)                                33.1          20.2           33.2           20.8           33.3          22.6            34.3            22.9
F (magnet)                                            9.2                           9.4                          10.6                            10.5
F (Noble)                                             11.3                          10.6                         11.6                            11.0
N                                      6,694         6,694          6,728          6,728          7,171         7,171           6,967           6,967
Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates of the effects of exam, magnet, and Noble years enrolled, estimated in multi-sector models. These estimates
were computed using the sample of 2009-11 exam school applicants who applied to exam schools and a Noble or magnet school, as in Table 5. The
instruments used to contruct the estimates in Panel A are described in the note to Table 5. The instrument list for Panel B replaces the any-exam-offer
dummy with a set of school-specific offer dummies, adding appropriate controls for offer risk. The table also reports Angrist and Pischke first-stage F
statistics for models with multiple endogenous variables and the p-value for tests of subgroup-effect equality. All models include the set of baseline
covariates listed in Table A2 and dummies for risk sets for Noble and magnet applicants. Models in Panel A also include school-by-tier-by-year fixed
effects and school-by-tier-by-year running variable controls. Models in Panel B also include year-by-tier fixed effects and year-by-tier specific running
variable controls as described in the text. Robust standard errors appear in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%.
                   Table 7. Noble Effects Identified by Offer Instruments and Covariate Interactions
                                                      PLAN                                     ACT
                                            Math                Reading              Math                      Reading
                                             (1)                  (2)                 (3)                        (4)
                                     Panel A: Offer instruments without covariates
Noble lottery offer
Noble years                               0.412***             0.350***            0.344***                    0.148**
                                           (0.071)              (0.089)             (0.047)                    (0.057)

Exam offer (clears qualifying cutoff)
Noble years                                 0.333*                0.500**               0.455***                0.118
                                            (0.179)               (0.209)                (0.113)               (0.128)

Both offers
Noble years                                0.386***              0.355***               0.361***               0.115**
                                            (0.070)               (0.084)                (0.045)               (0.054)
First stage F                                57.47                 58.36                  58.79                 52.69
Overid (DF=1) p-value                        0.759                 0.261                  0.422                 0.898
N                                            6,550                 6,699                  7,131                 6,759

                                  Panel B: Offer instruments with covariate interactions
Noble lottery offer
Noble years                                0.352***              0.311***               0.309***               0.109**
                                            (0.074)               (0.083)                (0.048)               (0.055)
First stage F                                11.52                 11.44                  12.09                  9.67
Overid (DF=9) p-value                        0.002                 0.446                  0.702                 0.498

Exam offer (LIML)
Noble years                                  0.379                0.451*                0.394***                0.160
                                            (0.239)               (0.246)                (0.094)               (0.111)
First stage F                                 4.04                  4.35                   4.89                  4.57
Overid (DF=9) p-value                        0.168                 0.219                  0.926                 0.951

Both offers
Noble years                                   0.358***              0.368***               0.350***             0.126**
                                               (0.063)               (0.075)                (0.040)              (0.048)
First stage F                                    8.36                  8.38                   8.55                 7.42
Overid (DF=19) p-value                          0.128                 0.606                  0.961                0.905
N                                               6,550                 6,699                  7,131                6,759
Notes: This table reports alternative IV estimates of the effects of Noble exposure for 2009-11 applicants. The sample
includes applicants who applied to exam schools and either to magnet or Noble schools. In Panel A, the instrument list
includes a dummy for the type of offer indicated in the heading. In Panel B, the list includes the type of offer plus
interactions with covariates (lunch status, race, gender, baseline test scores, and tier dummies). All models control for the
main effects of the baseline covariates listed in Table A2. Models using the exam offer include school-by-tier-by-year fixed
effects and school-by-tier-by-year running variable controls, as described in the text. Models using the Noble offer also
control for Noble risk sets. The table reports first-stage F-statistics and over-identification test p-values. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
              Table 8. Exam School Effects on Charter-enrolled Applicants in a Large Urban District
          Test Timing                                      Math                            English
               (1)                                          (2)                               (3)
 Within one year after enrollment                       -0.212***                            0.054
                                                          (0.070)                           (0.098)
                                          N                4,069                             4,106

        All available years                                      -0.161***                                 -0.021
                                                                   (0.051)                                (0.057)
                                                N                   5,499                                  5,534
Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates of the effects of years of exam school exposure for 2003-15 applicants to exam
schools in a large urban district. The applicants used to compute these estimates were enrolled in charter schools at the time
of application. Charter-originating exam school applicants are likely to attend charters when not offered an exam school seat.
Outcomes are test scores on a statewide assessment, standardized to the district mean and to have unit standard deviation.
All students were tested within the end of the first year after enrollment; some were also tested in later grades. Standard
errors clustered at the applicant level are shown in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%.
                                     Table A1. Differential Attrition
                                            PLAN                                      ACT
                                    Math             Reading                Math              Reading
                                     (1)               (2)                   (3)                (4)
                                         Panel A: Any exam offer
Clears qualifying cutoff            0.015             0.006                 0.004               -0.000
                                   (0.010)           (0.010)               (0.010)             (0.010)

Mean                               0.842              0.842                0.830               0.831
N                                  19,407             19,906               21,383              20,241

                                      Panel B: Magnet lottery offer
Magnet lottery offer              0.036***         0.038***               0.036***           0.036***
                                   (0.013)          (0.013)                (0.013)            (0.013)

Mean                               0.801              0.801                0.782               0.782
N                                  13,236             13,236               13,236              13,236

                                       Panel C: Noble lottery offer
Noble lottery offer                 0.014            0.014                 0.022*              0.022*
                                   (0.011)          (0.011)                (0.011)             (0.011)

Mean                               0.694                0.694                0.669               0.669
N                                  8,608                8,608                8,608               8,608
Notes: This table reports estimates of the effects of offer receipt on follow-up data availability for 2009-
11 applicants. All models include the set of baseline covariates listed in Table A2. Models in Panel A
also include school-by-tier-by-year fixed effects and school-by-tier-by-year running variable controls, as
described in the text. Models in Panels B and C also control for magnet and Noble risk sets,
respectively. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%; *** significant at 1%.
                                        Table A2. Covariate Balance for Exam, Magnet, and Noble Network Research Designs
                                      Exam school RD                    Exam school RD
                                                                                                       Magnet lottery                              Noble lottery
                                     (qualifying cutoff)             (school-specific offers)
                                   Mean               Offer      Joint F-test         p-value      Mean              Offer                     Mean              Offer
                                                      effect       (DF=9)                                            effect                                      effect
                                    (1)                (2)            (3)               (4)         (5)               (6)                      (7)                (8)
Black                              0.375             -0.013         1.971              0.038       0.361            -0.000                    0.373             -0.005
                                                    (0.013)                                                        (0.014)                                     (0.013)
Hispanic                           0.436            0.027*          1.280              0.242       0.456            -0.000                    0.568             0.007
                                                    (0.014)                                                        (0.016)                                     (0.014)
White                              0.107             0.002          1.595              0.110       0.105            -0.002                    0.024             -0.000
                                                    (0.008)                                                        (0.010)                                     (0.006)
Asian                              0.067             -0.010         1.803              0.062       0.063            0.001                     0.027             0.002
                                                    (0.007)                                                        (0.008)                                     (0.006)
Female                             0.594             0.010          0.869              0.553       0.591            -0.015                    0.549             0.008
                                                    (0.015)                                                        (0.018)                                     (0.017)
Free/reduced price lunch           0.794           0.022**          0.984              0.451       0.829            0.008                     0.894            0.019*
                                                    (0.011)                                                        (0.013)                                     (0.011)
Baseline math                      0.905             -0.025         0.698              0.711       0.530            -0.035                    0.076             0.011
                                                    (0.019)                                                        (0.030)                                     (0.030)
Baseline reading                   0.799          -0.053***         0.765              0.649       0.517            -0.028                    0.110             0.005
                                                    (0.017)                                                        (0.027)                                     (0.027)

N                                   17,826                               18,805                           10,500                               7,000
Notes: This table reports estimates of offer effects on covariates for 2009-11 applicants. Columns 1 and 2 report any-exam offer effects; columns 3-4 show F statistics for
school-specific offers; columns 5-6 show magnet offer effects; columns 7-8 show Noble offer effects. Sample sizes in columns 1 and 3 count the number of observatons in
the bandwidth for ACT math, for which baseline scores are available. Sample sizes in columns 5 and 7 count the number of observations with baseline scores. Fixed
effects and running variable controls are as in Table 2. Models in columns 5-6 and 7-8 control for magnet and Noble risk sets, respectively. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
                       Table A3. Characteristics of Compliers and Affirmative-Action-Affected Applicants

                                                                           AA Affected          AA Affected
                               Exam Applicants       Exam Enrolled                                                Exam Compliers
                                                                         (Improved Offer)     (More Selective)
                                     (1)                  (2)                   (3)                 (4)                  (5)
Black                               0.424                0.356                0.319                0.288                0.398
Hispanic                            0.418                0.338                0.571                0.560                0.464
White                               0.097                0.194                 0.05                0.065                0.114
Asian                               0.048                0.091                0.045                0.066                0.014
Female                              0.545                0.598                0.612                0.604                0.597
Free lunch                          0.728                0.542                0.739                0.690                0.701
Reduced lunch                       0.098                0.117                0.096                0.103                0.132
Special education                   0.101                0.068                0.034                0.039                0.015
Tier 1                              0.237                0.213                0.647                0.550                0.272
Tier 2                              0.263                0.220                0.333                0.426                0.222
Tier 3                              0.273                0.260                0.014                0.022                0.273
Tier 4                              0.226                0.308                0.007                0.000                0.235
Baseline math                       0.397                1.215                1.129                1.616                0.803
Baseline reading                    0.408                1.410                1.351                1.342                0.969

N                                     45,513                  7,795              1,548                917               13,852
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for exam applicants, exam school students enrolled in 9th grade, applicants for whom
affirmative action matters, and complier characteristics for the exam school RD design. The AA-affected sample includes: (a) improved
offer: applicants for whom affirmative action produces an offer from a school they've ranked above at which would otherwise have been
offered a seat, (b) more selective: gets an offer from a more selective school (Jones, Northside, Payton, and Young) than otherwise.
Negative estimates are reported as zeros.
A        Theoretical Appendix: Risk in Serial Dictatorship

SD, a version of DA without priorities, works like this:

         Order applicants by tie-breaker. Proceeding in order, offer each applicant his or her
         most preferred school with seats remaining.

Like any DA-type mechanism, SD generates a set of cutoffs, denoted s for school s. For any school
s that ends up full, cutoff s is given by the tie-breaker, normalized to the unit interval, of the last
student offered a seat at s. Otherwise, s = 1. Finite-market cutoffs are typically random, that is,
they depend on the distribution of lottery draws. In large "continuum" markets, however, cutoffs
are constant, a result that motivates use of the continuum model.25
       In SD, applicants seated at school s qualify there and are (necessarily) disqualified at schools
they like better. The building blocks for SD risk at school s are therefore (a) the cutoff at s and (b)
cutoffs at schools preferred to s. The latter are characterized by a quantity we call most informative
disqualification (MID), which tells us how the tie-breaker distribution among type  applicants to
s is truncated by offers at schools  prefers to s. Formally, let s denote the set of applicant types
who list s and let
                                        Bs = {s  S | s             s} for   s                      (17)

denote the set of schools type  prefers to s (The discussion here ignores tier, which can be absorbed
into preference lists). For each type and school, M IDs is a function of cutoffs at schools in Bs ,
specifically:
                                           
                                            0                            if Bs = 
                                M IDs                                                              (18)
                                            max{ | b  B }                otherwise.
                                                b      s


       M IDs is zero when school s is listed first since all who list s first compete for a seat there.
The second line reflects the fact that an applicant who lists s second is seated there only when
disqualified at the school they've listed first, while applicants who list s third are seated there when
disqualified at their first and second choices, and so on. Moreover, anyone who fails to clear cutoff
b is surely disqualified at schools with lower (less forgiving) cutoffs. For example, applicants who
fail to qualify at a school with a cutoff of 0.5 are disqualified at schools with cutoffs below 0.5.
We can therefore quantify the truncation induced by disqualification at schools preferred to s by
  25
       Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2017a) explores alternative justifications of the continuum model.


                                                           45
recording the most forgiving cutoff among them.
   Type  cannot be seated at s when M IDs > s because those qualified at s can do better (they
qualify at the school that determines M IDs ). Assignment risk when M IDs  s is therefore the
probability that
                                          M IDs < Ri  s .

We summarize these facts in the following proposition, which is derived in Abdulkadiroglu et al.
(2019).

Proposition 1 (Global Score in Serial Dictatorship): Consider serial dictatorship in a continuum
market, using a single tie-breaker, Ri , distributed according to FR (r|) for type . For all s and
  s , we have:


                    ps ()  E [Dis |i = ] = max{0, FR (s |) - FR (M IDs |)}.


   SD assignment risk, which is positive only when when the cutoff at s exceeds M IDs , is given
by the size of the group with Ri between M IDs and s . This is


                                       FR (s |) - FR (M IDs ).


With lottery tie-breaking (and a uniformly distributed lottery number), the SD risk formula sim-
plifies to s - M IDs . With non-lottery tie-breaking, as for CPS exam schools, the SD propensity
score depends on the conditional distribution function, FR (·|), evaluated at s and M IDs .
   This result does not immediately resolve omitted variables bias. With non-random tie-breakers
like test scores, conditional tie-breaker distributions, FR (.|), are likely to depend on , so the score
in Proposition 1 need not have coarser support than does . This is in spite of the fact many
applicants with different values of  share the same M IDs . Second, FR (.|) is typically unknown.
Finally, while control for the propensity score eliminates confounding from type, assignments are
a function of tie-breakers as well as type, and non-lottery tie-breakers are likely to be correlated
with potential outcomes.
   Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2019) address these challenges by evaluating risk for applicants close to
cutoffs. Proposition 1 identifies the relevant cutoffs in markets with many schools and types. Begin




                                                  46
by defining intervals around each cutoff. Given bandwidth  , these intervals are defined by
                                           
                                            n      if Ri > s + 
                                           
                               tis ( ) =    a      if Ri  s -                                         (19)
                                            c      if Ri  (s - , s +  ].

We collect the set of these for all schools in the vector


                                 Ti ( ) = [ti1 ( ), ..., tis ( ), ..., tiS ( )] .


We then have:

Proposition 2 (Local Score in Serial Dictatorship): Consider serial dictatorship in a continuum
market. Assume that cutoffs s are distinct. For each s  S and   s such that M IDs = 0,
suppose M IDs = s for s = s. For T = [t1 , ..., ts , ..., tS ]  {n, a, c}S , all  > 0, and all w,


                       P [Di (s) = 1|i = , Ti ( ) = T, Wi = w] = 0 if s > s .


Otherwise,
                                                                   
                                                                    0          if ts = n or ts = a
                                                                   
             lim P [Di (s) = 1|i = , Ti ( ) = T, Wi = w] =          1          if ts = a and ts = n
              0                                                     0.5        if ts = c or ts = c.

When M IDs = 0, risk is 0 when ts = n; 1 when ts = a; and 0.5 otherwise.

   The Proposition establishes a key conditional independence result: limiting SD assignment risk
depends only on tie-breaker proximity to the cutoff at s and to M IDs ; risk is otherwise unrelated
to applicant characteristics. Type  applicants with tie-breakers near either M IDs or the cutoff
at s face risk of one-half. Applicants with ts = a and ts = n have tie-breakers strictly between
M IDs and s , meaning they're disqualified at s but qualified at s. Finally, applicants with
ts = n or ts = a cannot be seated at s, either because they're disqualified there or because they
qualify at s .
   It remains to note that qualification at any exam school involves only a single cutoff, q (i ).
Near this cutoff, qualification risk is 0.5. Below and above q (i ), risk is degenerate.
   In the empirical (as opposed to theoretical) world, almost all applicants necessarily have tie-


                                                       47
breaker values that are strictly above or below any particular randomization cutoff. But applicants
with tie-breakers close to either M IDs or the cutoff at s are special, because it is these applicants
for whom qualification is (almost) randomly assigned.




                                                 48
B     Data Appendix for Chicago

This document describes data processing used to construct analysis files. Chicago Public Schools
(CPS) is the source of the application files for two school sectors: (i) Exam schools, and (ii)
Magnet schools. The Noble Network provided us with (iii) the Noble application file. CPS is also
the source of: (iv) the enrollment file which contains student demographic and school attendance
information, and (v) the outcomes data files which include the Plan test score file, and the Prairie
State Achievement Examination (PSAE) file. This appendix describes these data sets and the
procedures used to construct the sample of the main empirical analyses.


B.1    Data Sources

Exam School Application File

The exam school application file contains a record for each student consisting of an application
id number, CPS id number, name, gender, race, date of birth, the tier (from 2009 onwards),
address, special education status, application year, preferences over nine exam schools, and the
composite score for admission. Each record also includes the school where the student receives an
offer (if any). This data set covers students with application years from 2002-2012. The analysis
sample only includes applicants from 2009-2011. Students enroll in the fall of the following year.
Cutoffs for this period are published in the CPS website: http://cps.edu/AccessAndEnrollment/
Documents/SEHS_CutoffScores.pdf. We exclude duplicate observations, and applicants who were
missing the application id number from the analysis.


Magnet School Application File

The magnet application file contains a record for all applications to magnet schools. The records
consist of an application id, a CPS id number, the set of magnet schools the students apply to,
first name, last name, date of birth, application year and offer status. Magnet schools use separate
lotteries for applicants in proximity to the school, applicants with a sibling in the school and finally,
separate lotteries for each tier. These different lottery groups are indicated in the application file.
This data set covers students from 2001-2012. The analysis sample only includes applicants from
2009-2012.




                                                   49
Noble Network Application File

The Noble Network application file contains a record for each student consisting of the CPS ID
number, gender, name, race, date of birth, application year, the set of noble schools the student
applies to, the lottery number for oversubscribed schools, offer status for each Noble school, and
whether it is a lottery offer or a sibling offer. This data set covers students with application years
from 1998-2015. The analysis sample only includes applicants from 2009-2011.


CPS Enrollment File

The CPS enrollment file spans school years 2007-2008 through 2012-2013. Each record contains a
start of the school-year (October) snapshot for each student enrolled in Chicago Public Schools,
with unique student identifier (the CPS ID), the student's grade and school, and demographic
information. The variables of interest in the enrollment file are grade, year, date of birth, sex, race,
special education (SPED), limited English proficiency (LEP) status, disability status, subsidized
lunch eligibility, and school. Students are coded as attending an exam school, a magnet school, or
a Noble school if their enrollment in October is at each school sector, respectively. We transform
the enrollment file into a wide-format layout for each student where we compute the grade and
exam school years attended for a given year.


Outcome files

The Plan test score file spans school years from 2010 to 2014. It includes scores for four subjects:
English, Math, Reading, and Science, the grade and the year in which the test was taken (mostly
10th grade), and the school of the student. We standardize scores among CPS test-takers by year.
   The ACT test scores come from the Prairie State Achievement Examination (PSAE) files from
2010 to 2014. PSAE is a two-day standardized test taken by all High School Juniors in the U.S.
state of Illinois through 2014. On the first day, students take the ACT. On the second day, students
take a WorkKeys examination and Illinois State Board of Education-developed science examination.
Students were evaluated in four subjects: Math, Reading, Science, and Writing. Like PLAN, the
file has the grade and year of test. Scores are standardized among all CPS test-takers by year.




                                                  50
B.2       Merging Files

These five data sets were merged using the CPS ID. This implies that students who had not enrolled
in CPS at the moment they applied either to Exam, Magnet, or Noble schools are dropped from
the analysis. Panel A of Table B1 shows for each year and each school sector the proportion of
applicants who are missing the CPS ID.
       The master file corresponds to the enrollment data set of high school students from 2010 to
2013 for students.26 This file is merged with the application files for each school sector. Panel
B of Table B1 shows the application rates for each school sector in the period of analysis. We
keep the students that applied either to an Exam, Magnet, or Noble school. We replace with zero
the relevant variables for the analysis of a school sector for those students who did not apply to
it.27 All our estimations control for the set of school sectors to which a student applied in order to
partial out potential differences. Table B2 shows the final sample in our analysis and the number
of applicants for each school sector by year.
       We then merge this data set with the outcome data: Plan and ACT Math and Reading test
scores. Table B3 shows the merging rates between the two files for each outcome: the inverse of
attrition rates. To generate the variable of years of exposure to each type of school we take the
number of years enrolled in Exam, Magnet, or Noble schools between the year of application and
the year in which the respective test was taken. This data is the analysis file.




  26
    Since students enrolled in the fall of the following year to the year of application.
  27
    For example: applicants to Noble who did not apply to an Exam school have a score of zero in the admission
test to Exam schools. Similarly, applicants to Exam schools who did not apply to Noble have a lottery number of
zero for the different Noble campuses that run a lottery.


                                                      51
                      Table B1. Merging Application and Enrollment Files


                    Year     Exam Schools Magnet Schools Noble Schools
                         Panel A: Fraction of Applicants missing CPS ID
                    2009         11.4%             0.0%               -
                    2010         10.9%             0.0%               -
                    2011          9.4%             0.0%               -
                       Panel B: Application Rates for each type of School
                    2009         39.8%             9.8%             6.3%
                    2010         46.9%            11.7%             8.3%
                    2011         45.4%             9.6%             9.4%


                                  Table B2. Size of Analysis Sample


                             Year                        Applied to:
                                         N      Exam      Magnet       Noble
                             2009      15,351   14,456     3,523       2,500
                             2010      16,465   15,326     3,092       3,003
                             2011      17,279   15,936     5,046       3,671



C    Data Appendix for the Anonymous Large Urban District

This appendix describes the data and the procedures used to construct the analysis files for the
anonymous large urban district. The Public Schools Office is the source of the application files for
exam schools. The State provided us with the enrollment files and statewide assessment data.


Exam School Application File

The exam school application file contains a record for each student consisting of an application id
number, state id number, name, gender, race, date of birth, application year, grade of application,

                                      Table B3. Attrition Rates


                           Year           Plan                   ACT
                                     Math Reading           Math Reading
                           2009     82.4%    82.4%          79.2%  79.2%
                           2010     81.1 %   80.1%          78.0%  78.0%
                           2011     77.3%    77.4%          75.9%  75.9%




                                                 52
preferences over the exam schools, and the composite score for admission. Each record also includes
the school where the student receives an offer (if any). This data set covers students with application
years from 1995-2017. The analysis sample includes applicants from 2004-2016 for which both
baseline and outcome test scores are available. Students enroll in the fall of the same year. We
exclude duplicate observations, and applicants who were missing the application id number from
the analysis.


Enrollment File

The State enrollment file spans school years 2001-02 through 2017-18. Each record contains both a
start of the school-year snapshot and an end of the school-year snapshot for each student enrolled
in public schools. The variables include a unique student identifier, the student's grade, and school,
and demographic information. The relevant demographics are grade, year, sex, race, low-income
status, special education status (SPED), and native status. The end of the year enrollment file
determines the school of the student before the application. The start of the year enrollment files
determines the school of the student after the application. We compute the grade and exam school
years attended for a given year.


Outcome files: Statewide Assessment Test

The test score file spans school years from 2002 to 2018. It includes scores for two subjects:
English, and Math, the grade and the year in which the test was taken. We standardize scores
among test-takers by year and grade.


C.1    Merging Files

These three data sets were merged using the State identifier. Students who could not be found in
the State file for any year prior to application were dropped from the analysis. Column 1 of Table
C1 shows for each year and each school sector the proportion of applicants who are missing this
ID. The master file corresponds to the application file to exam schools. The using data sets are

   · The enrollment file of high school students from 2004 to 2017. Column 2 of Table C1 shows
      the matching rate between the application and the enrollment files by year. On average,
      approximately 85% of the applicants are found in the enrollment file.




                                                  53
            Table C1. Merging Application, Enrollment, and Outcomes Files


              Year     Missing ID    Match Enrollment    Match Outcomes
                           (1)             (2)                 (3)
              2004       10.9%            82.3%              92.4%
              2005       10.4%            82.8%              93.7%
              2006        7.2%            84.1%              95.8%
              2007        8.2%            83.2%              95.3%
              2008        5.4%            82.7%              94.3%
              2009        5.6%            83.1%              95.0%
              2010        4.8%            84.2%              95.0%
              2011        4.9%            83.9%              95.1%
              2012        3.7%            84.9%              95.9%
              2013        3.3%            85.2%              96.0%
              2014        3.1%            85.1%              96.2%
              2015        5.0%            85.2%              94.1%
              2016        5.3%            85.0%              95.7%
              2017        3.3%            88.8%              93.5%




· The outcome file covers 2002 to 2018. Column 3 of Table C1 shows the matching rate
  between the application and the outcome files by year. On average, we have test scores for
  approximately 94% of the exam applicants.




                                           54
