                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              RISK-FREE INTEREST RATES

                                   Jules H. van Binsbergen
                                     William F. Diamond
                                       Marco Grotteria

                                     Working Paper 26138
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26138


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




We thank Jonathan Berk, Doug Diamond, Darrell Duffie, Olivier Darmouni, Peter DeMarzo,
Wenxin Du, Vincent Glode, Ben Hebert, Bob Hodrick, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Eben Lazarus,
Zhongjin Lu, Ian Martin, Christian Opp, Michael Roberts, Tano Santos, Krista Schwarz, Ken
Singleton, Adrien Verdelhan, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and Jonathan Wright for helpful
discussions and/or comments. We thank the Rodney White Center and the Jacobs Levy Equity
Management Center for generous financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jules H. van Binsbergen, William F. Diamond, and Marco Grotteria. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk-Free Interest Rates
Jules H. van Binsbergen, William F. Diamond, and Marco Grotteria
NBER Working Paper No. 26138
August 2019
JEL No. E41,E43,E44,E52,E58,G12,G15

                                         ABSTRACT

We estimate risk-free interest rates unaffected by convenience yields on safe assets. We infer
them from risky asset prices without relying on any specific model of risk. We obtain a term
structure of convenience yields with maturities up to 2.5 years at a minutely frequency. The
convenience yield on treasuries equals about 40 basis points, is larger below 3 months maturity,
and quadruples during the financial crisis. In high-frequency event studies, conventional and
unconventional monetary stimulus reduce convenience yields, particularly during the crisis. We
further study convenience-yield-free CIP deviations, and we show significant bond return
predictability related to convenience yields.

Jules H. van Binsbergen                        Marco Grotteria
The Wharton School                             London Business School
University of Pennsylvania                     Regent's Park
3620 Locust Walk                               London NW1 4SA
Philadelphia, PA 19104                         United Kingdom
and NBER                                       mgrotteria@london.edu
julesv@wharton.upenn.edu

William F. Diamond
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
diamondw@wharton.upenn.edu
1.       Introduction

    One of the most important variables in economics is the interest rate on a risk free
investment. In frictionless models, it measures the time value of money: the required return
for receiving a riskless payoff in the future instead of the present. To measure investors'
willingness to take risk, the returns on risky assets are compared to the risk-free interest rate,
where the difference in average returns is conventionally interpreted as the compensation for
bearing an asset's risk, i.e., the asset's risk premium. As a consequence, any attempt to
measure either the risk or time preferences of investors requires a precise estimate of the risk
free interest rate.

    Empirically, the yield or interest rate on safe assets (such as government bonds) are often
used to measure the time value of money. However, a recent literature has provided evidence
that the interest rates on safe assets are driven in part by other forces (Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), Nagel (2016)). Safe assets provide a so-called convenience
yield that reflects the ease with which they can be traded by uninformed agents, posted as
collateral, or perform other roles similar to that of money.1 Thus, the yield on a money-like
asset is below that of the yield implied by the time value alone, reflecting the liquidity and
collateral value of such assets.

    In this paper, we estimate risk free rates that are unaffected by the convenience yield on
safe assets by inferring them from the prices of risky assets. Our empirical measurement is
motivated by the fact that in several recent asset pricing models with frictions, risky assets
do not earn a convenience yield while safe assets do.2 As a result, under the assumptions
of these models, a risk free rate inferred from risky asset prices is a pure measure of an
investor's time value of money. The spread between our rate and the observed yield on a
safe asset therefore measures the safe asset's convenience yield.

    We infer our benchmark rates from the put-call parity relationship for European-style
options and show robustness using other implied risk free rates, such as those inferred from
a storage arbitrage in the market for precious metals futures. We find that the convenience
yield on government bonds equals about 40 basis points on average over the sample period
2004-2018, with a relatively flat average term structure across maturities beyond 3 months,
and 65 basis points below 3 months. We further find that the convenience yield is strongly
time varying and grows substantially during periods of financial distress.
  1
      See Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) among several others.
  2
      E.g. Frazzini and Pedersen (2014), Stein (2012), Caballero and Farhi (2018), and Diamond (2018).




                                                     1
    Our estimated rates have four main advantages over existing rates in the literature. First,
because our rates are entirely inferred from risky asset prices, they are free of the convenience
yield on safe assets. In contrast, the common practice in the literature is to compute spreads
between the yields on various safe assets, which only identifies differences in convenience
yields on more and less money-like assets. Second, the high-frequency nature of our option
quotes allows us to accurately estimate our interest rates minute by minute, while many
existing rates only have data available at lower (e.g. daily) frequencies. Third, the fact that
index options are traded with maturities ranging from 1 month to 2.5 years, allows us to
estimate an entire term structure of risk-free interest rates and convenience yields. Fourth,
we find that the price discovery for option-implied interest rates compares favorably to price
discovery in the treasury market, suggesting that these rates accurately reflect information
available to market participants.

    One potential concern with our estimates of the time value of money is that frictions
distinct from the convenience yield on safe assets could impact our implied interest rates.
We document for our benchmark estimates (using S&P500 index options) that observable
measures of frictions (such as bid-ask spreads) in the option market do not seem related
to our estimated rates. Furthermore, we find similar convenience yields using the futures
market for precious metals, suggesting that the only frictions of concern must be common
across markets.

   We use our new data set in three applications, which specifically require us to observe a
term structure of high frequency interest rates (and convenience yields). First, we do an event
study of the effects of monetary policy and quantitative easing on both convenience yields and
the time value of money. We find that monetary policy and Q.E. reduce convenience yields,
particularly during the depths of the financial crisis. Quantitative easing is the purchase of
long term treasury bonds and agency mortgage-backed securities financed by the issuance
of bank reserves, which are a form of overnight debt. An important question about its
transmission mechanism is whether its effects spill over beyond the prices of debt securities
that are actually purchased.

   Under the "narrow" view of Q.E.'s transmission mechanism, quantitative easing should
not spill over broadly into the discount rates at which the private sector can borrow despite
the lowering of long-term treasury or MBS yields (the asset that is bought). A "broad"
view of the transmission mechanism of quantitative easing on the other hand is common
in much of the theoretical literature (Caballero and Farhi (2018)) and Diamond (2018))
which emphasizes that swapping reserves for risky or long duration assets increases the
overall supply of safe/liquid assets and should therefore reduce convenience yields across

                                               2
markets. Because our interest rates are inferred from equity options and not from fixed
income securities targeted by quantitative easing, we can use our data to test for a broad
transmission mechanism. We find that our risk free rates are more sensitive to quantitative
easing than the associated treasury yields, implying that quantitative easing reduces the
scarcity of safe assets as implied by the theoretical literature.

    Our second application is on bond return predictability. Because government bond yield
movements are affected by the dynamics of convenience yields, a natural question that arises
is whether the documented bond return predictability in the literature is related to the
dynamics of the convenience yield or to movements in convenience-yield-free rates. We find
that a forecasting factor constructed solely from the cross-section of convenience yields in the
spirit of Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) has substantial forecasting power for both government
bond excess returns as well as convenience-yield-free excess returns even when controlling for
factors in the literature. In univariate regressions, we even outperform the predictive power
of conventional predictors in the literature in our sample. The results therefore suggest
that a full explanation of the predictability in bond excess returns requires a model that
features both a time varying premium related to safe assets (convenience yield) as well as
other sources of excess return predictability (i.e. time-varying risk aversion, time-varying
volatility or expectation errors).

    Our third application studies whether measures of the time value of money denominated
in different currencies are consistent with no arbitrage. The so-called covered interest parity
relationship implies that risk free interest rates in different currencies are related to the ratio
of spot to future exchange rates between the currencies. Existing measures of violations
of covered interest parity (CIP)3 use interest rates that feature convenience yields (such as
government bond rates) or credit risk (such as LIBOR) which raises the question to what
extent such violations persist once convenience-yield-free risk free interest rates are used.
Using option data from Japan we construct an index-option-implied interest rate for that
region as well, and find that when using option-implied rates for both countries, previously
documented covered interest parity violations are substantially reduced.

    Our paper contributes to several related literatures. First, it contributes to the empirical
literature mentioned above on safe assets by providing a measure of the convenience yield
that is motivated by and connected to theory. Some existing proxies for the convenience
yield are spreads between yields on two different safe assets, which may be an underestimate
if both assets have positive convenience yields. Other proxies in the literature are spreads
between a safe asset and a low-risk asset, which may be an overestimate if there is a nontrivial
  3
      See Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018b) and Du, Im, and Schreger (2018a).

                                                    3
credit risk premium on the risky asset. Our computed spreads are larger than spreads in
the first category and smaller than those in the second category, which is consistent with
the hypothesis that we are obtaining cleaner estimates of the convenience yield on safe
assets. We also find that our spread is almost identical to the LIBOR-treasury spread before
the crisis but substantially smaller after. This is consistent with the view that credit risk
in LIBOR was considered negligible before the crisis but significant afterwards. Similarly,
we estimate a somewhat smaller convenience yield than the 73 basis points reported in the
seminal paper of Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) using a AAA-treasury spread,
perhaps because of some credit risk in AAA bonds. We also contribute to this literature by
providing an entire term structure of convenience yields at a minute-level frequency.

    Second, we use these unique features of the data to contribute to the literature on mone-
tary policy and quantitative easing event studies. The baseline event study on quantitative
easing (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011)) presents spreads between different
yields on safe assets but is constrained to a 2 day event window by slow price discovery,
while we are able to use estimates within an hour of all event time stamps. No existing
work studies risk free rates inferred from assets outside the fixed income market, so our data
is ideal for testing how broadly quantitative easing spills over to distant asset classes. In
addition, existing high frequency event studies on conventional monetary policy have not
examined the response of convenience yields, perhaps due to similar data limitations that
we overcome.

    Our work also relates to the literature on intermediary asset pricing, particularly the
subset of the literature relating arbitrage spreads to financial frictions. He and Krishna-
murthy (2013) presents a canonical intermediary asset pricing model, showing theoretically
and quantitatively under what assumptions the capitalization of financial intermediaries is a
key state variable for the dynamics of asset prices. A related theoretical and empirical paper
by Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) presents a model in which the spread between the return
on a zero-beta security and the risk-free rate measures the tightness of leverage constraints
for levered investors and shows that this zero-beta rate is very high in a large range of asset
classes. Measuring a zero-beta rate requires taking a stance on the specific risk factor that
the beta is computed against. If the factor does not capture all risks relevant to investors, the
zero beta rate includes a risk premium component. In contrast, the risk-free rate we estimate
from options markets does not require specifying any particular risk model and implies a con-
siderably smaller spread than the spread estimates in their paper. The spread we estimate
therefore measures the tightness of leverage constraints in any multi-factor generalization of
their model. Also related to our work is H´ ebert (2018), who presents a theoretical model in


                                               4
which arbitrage spreads are due to constraints on the trading of financial intermediaries.

    The last part of our paper relates to several existing papers (Amihud and Mendelson
(1991), Krishnamurthy (2002), Musto, Nini, and Schwarz (2018), Daves and Ehrhardt
(1993)) that study individual arbitrages that we consider in our analysis across multiple
asset classes. While these papers cannot make statements about the relative size and speed
of convergence of different arbitrage related spreads, they do provide additional institutional
details about the frictions related to each arbitrage opportunity. The first such paper, Ami-
hud and Mendelson (1991) documents a spread between maturity matched treasury notes
and bills and relates it to measures of relative illiquidity. Krishnamurthy (2002) shows that
spreads between repo rates makes it difficult for a levered investor to profit from the spread
between on and off the run bonds. Musto et al. (2018) show how the relative liquidity (mea-
sured using bid ask spreads and other proxies from the microstructure literature) of notes
and bonds contributes to the spread between their yields. Daves and Ehrhardt (1993) show
that the spread between interest and principal STRIPS seems related to measures of their
degree of illiquidity. Pasquariello (2014) constructs an aggregate index of multiple arbitrage
spreads with the purpose of forecasting risky asset returns. Finally, Golez, Jackwerth, and
Slavutskaya (2018) use a combination of 3-month option and futures data on the S&P500
index to construct a daily funding illiquidity measure and find that this measure significantly
affects the returns of leveraged managed portfolios by hedge funds.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we show how we use the put-call parity
relationship on European options to estimate risk free rates. In Section 3 we explore the
effects of monetary policy announcements on our estimated rates and compare them to the
effects on government bonds and convenience yields (the difference). In Section 4 we explore
to what extent the dynamics of the term structure of the convenience yield adds to bond
return predictability. In Section 5 we explore CIP deviations using option-implied interest
rates across markets. We perform several robustness analyses with respect to other interest
rate measures in Section 6. In Section 7 we document that bid ask spreads do not bias
the level of our estimated interest rates. In Section 8 we show how the price discovery
for Box rates compares favorably to those in treasury markets. In Section 9 we perform
a multivariate analysis of various arbitrage spreads documented in the literature, and our
various convenience yield measures. Section 10 concludes.




                                              5
2.     Risk Free Interest Rates without Convenience Yields

    In this section we first explain conceptually why it is necessary to use risky asset prices
to infer an interest that is free from the convenience yield on safe assets. We then propose
a novel estimator of a term structure of convenience-yield-free interest rates, which uses
European-style options on the S&P500 traded on the Chicago Board Options Exchange
(CBOE).


2.1.    How to Estimate the Convenience Yield on Safe Assets

    One difficulty in estimating the convenience yield on a safe, money-like asset is finding an
appropriate interest rate to compare it to. Generally, the literature cited above approached
this problem by using the yield on a less liquid and/or less safe asset for comparison. However,
any sufficiently safe asset can itself have a convenience yield, since it potentially has money-
like attributes as well. In the IS-LM model (Hicks (1937)), the nominal interest rate measures
the return that agents forgo in exchange for holding cash. More recently, Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) has shown that interest-bearing treasury bonds earn a convenience
yield because they perform a role similar to money in the financial system. As a result,
the spread between the nominal rate earned on treasury bonds and the zero rate earned on
cash identifies the difference in convenience yields between these two assets. Similarly, if
we estimate the convenience yield on treasuries by comparing their yield to that of another
(nearly) safe asset, such as repos, AAA bonds or commercial paper, we face a similar problem.
Any asset that is safe enough to compare its yield to that of a treasury bond to identify the
treasury's convenience yield may itself perform a money-like role in the financial system and
also earn a convenience yield.

   A very low risk (but not riskless) asset can therefore have a yield that is either above
or below the convenience-yield-free riskless interest rate because the asset may have both a
credit spread and a convenience yield. This is illustrated in Figure I which plots expected
returns against the covariance of an asset's return with the Stochastic Discount Factor (SDF).
The circle labeled T represents the yield on safe assets such as treasuries. The circle labeled
B represents the convenience-yield-free riskless rate. The circles A and C represent two
nearly safe assets such as commercial paper and AAA-rated bonds. The ideal measure of
the convenience yield is the difference in yields between B and T. If instead of asset B,
we would use either asset A or C as the counterfactual, the convenience yield would be
mismeasured and could be either overestimated (in case of asset A) or underestimated (in


                                               6
case of asset C).




                                            FIGURE I
                Risk and Return with a Special Demand for Safe Assets (Convenience).


    The ultimate objective of this paper is to accurately estimate the convenience-yield-free
riskless rate (represented by circle B in the figure). To do so, we need to extrapolate from
the pricing of risky assets (on the blue line in Figure I) the implied risk free rate (labeled
B). One approach would be to use prices of stocks and construct a portfolio whose return
does not covary with the stochastic discount factor (often called the zero-beta rate (Frazzini
and Pedersen (2014)). One potential downside of using this zero-beta rate as a proxy for
the risk free interest rate is that it depends crucially on a specific model for risk and return.
For example, if we use the Capital Asset Pricing Model (Sharpe (1964)) as the risk model,
the implied zero-beta rate would be influenced by risk factors not included in that model.
Because there is little consensus in the literature as to what the correct risk model is, an
accurate estimate of the convenience-yield-free risk free rate must be invariant to the specific
model of risk in asset markets. We propose such an estimate in the next subsection.




                                                 7
2.2.                               Constructing Risk Free Assets

   The starting point of our analysis is the put-call parity relationship for European options.
At each time t, for each time to maturity T , option price quotes are available for a large
cross-section of different strike prices indexed by i = 1, ...N . The put-call parity relationship
then states that at time t, for each time to maturity T , and each strike price Ki , the difference
between the put price pi,t,T and call price ci,t,T equals the discounted value of the strike Ki
minus the current value of the underlying St , where we need to adjust the latter for the
present value of the cash flow that the security delivers.4 Denote this present value of the
cash flow (or convenience) by Pt,T , then the put-call parity relationship is given by:

                                                   pi,t,T - ci,t,T = (Pt,T - St ) + exp(-rt,T T )Ki .                   (1)




                           1000




                                500
       Put Price - Call Price




                                  0




                                -500




                   -1000
                                       400   600   800    1000     1200    1400      1600   1800   2000   2200   2400
                                                                          Strike Price
                                              FIGURE II
The figure plots the difference between the put prices and the call prices (using midpoints) on the S&P
500 index against the underlying strike prices of the longest maturity option pairs. The maturity of the
options is 824 days. The data is from 3:00pm on the day of Lehman's default (September 15, 2008).


    As an illustration, we plot in Figure II option quote data from the S&P 500 index on
September 15, 2008 (Lehman's default) at 3:00pm. We plot the difference between the put
prices and the call prices (using midpoints) against the underlying strike prices of the longest
available maturity option pairs (with a 824 day maturity). The figure also plots the fitted
   4
    For dividend paying stock indices this price is the present value of the dividends paid out between time
t and T , also called the dividend strip price (van Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2012).


                                                                           8
line. The figure illustrates that even on days of financial distress (Lehman's default), the put-
call parity relationship holds within visual accuracy (with an R-squared value of 0.9999998),
leading to highly precise estimates of the implied interest rate. The estimated slope equals
0.93778, which corresponds to an annualized interest rate of 2.85%. The OLS standard error
of the estimated slope equals 8 × 10-5 .

    The put-call parity relationship provides two ways of obtaining a time series and term
structure of the risk free interest rate rt,T implied by the option market.

Estimator 1: At each time t and for each maturity T , we run the following cross-sectional
regression:
                                pi - ci =  + Ki + i                                    (2)

where the slope of the line is equal to:

                                        = exp(-rt,T T ),                                     (3)

and where the intercept is equal to:

                                            = Pt,T - St .                                    (4)

The continuously compounded risk free interest rate at time t for maturity T therefore equals:

                                               1
                                       rt,T = - ln( ).                                      (5)
                                               T
The estimated  of this regression can also be interpreted as the realized risk free return that
is earned on a particular trading strategy. To see this, consider the Ordinary Least Squares
(OLS) estimator of the slope:

                                       i   (pi - ci - p - c)(Ki - K )
                           OLS =                                                             (6)
                                                 i (Ki       - K )2

where
                                                     i (pi - ci )
                                       p-c=                                                  (7)
                                                          N
and
                                                   Ki i
                                            K=                                               (8)
                                                 N
So the strategy (also sometimes called the "Box" trade) involves buying (writing) a total of
Ki - K ¯ put options for which the strike is above (below) average and writing (buying) a
              ¯ calls for which the strike is above (below) average for each i  1, ..., N . This
total of Ki - K

                                                 9
                                                                            1
strategy will deliver the continuously compounded risk-free rate equal to - T ln(OLS ).

Estimator 2: At each time t and for each maturity T take all possible combinations of
                                               -1)
strikes, indexed by 1, ..., A where A = N (N 2
                                                   and compute an implied risk-free rate for that
strike pair. That is, i  i = 1, ..., N and j  i = 1, ..., -i, ..., N for which Ki > Kj , we
compute:
                                  1    (pi,t,T - ci,t,T ) - (pj,t,T - cj,t,T )
                       rt,T,a = - ln                                           ,              (9)
                                 T                   Ki - K j
with a  1, ..., A. We then compute the estimate for the risk free as the median over all these
implied rates:
                                rt,T = medianaA (rt,T,a ) .                               (10)

This estimator, known as the Theil­Sen estimator, allows for robust estimation of the slope
of the regression line even when there are large outliers in the underlying data. It also
corresponds to a trading strategy, which is to invest in the strike pair i and j that deliver the
median risk-free rate observation. Buying the put of strike Ki and the call of strike Kj while
writing the call of strike Ki and the put of strike Kj yields a riskless payoff of Ki - Kj > 0
if all options are held to maturity. Because buying and writing these puts and calls costs a
total of (pi,t,T - ci,t,T ) - (pj,t,T - cj,t,T ), this trading strategy earns exactly the risk-free rate
corresponding to the Theil-Sen estimator.


2.3.     Data

    Our options data contains all option trades and quotes from the Chicago Board Options
Exchange (CBOE) on two underlying assets: the S&P 500 index (SPX) and the Dow Jones
Index (DJX), between 2004 and 2018. The traded options on these underlying assets are
European, implying that the put-call parity relationship should hold exactly (for American
options it only holds with an inequality).5 The data set contains the bid price, the ask
price, the strike and the maturity date for a large range of strike prices for each minute. We
compute risk-free rate estimates at the minute level using the mid prices of puts and calls
of all strike prices with a particular maturity. To compute daily estimates, we then take a
median over the minute-level estimates in the day.
   5
    Brenner and Galai (1986) estimate implied interest rates using American options and use both an early
exercise correction as well as a correction for the dividend strip price. Our approach requires neither.




                                                   10
2.4.     Results: Estimated Interest Rates

We now describe the results. We estimate our benchmark rate using S&P 500 (SPX) index
options, which gives us extremely precisely estimated interest rates. We study risk free rates
implied by the Dow Jones (DJX) options for robustness in Section 6. In Table 1 we provide
summary statistics for SPX implied yields for three maturities: 6 months, 12 months and
18 months, and we compare them with the corresponding yields on government bonds as
implied by the Nelson-Siegel-Svensson (NSS) parameters estimated by G¨   urkaynak, Sack, and
Wright,6 the continuously compounded LIBOR rates, and the fixed rate of an interest rate
swap contract written on the Federal Funds rate (OIS).7
                                              Table 1
                   Summary Statistics of SPX Option Implied Interest Rates 2004-2018

                       Zero Coupon Yields: 6 month maturity
                                                                    Mean     St. Dev.
                       Option Implied SPX                           0.0178    0.0174
                       LIBOR Implied                                0.0185    0.0173
                       Government Bond                              0.0142    0.0167
                       OIS                                          0.0143    0.0178
                       LIBOR Implied - Option Implied SPX           0.0007    0.0021
                       Option Implied SPX - Government Bond         0.0035    0.0022
                       Option Implied SPX - OIS                     0.0035    0.0023

                       Zero Coupon Yields: 12 month maturity
                                                                    Mean     St. Dev.
                       Option Implied SPX                           0.0185    0.0171
                       LIBOR Implied                                0.0210    0.0160
                       Government Bond                              0.0148    0.0164
                       OIS                                          0.0148    0.0177
                       LIBOR Implied - Option Implied SPX           0.0024    0.0026
                       Option Implied SPX - Government Bond         0.0037    0.0021
                       Option Implied SPX - OIS                     0.0036    0.0020

                       Zero Coupon Yields: 18 month maturity
                                                                    Mean     St. Dev.
                       Option Implied SPX                           0.0194    0.0167
                       Government Bond                              0.0157    0.0159
                       Option Implied SPX - Government Bond         0.0037    0.0021
                       Option Implied SPX - OIS                     0.0037    0.0017

   6
    For a description of the NSS procedure see Section A.2.
   7
    There are two ways to compute SPX implied yields for fixed maturities. For simplicity, we linearly
interpolate the two closest SPX-implied yields around each fixed maturity. Alternatively, we could fit a NSS
yield curve. However, our shortest maturity yields are less precisely estimated, because a small amount of
price mismeasurement implies a large error in yield esimates due to the scaling by maturity in the calculation
of yields. Elsewhere in the paper, we handle this problem by dropping maturities less than 30 days and
weighting our loss function by the inverse of duration.



                                                     11
   The table shows that for all maturities the average yields on the SPX-implied interest
rates are above those of the corresponding government bonds and interest rate swaps, and
below those of the LIBOR rate. The average difference between the SPX implied rate and
the government bond rate (i.e., the convenience yield), is 35-37 basis points per year, with
very little variation across maturities. The average difference between the SPX-implied rate
and the interest-rate swap fixed rate is also 35-37 basis points, and also essentially constant
across maturities. The average difference between the LIBOR rate and the SPX-implied
rate is positive for both the 6-month and 12-month maturities, equal to 7 basis points and
24 basis points respectively. For the 18-month maturity, a LIBOR rate is not available.
Furthermore, the LIBOR rate has the lowest volatility, and the interest-rate swap fixed rate
the highest.

    To better understand the variation and comovement in the rates, we plot in Figures III,
IV and V the four interest rates for all three maturities. The three graphs show a consistent
pattern. Before 2008 the SPX implied yields are above the corresponding government bond
yield, and closely follow LIBOR. Between 2008 and 2017 a substantial deviation from LIBOR
occurs and the SPX-implied yields are in between the LIBOR rate and the government bond
yield. This suggests that between 2008 and 2017 banks faced substantial credit risk, as
measured by the spread between LIBOR and the SPX implied zero coupon yield.

                                                     0.06
        Cont. Compounded 6-month Zero Coupon Yield




                                                     0.05


                                                     0.04


                                                     0.03


                                                     0.02


                                                     0.01


                                                       0
                                                              2006     2008     2010        2012   2014     2016     2018

                                                                              FIGURE III
Comparison                                              of 6-month zero coupon interest rates implied from SPX options with
government                                             bond, LIBOR, and OIS rates.       All rates are continuously compounded.


   Next, we present in Figures VI and VII a time series average of daily Nelson-Svensson-
Siegel (NSS) yield curves fit to our SPX-implied rates and compare it to the benchmark


                                                                                       12
                                                          0.06



        Cont. Compounded 12-month Zero Coupon Yield
                                                          0.05


                                                          0.04


                                                          0.03


                                                          0.02


                                                          0.01


                                                            0
                                                                    2006     2008     2010        2012     2014     2016    2018

                                                                                    FIGURE IV
Comparison                                                   of 12-month zero coupon interest rates implied from SPX options with
government                                                   bond, LIBOR, and OIS rates.      All rates are continuously compounded.

                                                          0.06
            Cont. Compounded 18-month Zero Coupon Yield




                                                          0.05


                                                          0.04


                                                          0.03


                                                          0.02


                                                          0.01


                                                             0
                                                                    2006     2008     2010        2012      2014    2016    2018

                                   FIGURE V
Comparison of 18-month zero coupon interest rates                                                        implied from SPX options with
government bond rates and OIS rates.    All rates                                                        are continuously compounded.


treasury yield curve of G¨urkaynak et al. (2007) for both the full sample, as well as the year
2008. We add to these pictures a curve that is fit to constant maturity treasury bill rates.
The average spread between our yield curve and the treasury curve is remarkably flat. The
treasury yield curve that is fit to long maturity notes and bonds implies higher short term
yields than bills themselves. This spread between actual T-bill yields and the short-term
yields implied from the curve that is fit to long-term notes and bonds identifies the additional


                                                                                             13
convenience yield on treasury bills compared to notes and bonds. This additional convenience
yields equals roughly 25 basis points. This is consistent with the idea common in the banking
literature that short term safe assets are somehow special, and financial institutions therefore
have an incentive to finance themselves with large amounts of short term safe debt to exploit
the additional convenience yield it earns. Further, our entire term structure of convenience
yields shifts outward but remains relatively flat if we restrict our data to only 2008, when
the financial crisis was severe. This suggests that the scarcity of safe assets which occurred
during the financial crisis was not restricted only to short term debt, and investors were
willing to pay a large premium for the safety of even 2.5 year treasury bonds. Our data does
not allow us to compute convenience yields beyond this maturity without extrapolating, so it
is an open question whether the convenience yields on 10 or 30 year bonds behave similarly.

                                                                                                2004-2018
                                                    2.4
        Average Continuously Compounded Yield (%)




                                                    2.2


                                                     2                                                                      35bp



                                                    1.8


                                                    1.6       38bp




                                                    1.4

                                                              27bp
                                                                                                                      SPX Box
                                                    1.2                                                               Government Bond
                                                                                                                      Treasury Bill


                                                     1
                                                          0          5           10        15               20   25    30               35
                                                                                           Maturity in Months


                                                                                           FIGURE VI
Average NSS yields                                                       curves fit    to SPX Box rates and treasury bond rates to-
gether with treasury                                                     bill rates,   2004-2018.  All rates are continuously compounded


    To further study the differences between the various available interest rates, we plot in
Figures VIII, IX and X the spreads between the SPX implied yield and the government bond
yield, as well as the spread between LIBOR and the SPX implied yield with maturities of 6
months, 12 months and 18 months. As LIBOR rates only have maturities up to 12 months,
we only plot the spread between the SPX implied yield and the government bond yield for
that maturity. For all three maturities, both spreads exhibit large variation, and they both
go up during the crisis and have since been reduced to levels closer to zero.


                                                                                                 14
                                                                                                                                                        2008
                                                                                                3.5


                                                    Average Continuously Compounded Yield (%)
                                                                                                 3



                                                                                                                                                                                              100bp
                                                                                                2.5
                                                                                                              97bp                                                93bp




                                                                                                 2



                                                                                                              61bp
                                                                                                1.5                                                                                                   SPX Box
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Government Bond
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Treasury Bill


                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                      0              5         10           15               20                 25           30             35            40
                                                                                                                                                 Maturity in Months


                                                                                                                                              FIGURE VII
Average NSS yields                                                                                                       curves fit        to SPX Box rates                          and      treasury bond rates to-
gether with treasury                                                                                                     bill rates,        2008.   All rates                        are     continuously compounded
      Spread in Cont. Compounded 6-month Zero Coupon Yields




                                                                                       0.025


                                                                                                0.02


                                                                                       0.015


                                                                                                0.01


                                                                                       0.005


                                                                                                          0


                                                                         -0.005
                                                                                                                     2006           2008         2010                    2012         2014             2016             2018


                                       FIGURE VIII
Spreads of 6-month zero coupon interest rates implied from SPX options with government
bond rates (the convenience yield) and LIBOR rates.  All rates are continuously compounded.




                                                                                                                                                        15
       Spread in Cont. Compounded 12-month Zero Coupon Yields
                                                                    0.016

                                                                    0.014

                                                                    0.012

                                                                     0.01

                                                                    0.008

                                                                    0.006

                                                                    0.004

                                                                    0.002

                                                                        0

                                                                    -0.002

                                                                    -0.004
                                                                             2006   2008   2010        2012   2014   2016   2018



                                        FIGURE IX
Spreads of 12-month zero coupon interest rates implied from SPX options with government
bond rates (the convenience yield) and LIBOR rates.  All rates are continuously compounded.
           Spread in Cont. Compounded 18-month Zero Coupon Yields




                                                                    0.016

                                                                    0.014

                                                                    0.012

                                                                     0.01

                                                                    0.008

                                                                    0.006

                                                                    0.004

                                                                    0.002

                                                                        0
                                                                             2006   2008   2010        2012   2014   2016   2018



                                      FIGURE X
Spreads of 18-month zero coupon interest rates implied from SPX options with govern-
ment bond rates (the convenience yield).    All rates are continuously compounded.


2.5.                                     Results: Precision of Estimated Rates

   In this subsection we evaluate the precision with which our rates are estimated. If no-
arbitrage conditions held perfectly, the R-squared of the regression in Equation 2 would
                                                                                                  16
equals 1 and there would be no estimation error in our rates. As such, the R-squared of the
regression can be interpreted as a measure of efficiency within the market for options for this
particular underlying asset. Because the slope of the regression is so close to 1, we can also
easily map this measure of market efficiency to variation in estimated (non-annualized) rates
(T rt,T ) across the strikes. To see this, note that the population R-squared of the regression
in equation 2 is given by:

                                             var(K )
                                 R2 =                                                      (11)
                                        var(K ) + var()
                                              2 var(K )
                                      =                                                    (12)
                                         2 var(K ) + var()
                                              1
                                      =                                                    (13)
                                        1 +  2var()
                                               var(K )
                                                                                           (14)

Rewriting this equation, we find:

                               1        var()     var()
                                 2
                                   -1= 2                  .                                (15)
                               R       var(Ki )  var(Ki )

Assuming uncorrelated error terms, the asymptotic variance of the univariate OLS estimator
equals the variance of the error term scaled by N times the variance of the right-hand side
variable, that is, the variance across the strike prices. This then implies that the variance of
the OLS estimated interest rates can be approximated by (using the approximation that 
is close to 1 and that the log-linearized regression coefficient uncovers the interest rate):

                                      1                  1     1
                         rt,T )  
                        (^              ln(OLS )             (   - 1).                     (16)
                                      T                 N T 2 R2

As a consequence, for a regression for maturity T = 1, with N = 20 strike prices and an
R-squared of 0.999999, the standard error of the estimate at each time t (i.e. each minute)
is in the order of magnitude of 2 basis points. For 100 strikes, this number is 1 basis
point. Given that our daily estimates are computed by taking a median over the minutely
observations, the standard error of the daily estimate is even smaller than that. As an
illustration, we plot in Figure XI a daily series of the standard error of the minute-level
risk free zero coupon yield estimate for the 18 month maturity. We use the actual standard
error implied by the regression, which is approximately equal to the non-linear transform
of the R-squared as explained in Equation 16, and as such can be interpreted as a measure
of market efficiency. To arrive at a daily series for this minute level standard deviation, we


                                              17
take the median standard error across all minutes within a day. The graph shows that the


         (rt,T ) in basis points (bps) per year for the 18-month maturity
                                                                            9

                                                                            8

                                                                            7

                                                                            6

                                                                            5

                                                                            4

                                                                            3

                                                                            2

                                                                            1

                                                                            0
                                                                                2006   2008   2010        2012   2014   2016   2018



                                           FIGURE XI
Efficiency in the SPX option market expressed as the standard error around the implied risk-free rate.


typical standard error is in the order of magnitude of 1 basis point, but it can occasionally
spike. The maximum over our sample period is 8 basis points.

    One implication of our very small standard errors (or equivalently the very high values of
our cross-sectional R-squared measures) is that put-call parity holds almost exactly (with the
appropriate interest rate) in our SPX option data. If our R-squared values were not so high,
the deviation of our rates from treasury rates could arguably be interpreted as a measure
of put-call parity violations unrelated to the convenience yield on safe assets. However,
the data shows that the implied interest rates across various different strike prices are highly
internally consistent. This is consistent with the absence of put-call parity violations and the
presence of a convenience yield for safe assets. Under this interpretation, our option-implied
rates precisely measure the time value of money for investors in this option market.



3.     Convenience Yields, Monetary Policy and Q.E.

   We use our data to perform high-frequency event studies of the effects of monetary policy
and quantitative easing on the term structure of convenience yields and the time value of
money. Our minute-level data is ideal for this purpose and broadens the set of questions

                                                                                                     18
that can be examined using high frequency event studies. Existing event studies on the
effects of quantitative easing (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011)) use two-day
event windows because of issues related to slow price discovery. While price discovery in
treasury bonds themselves is quite fast, more illiquid bonds such as agency debt, corporate
debt, or mortgage-backed securities require longer event windows. Because our Box rate
estimates seem to have price discovery roughly as fast as treasuries (see Section 6), we are
able to measure spreads between different risk free rates using a considerably shorter event
window. There is a large literature on the high frequency effects of monetary policy on asset
prices (Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), Rigobon and Sack (2004), Nakamura and Steinsson
(2018)), but before our paper this literature has not presented results on convenience yields,
arguably for similar reasons related to slow price discovery.

    If liquidity is an important channel in the monetary transmission mechanism, we should
find that monetary stimulus (either conventional and/or unconventional) reduces convenience
yields. An idea going back to the LM curve of the IS-LM model (Hicks (1937)) that has
been justified with recent empirical support (Nagel (2016)) is that the nominal interest rate
measures the liquidity premium on assets such as cash and checking accounts (that pay
no interest). As a result, an interest rate increase should make liquidity more scarce and
increase the convenience yield on safe assets. Because our Box rate is inferred from risky
assets which should have little to no convenience yield, we are able to decompose the effects
of central bank policy on bond yields into changes in the time value of money and changes
in convenience yields. Our contribution is to present more direct evidence that monetary
stimulus reduces convenience yields. Existing evidence mainly shows that nominal interest
rates are correlated with spreads between different rates.

    Our results on quantitative easing discipline the understanding of its transmission mech-
anism, making progress on the state of knowledge in which Ben Bernanke said it "works in
practice but not in theory." Because quantitative easing is the purchase of long term trea-
sury bonds and agency mortgage-backed securities financed by the issuance of bank reserves
(which are a form of overnight debt), it is not clear whether its effects are determined by
what is bought or what is sold. The seminal paper by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2011) presents empirical evidence on the transmission mechanisms of quantitative easing
and discusses several possible channels. One view is that reducing the supply of treasuries
should make long duration safe assets more scarce and therefore increase their convenience
yield. Under this "narrow" view of Q.E.'s transmission mechanism, the yield on the specif-
ically purchased asset is disproportionately affected by the policy. A "broad" view of the
transmission mechanism of quantitative easing is common in much of the theoretical liter-


                                             19
ature (Caballero and Farhi (2018) and Diamond (2018)), which emphasizes that swapping
reserves for long duration assets increases the overall supply of safe assets and should there-
fore impact the prices of untargeted assets. Because our Box rates are inferred from equity
option prices, an asset class quite distinct from the fixed income market, our data is well-
suited to measure the spillover of Q.E. to untargeted asset classes. We find substantial broad
spillover effects from Q.E. 1 but not from Q.E. 2 or Q.E. 3. This is complimentary to the ev-
idence in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2013) that Q.E. 3 had important "narrow"
effects on agency MBS yields.


3.1.     Effects of Quantitative Easing

   Our results on the effects of quantitative easing follow a literature which has identified
specific dates and times at which policymakers conveyed news about their intention to in-
crease or decrease the size of the program. For the first two rounds of the program, which
occurred respectively in 2008/2009 and in 2010, we use the same dates as Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011). For Q.E. 3, which happened after the aforementioned paper,
we follow the dates in Di Maggio, Kermani, and Palmer (2019). The five event dates for
Q.E. 1 are 11/25/2008/, 12/1/2008, 12/16/2008, 1/28/2009 and 3/18/2009. For Q.E. 2 we
consider the event dates 8/10/2010, 9/21/2010, and 11/3/2010, and for Q.E. 3 we consider
the event dates 9/13/2012, 5/22/2013, 6/19/2013,7/10/2013, and 9/18/2013. For each date
we have precise time stamps of the event.

    To illustrate the quality of our minute-level data, we plot in Figure XII the minute-
level Box rates on March 18th 2009, for three different maturities. The time of the Q.E.
announcement was at 2.15pm. The picture clearly shows the effect of the announcement for
all three maturities and particularly for the shortest maturity, it seems that rates started
moving before the actual announcement.8

   To analyze the effect across all Q.E. dates, we take the median yield on every asset in a
window 30 to 60 minutes before the time stamp and 30 to 60 minutes after the time stamp.9
We then fit Nelson-Siegel-Svensson yield curves to these median yields before and after each
event. Specifically, we fit one yield curve to our intraday SPX Box rates and a second yield
curve to intraday indicative quotes on treasury yields from GovPX. For all quotes we use a
   8
    See also Cieslak, Morse and Vissing-Jorgensen (2019).
   9
    This is not possible for 2 of our time stamps, since they occur too early in the day. On 11/25/2008, the
time stamp is before the start of trading, so we use the median yield in the last 30 minutes of the previous
day and the median yield in the first 30 minutes of the day. On 5/22/2013, we use the median yield between
0 and 30 minutes before the 10am timestamp and 60 to 90 minutes after.


                                                    20
                                     1004 days to maturity
                       1.8
   Zero-coupon yield


                       1.6
                                     640 days to maturity

                       1.4

                                     458 days to maturity
                       1.2


                             10:00     11:00     12:00           13:00   14:00   15:00   16:00
                                       FIGURE XII
S&P500 Box Rates on March 18, 2009: The figure plots the minute-level box rates for three dif-
ferent maturities on March 18, 2009. The vertical line represents the time of the release (14:17).


midpoint of bid and ask.

    To summarize our results, we find that both monetary policy and quantitative easing
have quite strong effects on convenience yields during the worst of the financial crisis (the
second half of 2008 and first half of 2009) but considerably more modest effects otherwise.
We report in the figures below the effects of the central bank policies on 3-month, 12-month,
and 30-month yields. We report results on treasury yields, Box yields, and the convenience
yield (which equals their difference). The maturities of 3 and 30 months are the most extreme
durations for which we can present results without extrapolating beyond where our data lies.

    We find that for Q.E. 1 (i.e., the first round of quantitative easing) which occurred
between November 2008 and March 2009, Box yields fell considerably more than treasury
yields. In Figure XIII below, we show that 12 and 30 month Box yields fell by 88 and 86 basis
points respectively, while treasury yields of the same maturity only fell by 46 and 61 basis
points. This results in a reduction in 12- and 30-month convenience yields of 42 and 25 basis
points. At the shorter 3-month maturity, government yields fell by only 2 basis points while
Box yields fell by 37 basis points rounding to a 36 basis point reduction in the convenience
yield. The lack of response in short term treasury rates is likely because those rates were
already at the zero lower bound, while all Box rates were considerably higher than treasury
yields at this time. The greater drop in box than treasury yields provides evidence in favor of
a broad transmission of quantitative easing, in which asset prices outside of narrowly defined


                                                            21
fixed income markets also respond. Because risky assets are priced without the convenience
yield (that is, consistently with our Box rate rather than treasury rates), this implies that
quantitative easing reduced investors' time value of money by even more than is suggested
by the drop in treasury yields. It also implies that Q.E. 1 can be thought of as an increase
in the supply of safe assets, by swapping more scarce reserves for less scarce treasuries or
agency mortgage-backed securities.10 In particular, Q.E. 1 reduced the convenience-yield-
free short term interest rate. If this rate solves the consumption Euler equation, Q.E. 1
therefore stimulated aggregate demand by the same mechanism as conventional monetary
policy.11 This relative scarcity is consistent with our finding that the convenience yield is
largest at the shortest maturities.




                                           FIGURE XIII
Cumulative effect     of    QE 1 on government bond yields,              Box yields,     and conve-
nience yields (i.e.        the difference between the two) across       various different maturities.


     For Q.E. 2 and 3, we find considerably smaller effects on treasury yields and effects with
ambiguous signs on the convenience yield on safe assets as reported in Figure XIV. Summing
up across all 8 event dates in this period, we find that 3, 12, and 30-month treasury yields
fell by 3, 4 and 11 basis points respectively. At the same time, 3, 12 and 30-month Box yields
fell by 6, increased by 3, and fell by 8 basis points respectively. This leads to a 3 basis point
  10
     Because our longest maturity is only 30 months, we are unable to measure any specific scarcity of
long-term safe assets, as documented by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011).
  11
     This transmission mechanism is analyzed in Caballero and Farhi (2018); Diamond (2018) and our em-
pirical findings confirm predictions of these models.

                                                 22
decrease in the 3-month convenience yield and a 7 and 3 basis point increase in the 12- and
30-month convenience yields. The aggregate effect of all Q.E. 2 and 3 announcements is of
considerably smaller magnitude than the effect of Q.E. 1. In particular, if anything, it seems
to increase the convenience yield on treasuries, though the effect is small and of ambiguous
sign across the yield curve.

    One possible explanation of our results is that quantitative easing after 2009 was per-
formed outside of the depths of the financial crisis, at which point convenience yields had
already converged back to normal levels. It may be that quantitative easing is a weaker
policy tool when the financial system is not in distress. Another possible explanation is
that the news in this sample on average did not surprise investors as much, with event days
including both news that increased and decreased investors' expectations about the size of
the program. Regardless of the explanation, it is immediately clear that the large effects
found in Q.E. 1 do not seem to generalize to this extension of the program after the depths
of the crisis.




                                          FIGURE XIV
Cumulative effect of   QE 2 and 3        on government bond yields, Box yields, and conve-
nience yields (i.e.     the difference   between the two) across various different maturities.




                                               23
3.2.    Monetary Policy Event Studies on FOMC announcement dates

    To study the effect of conventional monetary policy on convenience yields, we perform
a high frequency event study using all FOMC announcements from 2004 to 2018, the time
period in which we have Box rate data. We measure unanticipated shocks to monetary
policy using innovations in Federal Funds futures from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
(CME) around each FOMC announcement. Our measure of a monetary policy shock is
analogous to that of (Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018)).
We use the first trade more than 10 minutes before and the first trade more than 20 minutes
after each announcement to compute our monetary surprise. Given this monetary policy
shock, we fit yield curves to GovPX treasury quotes and our Box yields in windows 30 to
60 minutes around each announcement. We then regress the change in each yield around an
announcement on our measure of the monetary shock associated to that announcement and
use our estimated regression coefficient to predict the effects of a 100 basis point surprise
increase in the Federal Funds rate when reporting our results below.

    Similar to our quantitative easing results, we find that monetary policy has considerably
stronger effects on convenience yields in the depths of the crisis than at other times. In
Figure XIV below we show the results for the whole sample. A 100 basis point rate increase
leads to a 54, 88, and 74 basis point increase in Box yields for the 3, 12 and 30-month
maturities respectively. It leads only to 52, 63, and 45 basis point increases in the 3, 12, and
30-month treasury yields. This results in an increase of the convenience yield of 2, 26, and
28 basis points respectively. This implies that particularly at longer maturities, an increase
in the Federal Funds rate leads to increases in the convenience yield that are more than a
third the size in the increase in treasury yields. Similar to quantitative easing, the effect of
monetary policy spills over to unrelated asset classes like equity index options.

    Next, we present results in Figure XVI from an identical event study but ignoring data
from the second half of 2008 and first half of 2009. The results change considerably. Like
before, we find that treasury yields respond quite strongly to monetary policy. A 100 basis
point increase in the fed funds rate leads to 70, 55, and 34 basis point increases in the 3, 12,
and 20 month treasury yields. However, there is only a 32, 66, and 46 basis point increase
in the 3, 12, and 20 month Box rate. This leads to a 38 basis point decrease in the 3 month
convenience yield and a 11 and 13 basis point increase in the 12 and 30 month convenience
yields. It therefore seems that by simply removing one year of the worst of the financial
crisis from the data, the results imply a considerably weaker (and ambiguously signed) effect
of monetary policy on convenience yields. That said, it does seem robustly true that rates in


                                              24
                                       FIGURE XV
Effect of FOMC Announcements on government bond yields, Box yields, and convenience yields
(i.e.   the difference between the two) across various maturities over the sample 2004-2018.


the equity options market move in the same direction as treasury yields and with reasonably
large magnitudes, suggesting that monetary policy broadly decreases risk free rates even
outside the narrowly defined market for safe, money-like securities.



4.    Bond Return Predictability

   A literature as early as Fama and Bliss (1987) has focused on the predictability of gov-
ernment bond returns using information contained in the term structure of bond returns.
This large predictability has been one of the more difficult empirical findings to square with
asset pricing theory, particularly given the seeming disconnect of these time varying expected
excess returns from the documented variation in expected excess return in stock markets.

   Because of our unique term structure of convenience yields, we can decompose govern-
ment bond returns into movements in the time value of money and convenience yields. In
particular, we have defined the convenience yield cyt,n as the difference between the implied
(continuously compounded) yield inferred from S&P500 options and the yield on government
bonds:
                                              box    gov
                                     cyt,n = yt,n - yt,n ,                               (17)



                                             25
                                              FIGURE XVI
Effect of FOMC Announcements on government bond yields, Box yields, and convenience yields (i.e. the
difference between the two) across various maturities for the sample 2004-2018 but excluding the crisis period.


where n is the time until maturity. Rewriting this equation we find:

                                             gov    box
                                            yt,n = yt,n - cyt,n .                                         (18)

The excess return on government bonds, which is given by:

                               rxgov       gov           gov        gov
                                 t+1,n = nyt,n - (n - 1)yt+1,n-1 - yt,1                                   (19)

can then be written as the difference between two return components, the one related to
changes in the Box rate and the one related to changes in the convenience yield:

          rxgov       box           box        box
            t+1,n = nyt,n - (n - 1)yt+1,n-1 - yt,1 - ncyt,n + (n - 1)cyt+1,n-1 + cyt,1 .                  (20)

This then naturally raises two questions. First, to what extent is the predictability in
government bond returns related to each of these two components? Is it driven by predictable
variation in excess box returns, or predictable variation related to the convenience yield
component of returns? Second, is the predictive power in current yields due to the component
due to convenience yields or the component due to the time value of money?

    To provide a first answer to these two questions, we use the approach proposed by


                                                      26
Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) and use the cross-section of yields to construct a return fore-
casting factor. We construct two such factors. The first replicates the one of Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2005) for the 2004-2018 sample. For the construction of the second forecasting
factor, we follow the exact same procedure (using the same left-hand side variables), but
instead of using as the forecasting variables the cross-section of government bond yields, we
use the cross-section of convenience yields. We then evaluate the forecasting power of these
two factors individually and jointly using excess returns on government bonds and excess
returns on Box rates focusing on the 2-year maturity only (we do not have longer maturity
claims available for the Box rate).

    The results are summarized in the table below. The results show that the factor con-
structed from the convenience yield substantially predicts both government bond returns as
well as Box rate returns. In the joint regression, both the convenience yield factor and the
Cochrane Piazzesi factor show up significantly. In traditional asset pricing models where
the consumption Euler equation prices all assets, there is no convenience yield and thus no
predictability resulting from it. Overall, the results therefore suggest that a complete expla-
nation of bond return predictability requires a model that features both time varying risk
aversion (or volatility) as well as a time varying premium related to safe assets (convenience
yield).

                     rxgov
                       t+1,2   rxgov
                                 t+1,2    rxgov
                                            t+1,2      rxbox
                                                         t+1,2   rxbox
                                                                   t+1,2    rxbox
                                                                              t+1,2


           CP        0.299                0.196        0.357                0.204

           CY                  0.415      0.329                  0.580      0.489

          Adj. R2    0.231     0.319      0.403        0.258     0.488      0.560




5.    The Box-Rate-Implied CIP Deviation

    One important no-arbitrage relation that has received increasing attention in recent years,
is the so-called Covered Interest Parity (CIP) relationship. CIP states that the ratio of an
exchange rate's forward and spot rate equals the ratio between the nominal gross interest
rates in the two countries. Recently, however, Du et al. (2018a) and Du et al. (2018b) have
shown large, and persistent violations of CIP using government bond and LIBOR yields as the
measure for the nominal interest rate. As argued previously, government bond yields feature

                                              27
a convenience yield and LIBOR contains credit risk. As a consequence, it is informative to
compute a measure of CIP deviations using our convenience-yield-free risk free interest rates.

    Take a US-based agent at time t facing two alternative strategies. He can either invest
in a riskless asset denominated in dollars with n years to maturity (in our case the U.S. Box
rate), or exchange money into a foreign currency, invest it into the riskless asset denominated
in that currency for n years (the Box rate constructed for the foreign country) and buy a
promise to exchange the money back into dollars at a predetermined rate at time t + n.
                                          
   More formally, denote with rt,n and rt,n the continuously-compounded Box rates at time
t with n-year maturity for the domestic and foreign country. The CIP relation that we are
exploring in this section is then given by:

                                                         St
                                      enrt,n = enrt,n        ,                            (21)
                                                        Ft,n

where St is the time-t spot exchange rate between dollars and foreign currency and Ft,n the
forward rate of exchange, set at time t with a n-year maturity.

   We construct the so-called cross-currency basis, in logs, as

                                                       1
                               xt,n = rt,n - rt,n -      ln(St /Ft,n )                    (22)
                                                       n
               1
The last term ( ln(St /Ft,n )) is the annualized continuously-compounded "forward pre-
               n
mium".

    We analyze the CIP deviation between the U.S. dollar and the Japanese yen. The data on
futures trades are obtained from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). Spot exchange-
rate quotes are from the TrueFX dataset, which offers historical tick-by-tick market data
for interbank foreign exchange rates at the millisecond frequency. For spot exchange rate
quotes, we take the mid-point between bid and ask rates. We compute the median spot and
the median forward rate every minute, and match the spot and forward rates in the same
minute. We construct the forward premium, and compute the daily median.

   To compute the Japanese Box rate, we use European options on the Nikkei 225 index
provided by the Japan Exchange Group. Each observation corresponds to a quote in response
to a new order. We then construct the mid quote at the minute level. In particular, we
consider the best bid and the best ask each minute, and use only those minutes in which
both an order to sell and to buy are submitted. Finally, we restrict our attention to those
minutes, maturities, and strikes for which the minimum ask price is not larger than 1.5 times

                                               28
                                                  FIGURE XVII
                                CIP Deviation: Box rate, government bond, and LIBOR

                     120

                     100
Basis points (bps)




                     80

                     60

                     40
                           Box Rate
                     20    Gov.
                           LIBOR
                      0
                           Sep 2016            Nov 2016                Jan 2017       Mar 2017
                                   FIGURE XVIII
The figure shows a ten-day rolling moving average of the Dollar-Yen cross-currency basis
implied by Box rates, as well as those implied by government bonds and LIBOR pre-
sented in Du et al. (2018a) and Du et al. (2018b).      The maturity equals 3 months.



the maximum bid price. The rest of the procedure for constructing the Box rates from mid
quotes follows the one outlined in Section 2. Per each maturity and date, we compute a
daily median.

    We then linearly interpolate Box rates on both currencies to match the maturity of
the forward contract. Figure XVII depicts the cross-currency basis in bps implied by Box
rates, and the ones computed by Du et al. (2018a,b). These authors use U.S. and Japanese
government bonds and LIBOR respectively to construct their cross-currency bases. To make
our results comparable to existing work, we use the forward contract with the maturity
closest to 90 days. The average maturity for our series is 97 days. The figure shows that
the box-rate-implied CIP deviation is almost always smaller (closer to zero) than previous
estimates. The average value of the cross-currency basis we calculate is 41 bps relative to the
79 bps for the Du et al. (2018a) series in the same period. The difference of 38 bps is driven
by two effects: (1) a more precise estimate of the forward premium (daily median of minute-
level forward premia instead of end-of-the-day values), and the usage of Box rates rather
than government bonds. In the same period, the CIP violation computed using LIBOR
rates is 87.5 bps.


                                                        29
6.     Robustness to Other Interest Rates

   In this section we perform several robustness analyses related to our implied interest
rates. First, we compare our SPX implied Box rates to three other interest rates: the GC
repo rate, the DJX option-implied Box rate, and the risk free rate implied by precious metal
futures.


6.1.    Relation to Other Interest Rates

   In this subsection, we compare our Box rate to three other risk free interest rate proxies.
First, we show that the average level of the General Collateral (GC) repo rate (which is
only available for short maturities) equals that of the government bond yields implied by
the NSS curve. As a result, GC repo also seems to earn a convenience yield close to that of
government bonds. More importantly, we can confidently conclude that our rate is distinct
from other common benchmarks in the literature, including government bond yields, OIS
rates, LIBOR and GC repo rates.

    Second, we estimate risk free rates from DJX (Dow Jones) options instead of SPX options.
We find that the implied rates and associated convenience yields are highly similar to those
implied by the SPX, though the DJX estimated rates are substantially noisier, with lower
R-squared values (and associated higher standard errors) in our estimated cross-sectional
regressions. This demonstrates that our data on SPX options yields uniquely precise rate
estimates and that the nearly perfect fit of the put-call parity relationship is due to the
quality of the SPX option market, rather than a mechanical feature of how option quotes
are generated.

    Third, we use the cost-of-carry formula for precious metal futures to infer implied in-
terest rates from that derivatives market. Generally, the time-varying cost of storage of a
commodity can complicate the estimation of a risk-free rate from the cost-of-carry formula.
We resolve this issue by focusing on precious metals for which the storage cost as a fraction
of the value of the underlying asset is minimal. Using this risk free interest rate proxy, we
once again find similar convenience yields to those implied by option markets (equal to about
40bp over our sample period).




                                             30
6.1.1.      GC Repo

    In this section we study the GC repo rate and compare it to several other interest rates.
The GC repo rate is the interest rate earned on a loan collateralized by a safe financial asset
such as treasuries, agency securities, or other members of the so-called "General Collateral"
basket of safe assets. It is commonly used in the literature Nagel (2016) to measure a riskless
rate of return that is higher than that earned by special liquid assets such as Treasury Bills.
It is generally available for shorter maturities than the ones we study in this paper.

    In Table 2 we compare the summary statistics of our 3-month Box rate to those of the
3-month government bond yield (implied by the NSS curve), the 3-month OIS rate and the
3-month GC repo rate. We find that the average rate across government bonds, OIS and
GC repo are all very similar, whereas our implied Box rate is substantially above all three.
We can therefore conclude that our rate is distinct from other common benchmarks in the
literature, which all seem to feature some form of convenience yield.
                                                 Table 2
                      Summary Statistics of Various (Implied) Interest Rates 2004-2018

                    Zero Coupon Yields: 3-month maturity
                                                                        Mean St. Dev.
                    Option Implied SPX                                  0.0174 0.0176
                    Government Bond                                     0.0142 0.0169
                    OIS                                                 0.0139 0.0178
                    GC Repo                                             0.0154 0.0176



6.1.2.      Box Rates from the Dow Jones Industrial Index (DJX)

    Next, we repeat the Box rate estimation that we performed for the S&P 500 index for
options on the Dow Jones industrial index (DJX). In Table 3 we summarize the results for
the median estimator (estimator 2 in equation 10).12 We find highly comparable results to
those of the SPX: the implied interest rate is on average higher than the government bond
yield by about 40 basis points, which is invariant to maturity.

   Given how comparable the results for the DJX are to the SPX we only plot the implied
continuously compounded interest rate for the 1-year maturity as an illustration in Figure
XIX. The graphs exhibit very much the same pattern, though the implied rates are somewhat
noisier than the ones implied by the SPX. Next, we repeat the efficiency analysis of Figure XI
 12
      The regression-based estimator gives highly comparable results.


                                                     31
                                             Table 3
                  Summary Statistics of DJX Option Implied Interest Rates 2004-2018

                  Zero Coupon Yields: 6 month maturity
                                                       Mean               St. Dev.
                  Option Implied DJX                   0.0184               0.0171
                  Government Bond                      0.0144               0.0166
                  Option Implied DJX - Government Bond 0.0040               0.0029

                  Zero Coupon Yields: 12 month maturity
                                                       Mean               St. Dev.
                  Option Implied DJX                   0.0190               0.0168
                  Government Bond                      0.0150               0.0163
                  Option Implied DJX - Government Bond 0.0040               0.0023

                  Zero Coupon Yields: 18 month maturity
                                                       Mean               St. Dev.
                  Option Implied DJX                   0.0197               0.0164
                  Government Bond                      0.0159               0.0158
                  Option Implied DJX - Government Bond 0.0039               0.0021


        0.06
                                                                               DJX Option Implied
        0.05                                                                   Government Bond
                                                                               LIBOR

        0.04

        0.03

        0.02

        0.01

           0
           2004       2006       2008      2010        2012       2014     2016       2018          2020

                                           FIGURE XIX
Comparison of     1-year zero   coupon   interest rates implied     from DJX options with gov-
ernment bond      rates and     LIBOR     rates.      All rates      are continuously compounded.


but now for DJX. The results are summarized in Figure XX where we plot the standard
error of the OLS estimate of Equation 2. The results are comparable to the SPX though
the average level of efficiency is substantially lower, with an average standard error of the
minutely level estimated rate equal to 3.4 basis points, and spikes that occasionally go as

                                                  32
high as 38 basis points. Because our daily estimates are computed by taking a median over
all the minute-level observations, those estimates will of course have much smaller standard
errors.


                                                                     40
         (rt,T) in Basis Points per Year for the 18-month Maturity




                                                                     35

                                                                     30

                                                                     25

                                                                     20

                                                                     15

                                                                     10

                                                                      5

                                                                      0
                                                                             2006         2008        2010          2012       2014         2016   2018


                                           FIGURE XX
Efficiency in the DJX option market expressed as the standard error around the implied risk-free rate.



   Finally, we study how the interest rates implied by the DJX differ from those implied by
the SPX. For each maturity, we compute a difference between the DJX and the SPX rate
and we report the characteristics of that series in table 4.
                                                                                                        Table 4
                                                                          Difference between DJX and SPX Option Implied Interest Rates 2004-2018

                                                                                    Maturity        6-month       12-month 18-month
                                                                                    Mean             0.00046        0.00023  0.00021
                                                                                    Stdev            0.00224        0.00121  0.00103
                                                                                    AR(1) (daily)     0.4302        0.49587   0.5710


    The table shows that while on average the rates are very close, substantial persistent
daily deviations occur. As an illustration, Figure XXI plots the differences between the two
yields for the 12-month maturity.




                                                                                                             33
                                                                     200
         Diff. in 12-month Yield Between DJX and SPX (bp per Year)


                                                                     150



                                                                     100



                                                                      50



                                                                       0



                                                                     -50
                                                                       2004     2006      2008       2010         2012       2014           2016      2018


                                                                                                     FIGURE XXI
Difference     in                                                                Daily      Continuously    Compounded                Implied     12-month     Zero
Coupon     Yield                                                              Between    the   DJX      and  the SPX             in     Basis   Points   per   Year.


6.1.3.                                                               Rates from Commodity Markets

   To construct a risk free asset in commodity markets we use the cost-of-carry relationship
between the futures price (Ft,T and the spot price St ) which states that:

                                                                                            Ft,T = St exp ((rt,T + ct,T )T ) .                                 (23)

where rt,T is the implied continuously compounded risk free interest rate and ct,T is the net
storage cost of the commodity. To derive estimates of the risk free interest rate, we focus on
futures contracts on underlying assets that are very cheap to store relative to their underlying
value, implying that the term ct,T is essentially zero. As such we focus on precious metals:
gold and silver. The risk-free rate is then computed as:

                                                                                                           1      Ft
                                                                                                  rt,T =     ln          .                                     (24)
                                                                                                           T      St

Our data set contains all futures trades made between May 2007 and January 2018 on the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) regarding two precious metals: gold, silver. Unlike the

                                                                                                            34
CBOE data, which also contains quotes, the database we purchased only contains trades.

   In Table 5 we summarize the key statistics for gold and silver implied interest rates.
We compare these rates to the government bond yields as implied by the NSS parameters
(G¨
  urkaynak et al. (2007)). The table shows that the estimated convenience yield for govern-
                                                  Table 5
                   Risk-free rates and convenience yields implied by precious metal prices

             Zero Coupon Yield Curve
                                                 Gold                                Silver
                                           Mean St. Dev                         Mean St. Dev
             Metal implied 6m              0.0118    0.0123                     0.0133    0.0174
             Metal implied 12m             0.0120    0.0117                     0.0116    0.0126
             Metal implied 18m             0.0127    0.0112                     0.0116    0.0124
             Metal Implied - Gov. Bond 6m 0.0043     0.0035                     0.0054    0.0117
             Metal Implied - Gov. Bond 12m 0.0040    0.0027                     0.0036    0.0049
             Metal Implied - Gov. Bond 18m 0.0037    0.0027                     0.0024    0.0050


ment bonds relative to metal-implied interest rates is the same as for our previous estimates
and equal to about 40 basis points for gold with no apparent relation to maturity. For silver
the order of magnitude is the same, but there now seems to be a maturity dependence of
the estimate, with the convenience yield decreasing with maturity.13



7.      Robustness to Bid Ask Spreads

    One potential concern with our option-implied rates is that frictions distinct from the
convenience yield on safe assets could bias our estimates. For example, it is possible that our
rates are systematically above or below true measures of the time value of money when the
option market is particularly illiquid. While our SPX options do seem to be highly liquid
and imply a very precise rate estimate (as measured by the cross-sectional R-squared when
estimating Equation 2 and the standard error measures in Figure XI), we demonstrate in
this section that option market illiquidity does not induce bias in our estimated rates.

    To compute our rates, we have followed the common practice of using midpoints of bids
and asks (also used in the computation of the VIX index by the CBOE). If bid-ask spreads
are symmetric around a true measure of an option's value, then an expanding bid ask spread
  13
    In unreported results, for platinum, the data is not sufficiently rich to obtain (interpolated) term structure
data. However, the average convenience yield across all available maturities is 50 basis points. The volatility
of the daily estimates is large, partly due to the fact that we only have trade data and not quote data.


                                                       35
would not change the value of the midpoint. However, if bid ask spreads expand and contract
asymmetrically, they could induce bias in an option's midpoint value. In this section, we
explore this issue, and document that observable measures of frictions (bid-ask spreads) in
the option market do not seem related to our estimated rates. A first indication that such
frictions are not influencing the level of our rates is that, on average, the DJX option market
is substantially less liquid then the SPX option market (with wider bid ask spreads and
substantially lower R-squared values) yet it produces essentially the same average level of
interest rates (as reported in Table 3). Furthermore, and as argued before, we find similar
convenience yields using the futures market for precious metals, suggesting that the only
frictions of concern must be common across several markets.

    We believe our usage of midpoint prices produces a more accurate measure of the time
value of money compared to other approaches that use bids or asks directly, or that use data
on observed trades. First, while there are non-trivial bid-ask spreads on individual options
in our data, anecdotal evidence suggests that there are substantially smaller bid-ask spreads
specifically for doing the box trade. After all, a box trader is unexposed to the underlying
asset, so that market makers need not worry about asymmetric information regarding the
underlying. Second, a trader posting limit orders or a trader who is well-connected in the
trading network, can execute at substantially better prices than the reported bid and ask.
Third, using trade data only would drastically reduce the cross-sectional R-squareds that
we obtain and therefore yield much less precise rate estimates (yet similar unconditional
means). We therefore take the approach of using midpoints and showing empirically that
the resulting rate estimates are not biased by microstructure effects.

    To refute the possibility of bias induced by option-market frictions, we study the time
variation in the spread between the DJX-implied rate and the SPX-implied rate. Without
such frictions, both rates would accurately estimate the time value of money using only
risky asset prices. As a result, fluctuations in the DJX-SPX spread reflect potential biases
in both rates due to market-specific frictions. We demonstrate the lack of bias in the SPX-
implied rate using two methods. First, we document that a positive (negative) DJX-SPX
spread predicts negative (positive) changes in the DJX rate towards the SPX rate but the
converse effect is an order of magnitude smaller. Second, we show that proxies for option
microstructure frictions such as bid-ask spreads in each market predict almost no variation
in the DJX-SPX spread. In our data, measures of frictions in the DJX and SPX option
markets are only moderately correlated with each other, so we can observe the effects of
changing liquidity conditions separately in each market.

   We proceed with the analysis as follows. First, we compute daily changes in the 12-

                                              36
month SPX-implied Box rate as well as daily changes in the 12-month DJX-implied rate
and evaluate to what extent the spread between the two rates on the previous day predicts
these changes. The results are reported in Table 6. The table shows that the DJX-SPX box
spread negatively predicts changes in the level of the 12-month DJX-implied rate, indicating
a convergence of the DJX-implied rate towards the SPX-implied rate. The R-squared of this
predictive regression is 25%. While the DJX-SPX spread also positively predicts changes
in the 12-month SPX rate, the coefficient is 14 times smaller in absolute magnitude (0.04
vs -0.54), and the explained variation (R-squared) is only 1.3%. It thus appears that the
SPX-implied rate more accurately measures the time value of money and deviations of the
DJX-implied rate from this more accurate estimate dissipate over time. Given that the
DJX-SPX spread has a daily autocorrelation of 0.5 over our sample period, the DJX-implied
rate seems to converge towards to SPX-implied rate not in a matter of hours or minutes,
but rather in a matter of days.
                                             Table 6
                     Predicting Daily Yield Changes with the DJX-SPX Spread



                                                    DJX          SP X
                                                   rt, 1y       rt, 1y




                             Constant                  0.0001   0.0000
                             t-stat                      6.22     -0.84

                              DJX        SP X
                             rt -1,1y - rt-1,1y    -0.5444      0.0429
                             t-stat                 -34.66        6.78


                             R2                         0.252    0.013


    Next, we compute a daily bid-ask spread measure. We do this separately for the SPX and
the DJX. For each minute, each maturity, and each strike, we compute the bid ask spread by
taking the difference between the bid and the ask and dividing it by the mid price. We then
construct a daily measure by taking the median over all those bid-ask spreads within the
day. We do this separately for puts and calls, so that we can evaluate the influence of each
option type in the regression. We then regress the daily spread between the 12-month DJX
and SPX-implied interest rates on the natural logarithm of these bid-ask spread measures,
so that the coefficients can be interpreted as the effect of roughly a doubling of the bid-ask
spreads. The results are reported in Table 7.


                                                  37
                                             Table 7
                       The Influence of Bid Ask Spreads on Estimated Rates



                                                     DJX        SP X
                                                    rt -1,1y - rt-1,1y


                            Constant                          0.0019
                            t-stat                              6.51

                            ln(bid-ask-djx-call)             0.00026
                            t-stat                              5.81

                            ln(bid-ask-djx-put)              0.00022
                            t-stat                              4.90

                            ln(bid-ask-spx-call)            -0.00004
                            t-stat                              -0.59

                            ln(bid-ask-spx-put)              0.00020
                            t-stat                              3.37

                            R2                                 0.042


    The table shows that while there is some influence of the bid-ask spreads on the spread
between the two rates, the effect is generally small. An increase of one unit in the log-bid-ask
spread (roughly a doubling of the spread) leads to a change of at most 2.6 basis points in
the spread. More importantly, the R-squared of the regression is only 4.2%. Because the
standard deviation of the DJX-SPX spread (the dependent variable) equals 12 basis points,
this R-squared value translates to a standard deviation of the fitted value of the regression
of only 2.4 basis points. In Figure XXII we plot this fitted value together with the raw
spread. The graph once again illustrates that very little of the DJX-SPX spread is related
to movements in bid-ask spreads across the two markets.

    Finally, we repeat the analysis above, but now using the LIBOR rate as the counterfactual
interest rate. After all, in the period before 2007, when our rate is almost identical to LIBOR
(and banks were not thought to be risky borrowers), the Box-LIBOR spread is another
potential measure of the accuracy of our rate. After 2007, this spread is driven primarily
by the credit risk of banks and is no longer an accurate proxy for the distortions we wish
to measure. We therefore run regressions of the Box-LIBOR spread on our bid-ask spread
from 2004 to 2006 to test the hypothesis that option microstructure frictions can bias our
Box rate estimates away from the time value of money.

                                               38
                                                                     200

         Diff. in 12-month Yield Between DJX and SPX (bp per Year)
                                                                                                                      Data
                                                                                                                      Fitted Value
                                                                     150



                                                                     100



                                                                      50



                                                                       0



                                                                     -50
                                                                       2004   2006   2008   2010        2012   2014   2016       2018


                                     FIGURE XXII
Difference in Daily Continuously Compounded Implied 12-month Zero Coupon Yield Between
the DJX and the SPX in Basis Points per Year.       The graph also plots the fitted value
that uses bid-ask spreads on puts and calls in both markets as the explanatory variables.


   We summarize our results in Table 8. The left-hand side of the regression is the daily
Box-LIBOR spread (1-year maturity) between January 1st 2004 and December 31st 2006, i.e.
755 daily observations, which we regress on the bid ask spread measures mentioned above.
The regression results show once again that the option market frictions have a negligible
explanatory power for the spread with a low R-squared value (2.3%). The coefficients on
the log bid ask spread measures indicate that a doubling of bid ask spreads lowers our Box
rate estimate by a few basis points. Given that put and call bid-ask spreads predict the
Box-LIBOR spread with opposite signs, it is not even clear whether an overall decrease in
option market liquidity predicts an increase or a decrease in the Box-LIBOR spread.



8.    Price Discovery

   As a last robustness analysis, we examine the speed of price discovery for Box rates
and compare it to the speed in treasury markets. In particular, we investigate how fast
rates converge to a new stable level that incorporates news in Federal Open Market Com-
mittee (FOMC) announcements. Previous research (Fleming and Piazzesi (2005)) has used

                                                                                                   39
                                             Table 8
                    The Influence of Bid Ask Spreads on Estimated Rates, Cont.

                                                        SP X      libor
                                                       rt, 1y - rt,1y
                            Constant                         -0.00048

                            log (bid-ask-spx-calls)         -0.00029
                            t-stat                              -3.19

                            log (bid-ask-spx-puts)           0.00010
                            t-stat                              1.26

                            R-squared                           0.023
                            Number of daily obs                   755


treasury yield data from GovPX to show that government bond yields respond quickly to
such announcements. We demonstrate that the speed of convergence in our minute-level
Box rate data is as fast, if not faster, than the convergence in treasury yields. The ad-
vantage of our Box rates is that we have quotes at every minute for all maturities while
GovPX is irregularly spaced with frequent gaps. For this reason, to appropriately compare
our high-frequency rates with the Treasury security tick data from GovPX, we first select
the government bonds with the highest market activity in a given FOMC meeting day. We
then match these bonds with the closest Box rates in terms of maturity with a maximum
difference in maturities of 30 days.

    Our price-discovery exercise closely mimics Fleming and Piazzesi (2005). As in Section 3,
we derive policy surprises from the prices of fed funds futures traded on the Chicago Board
of Trade (CBOT). We compute policy surprises as the difference between the yield implied
by the last trade executed at most 10 minutes before the announcement release and the
first trade made at least 20 minutes after the announcement. Following Kuttner (2001) and
Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) we define the policy surprise to be the innovation in the
current-month futures rate scaled up to reflect the number of days left in that month. For
announcements made in the last seven days of the month we use the next month's futures
contract.

    We compute changes in both Box and treasury rates in 5-minute intervals around the
announcement release. Figure XXIII reports the average 5-minute absolute yield changes
(volatility) for all matched securities and all FOMC announcement days. Both treasury yields
and Box yields appear to adjust immediately at the time of announcement. Furthermore,
a slightly higher volatility seems to persist in the hours after the announcement. These

                                               40
volatility patterns provide evidence that both rates respond with similar speed to news.14

   To calculate the speed of convergence, we then proceed by regressing rate changes over
various time intervals around announcements on the Fed Funds target rate surprises. For
both the government and the Box rates, the largest responses occur in the interval including
the announcement release. However, unlike the Box rate, the government bond yields exhibit
a sluggish response to target rate surprises consistent with the evidence documented by
Fleming and Piazzesi (2005). The regression estimates yield additional support for the
usage of the Box rate when evaluating the market behavior at higher frequencies.
                                                    Table 9
                  Effects of Fed funds rate surprises on yields around FOMC announcements

                                                     Interval of Analysis
                Security         (-45, -25)      (-25, -5)     (-5, 25)    (25, 55)   (55, 80)
                Box rate            0.034          -0.035      1.196       0.354       0.080
                                   (0.065)        (0.081)      (0.209)     (0.170)    (0.087)
                Government          0.010          -0.020      0.461        0.187     0.165
                                   (0.039)        (0.034)      (0.205)     (0.122)    (0.053)
           Notes : The table shows the results from regressing the innovations in Box rates or
government bond yields on Fed Funds rate surprises for various intervals around the announcement release.
The Fed Funds surprise is the variation in the current-month futures rate from the last trade executed at
most 10 minutes before the announcement to the first trade made at least 20 minutes after the announcement.




9.        A Multivariate Analysis of Spreads

   This section jointly studies the dynamics of our convenience yield measure and several
arbitrage spreads that have been documented in the literature. We replicate these arbitrage
spreads in Online Appendix A. The measures we consider are (1) the so-called 6-month
spread (the difference between the yield on zero-coupon treasury bills and the yield on notes
and bonds that mature within 6 months), (2) the spread between principal and interest
STRIPS, also called the STRIP spread, (3) the spread between on-the-run and off-the-run
long-term bonds of equal maturity, and (4) the spread between notes and seasoned bonds
with the same remaining maturity.

   We find that the SPX option-implied convenience yield measure is exposed to considerably
smaller idiosyncratic shocks than all other spreads in the analysis, and that the level of the
  14
       In Online Appendix B we present several interesting individual cases.

                                                      41
                                                                             FIGURE XXIII
                                                                 Yield volatility on FOMC announcements

                                      2
                                                 Gov yield
Yield Volatility (in Basis Points)




                                                 Box rate

                                     1.5


                                      1


                                     0.5


                                      0
                                               -100                -50                   0                 50                100
                                                                             Event Time (in Minutes)
                                           The figure shows the average absolute rate changes around FOMC announcement releases.



SPX convenience yield today contains the vast majority of predictive information for its level
in the future. This suggests that while some of the other spreads in our analysis could be
thought of as market-specific measures of limits to arbitrage, our convenience yield measure
can be thought of as measuring the overall scarcity of safe assets.15

   To establish these results, we estimate a first order Vector Auto Regression (VAR) that in
addition to our SPX convenience yield measure includes the bond arbitrage spreads above, as
well as the DJX- and gold-implied convenience yields. The results are reported in Table 10.

    The table shows that both option-implied interest rate series (SPX and DJX) are subject
to considerably less idiosyncratic risk than others, while the metal convenience yields are
subject to more.16 As a result, if we are interested in using data on risky asset prices to infer
the risk-free rate consistent with the time value of money, the option-implied rates seem to
be our best candidate. The R-squareds of predicting the in-sample SPX-implied rate is ex-
tremely high (94%), and substantially higher than that of the DJX (83%). Government bond
arbitrages have intermediate R-squareds, while the metal series have by far the lowest. This
implies that there does not seem to be a high degree of unpredictable, non-persistent noise
in the SPX-implied rates. The SPX-implied rate seems most consistent with the intuitive
                           15
    We thank Eben Lazarus for providing this interpretation of our findings.
                           16
    This is also due to the fact that the convenience yields on precious metals are estimated with trade data
only (as opposed to quote data) leading to noisier estimates.


                                                                                    42
                                           Table 10
                               VAR(1) Analysis of Arbitrage Spreads

                  djx     spx             lessthan6 metal   notesbonds ontherun
       djx         0.6798 0.0634             0.0032 -0.0585      0.0001  -0.0002
       spx         0.2662 0.9103            -0.0400 0.4142      -0.0002   0.0001
       lessthan6  -0.0066 -0.0323            0.5319 1.4711      -0.0018  -0.0015
       metal       0.0005 -0.0002            0.0031 0.0223       0.0000   0.0000
       notesbonds 1.6658 0.4304              0.2773 4.7072       0.7044  -0.0094
       ontherun    0.0671 0.1230            -0.4992 -8.0279     -0.0037   0.4580
       constant    2.7326 0.6319            -1.8320 41.4707      0.0078  -0.0281

       R2             0.8332     0.9403      0.3494     0.0126        0.5004    0.2147


notion that the time value of money does not have extreme high frequency fluctuations.



10.     Conclusion

    We have constructed and analyzed a novel panel of risk-free interest rates that are free of
the convenience yield on safe assets. We have presented three important applications of this
novel data set: (1) high frequency event studies of the effects of central bank policy, (2) the
role of convenience yields in bond return predictability, and (3) constructing a convenience-
yield free measure of Covered Interest Parity (CIP) deviations in foreign exchange markets.
More generally, we wish to advocate for our rates' widespread use in the macro, monetary,
international, and financial economics literatures. For example, our data is important for the
accurate measurement of risk premia on stocks and credit instruments in asset pricing, as it
prevents researchers from inadvertently confusing the convenience yield on safe assets with
compensation for risk. In addition, our rates allow monetary economists to isolate monetary
transmission mechanisms that flow specifically through the scarcity of safe/liquid assets.

   One issue we have not yet explored is the possibility that the time value of money is
not the same for all investors, which would imply that the convenience yield on a safe
asset depends on which investor buys it. Understanding how the time value of money for
a specialist investor who trades actively in options markets may differ from that of a less
sophisticated household is a promising direction for future research.




                                               43
References
Amihud, Y., Mendelson, H., 1991. Liquidity, maturity, and the yields on u.s. treasury secu-
 rities. Journal of Finance 46, 1411­1425.

Bernanke, B., Kuttner, K., 2005. What Explains the Stock Market's Reaction to Federal
  Reserve Policy? Journal of Finance 60, 1221­1257.

Brenner, M., Galai, D., 1986. Implied interest rates. The Journal of Business 59, 493­507.

Caballero, R., Farhi, E., 2018. The Safety Trap. Review of Economic Studies 85, 223­274.

Cochrane, J. H., Piazzesi, M., 2005. Bond risk premia. American Economic Review 95,
  138­160.

Daves, P. R., Ehrhardt, M. C., 1993. Liquidity, reconstitution, and the value of u.s. treasury
  strips. Journal of Finance 48, 315­329.

Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., Palmer, C., 2019. How Quantitative Easing Works: Evidence
  on the Refinancing Channel. Tech. rep., working Paper, Harvard Business School.

Diamond, W., 2018. Safety Transformation and the Structure of the Financial System. work-
  ing paper .

Du, W., Im, J., Schreger, J., 2018a. The U.S. Treasury Premium. Journal of International
 Economics 112, 167 ­181.

Du, W., Tepper, A., Verdelhan, A., 2018b. Deviations from covered interest rate parity. The
 Journal of Finance 73, 915­957.

Fama, E. F., Bliss, R. H., 1987. The information in long-maturity forward rates. American
  Economic Review 77, 680­692.

Fleming, M. J., Piazzesi, M., 2005. Monetary policy tick-by-tick. Working paper, Stanford
  University.

Frazzini, A., Pedersen, L., 2014. Betting against beta. Journal of Financial Economics 111,
  1­25.

Golez, B., Jackwerth, J., Slavutskaya, A., 2018. Funding illiquidity implied by s&p 500
 derivatives. Working paper.



                                             44
Gorton, G., Pennacchi, G., 1990. Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation. Journal
 of Finance 45, 49­71.

G¨
 urkaynak, R. S., Sack, B., Wright, J. H., 2007. The U.S. Treasury yield curve: 1961 to the
 present. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291 ­ 2304.

He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., 2013. Intermediary asset pricing. American Economic Review
  103, 732­770.

H´
 ebert, B., 2018. Externalities as arbitrage. Working paper, Stanford University.

Hicks, J., 1937. Mr. keynes and the 'classics': A suggested interpretation. Econometrica 5,
  147­159.

Krishnamurthy, A., 2002. The bond/old-bond spread. Journal of Financial Economics 66,
  463­506.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2011. The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Inter-
  est Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy (Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  2011, No. 2). Brookings Papers on Economic Activity pp. 215­287.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2012. The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt.
  Journal of Political Economy 120, 233­267.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2013. The ins and outs of large scale asset pur-
  chases. Kansas City Federal Reserve Symposium on Global Dimensions of Unconventional
  Monetary Policy .

Kuttner, K. N., 2001. Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the fed
 funds futures market. Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 523 ­ 544.

Musto, D., Nini, G., Schwarz, K., 2018. Notes on bonds: Illiquidity feedback during the
 financial crisis. The Review of Financial Studies 31, 2983­3018.

Nagel, S., 2016. The liquidity premium of near-money assets. Quarterly Journal of Economics
  131, 1927.

Nakamura, E., Steinsson, J., 2018. High Frequency Identification of Monetary Non-
  Neutrality: The Information Effect. Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 1283­1330.

Pasquariello, P., 2014. Financial market dislocations. Review of Financial Studies 27, 1868­
  1914.

                                            45
Rigobon, R., Sack, B., 2004. The Impact Of Monetary Policy On Asset Prices. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 51, 1553­1575.

Sharpe, W., 1964. Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of
  risk. Journal of Finance 19, 425­444.

Stein, J., 2012. Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 127, 57­95.

Svensson, L. E., 1994. Estimating and interpreting forward interest rates: Sweden 1992 -
  1994. Working Paper 4871, National Bureau of Economic Research.

van Binsbergen, J., Brandt, M., Koijen, R., 2012. On the timing and pricing of dividends.
  American Economic Review 102, 1596­1618.




                                           46
Online Appendix


A.      Other Arbitrage Measures

    In this appendix, we replicate several bond arbitrage measures from the literature and
compare them to the dynamics of our estimated convenience yield. We consider four distinct
categories of arbitrage spreads using government bond data. Two of them relate to zero
coupon bond arbitrages, which can be computed without estimating (and interpolating)
a yield curve, and two of them involve bonds with coupon payments that do require an
estimated yield curve.


A.1.      Zero Coupon Bond Arbitrages

6 month Spread
First, we consider the spread between notes/bonds that mature within the next 6 months
and yields on treasury bills that mature on the exact same date. Treasury bills are more
liquid and therefore tend to have lower yields (Amihud and Mendelson (1991)). Because
treasury securities pay coupons every 6 months, there are no intermediate coupon payments
for either security used in constructing this spread. For each day, we compute the median
of the continuously compounded yields to construct a daily time series.

STRIP Spread
Second, we consider the spread between two types of STRIPS (Separate Trading of Registered
Interest and Principal of Securities) constructed respectively from interest and principal
payments on U.S. government debt. These securities pay identical cash flows and are backed
by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government, so any difference between the yields on
coupon vs principal STRIPS identifies an arbitrage. In general, whichever of the principal or
interest STRIP that has a higher supply outstanding tends to have a lower yield. At short
maturities, interest STRIPS are in larger supply while at long maturities principal STRIPS
are.17 Because all principal and interest payments happen on a regular 6-month schedule,
there are enough overlapping bonds to consider only spreads between interest and principal
strips that mature on exactly the same day. We present averages of both the level as well as
the value of this spread across all maturity matched pairs of coupon and principal STRIPS
  17
     The reason is that all bonds of all maturities pay coupon payments every 6 months and contribute to
the coupon-related supply.



                                                  47
below.


A.2.     Coupon Bond Arbitrages

   Because the two spreads we study in the previous subsection are between pairs of zero
coupon securities with the exact same maturity, no assumptions were required regarding the
shape of the yield curve to construct them. This is not true for the two arbitrage spreads that
we consider next. The reason is that these next two measures relate to government bonds
that make coupon payments for which no exact matching security may exist. As a result,
we compute these spreads by comparing a bond's true yield to the yield implied by fitting
a yield curve to all treasury bonds. To estimate this yield curve, we estimate a parametric
model following Svensson (1994), and G¨   urkaynak et al. (2007). A Nelson-Siegel-Svensson
(NSS) instantaneous forward rate  periods in the future is assumed to have the functional
form
                                                                          
                  f ( ) = 0 + 1 + 2         exp -        + 3 exp -            .
                                        1            1         2         2
Given parameters (0 , 1 , 2 , 1 , 2 ) , this forward rate function uniquely implies a zero coupon
yield curve that can be used to price any risk free bond. To estimate the parameters, we use
data from GovPX between 3pm and 4pm of each day and consider the price of all off-the-run
notes and bonds. Let yi be the yield to maturity of bond i, Di be the duration of bond i,
and yi (0 , 1 , 2 , 1 , 2 ) be its yield to maturity implied by the NSS yield curve. We estimate
the parameters of the yield curve for each day by minimizing

                                    1
                                       (yi - yi (0 , 1 , 2 , 1 , 2 ))2
                                i
                                    Di

where the sum i goes over all bond quotes between 3 and 4pm that day.

On the Run Spread
We use the NSS yield curve to compute an implied yield for the most recently issued bond
of each maturity, called the on-the-run bond, and take its difference from the true yield on
that bond. On-the-run bonds tend to be more liquid than off-the-run bonds and therefore
trade at a lower yield as shown below. The spread between on- and off-the-run bonds is
related to the timing of the treasury auction cycle. This is particularly true for the yield
on the on-the-run 10-year bond. We plot the spread between this on-the-run 10-year bond
yield and yield implied by the NSS yield curve in Figure A.1.

Notes vs Bonds


                                                 48
We also use the NSS yield curve to consider the relative spread between treasury notes (which
by definition have a maturity less than 10 years after issuance) and bonds (which mature
more than 10 years after issuance), that have less than 10 years of maturity left, following
(Musto et al. (2018)). For each note and bond that mature between 3 and 10 years from the
day on which the security is traded, we compute the spread between the security's actual
yield to maturity and the yield implied by the estimated NSS yield curve. We then take the
median of this spread across all notes, and the median of the spread across all bonds on each
day and compute a daily difference between these two medians. As the above authors show,
this spread is small in normal times but spikes during the financial crisis.


A.3.     Data

    As mentioned previously, our U.S. treasury security prices come from the GovPX database,
which reports trades and quotes from the inter-dealer market for U.S. treasuries. We use
indicative quotes, which provide the most frequent measure of bond prices on GovPX from
3 to 4pm on each day. In addition, we have data from Tradeweb on the prices of STRIPS,
which are zero coupon bonds created by separating the principal and interest payments on
treasury securities. This database provides quotes 2 times a day, and we restrict ourselves
to quotes at 3pm. Whenever using quote data, we take the midpoint of the bid and ask as
the price measure.


A.4.     Results

    First, we present summary statistics on the four above-mentioned government bond ar-
bitrages in Table 11 and we plot them in Figures A.1, A.2 and A.3.

   Several patterns appear across all of these arbitrage spreads. First, both their level
and volatility generally increase during the financial crisis period of late 2008 and early
2009. Second, most spreads are smallest in the later part of our sample, suggesting that
government bond markets are now even more integrated than they were before the crisis.
Third, some spreads (such as the 10-year on the run spread) seem to be driven in part
by idiosyncratic factors such as the treasury auction cycle. That is, the regular spikes in
Figure A.1 correspond to auction cycle dates.




                                             49
                                                                                     Table 11
                                                            Summary Statistics of Government Bond Arbitrages 2004-2018



                                                                                           Mean (in bp)          St. Dev.


                                                                6 month Spread                         6.4388     6.9544


                                                                STRIP Spread                           3.8696     8.8144


                                                                On the Run Spread
                                                                All Bonds                              0.4945     1.9194
                                                                10 year Bond                           2.1587     2.4044


                                                                Notes vs Bonds                         0.3576     0.9573




                                                     15
10-year On the Run Spread in Basis Points per Year




                                                     10




                                                      5




                                                      0

                                                     2000   2002    2004    2006    2008        2010      2012     2014     2016   2018


                                                                                 FIGURE A.1
                                                               Ten Year On-the-Run Spread in Basis Points per Year.




                                                                                           50
                                                                               10



                            Median Note-Bond Spread in Basis Points per Year
                                                                                8


                                                                                6


                                                                                4


                                                                                2


                                                                                0


                                                                               -2
                                                                               2006          2008            2010      2012       2014            2016          2018


                                                                                                             FIGURE A.2
                                                                                                Notes/Bonds Spread in Basis Points per Year.




                                                         11
Median Absolute Strip Spread in Basis Points per Year




                                                         10

                                                                               9

                                                                               8

                                                                               7

                                                                               6

                                                                               5

                                                                               4

                                                                               3

                                                                               2

                                                                               1
                                                                                      2005          2006       2007     2008     2009      2010          2011          2012


                                                                                                                  FIGURE A.3
                                                                                                           Median Absolute STRIP Spread.




                                                                                                                        51
B.      Select responses of box rate and government yields
        to FOMC announcements
                                        Panel A: March 22, 2005


3.9

3.8
            Box rate
3.7         Gov yield



3.6

3.5
        10:00           11:00          12:00          13:00          14:00          15:00     16:00
                                                                                     Mar 22, 2005
                                         Panel B: June 29, 2006


5.7

5.6

            Box rate
5.5         Gov yield


5.4

5.3

        10:00           11:00          12:00          13:00          14:00          15:00          16:00
               The figure plots the maturity-matched box rates and government yields Jun
                                                                                       around
                                                                                            29, 2006
the release of the March 22, 2005 and June 29, 2006 FOMC announcements. The maturities are 452 days
for Panel A and 541 days for Panel B. The vertical line represents the time of the release. Yields are in %.




                                                    52
                                       Panel A: October 31, 2007


4.4

4.3

4.2         Box rate
            Gov yield
4.1

  4

3.9
        10:00           11:00         12:00          13:00          14:00          15:00     16:00
                                                                                    Oct 31, 2007
                                      Panel B: September 23, 2009




1.1


  1         Box rate
            Gov yield



0.9


0.8
        10:00           11:00         12:00          13:00          14:00          15:00          16:00
             The figure plots the maturity-matched box rates and government yields around   the 2009
                                                                                      Sep 23,
release of the October 31, 2007 and September 23, 2009 FOMC announcements. The maturities are 598 days
for Panel A and 633 days for Panel B. The vertical line represents the time of the release. Yields are in %




                                                    53
