                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               SHARING A GOVERNMENT

                                      Jaume Ventura

                                    Working Paper 26141
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w26141


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




I acknowledge financial support from the Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI),
through the European Research Council (ERC), under the European Union's Horizon 2020
Programme, Grant Agreement 693512 ("Globalization, Economic Policy and Political
Structure"), the Generalitat de Catalunya (CERCA program and grant 2014 SGR 830) and the
Barcelona GSE. I thank Janko Heineken and Ugur Yesilbayraktar for excellent research
assistance. I am grateful to Alessandra Bonfiglioli, Fernando Broner, Gino Gancia, Teresa
Garcia-Milà, Alberto Martin, Marti Mestieri and, especially, to Giacomo Ponzetto for very
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jaume Ventura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Sharing a Government
Jaume Ventura
NBER Working Paper No. 26141
August 2019
JEL No. D72,D79,F15,F55,H77

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper develops a simple theoretical framework to study a set of regions, each with its own
regional government, who share a union or central government. These governments must decide
whether to implement or discard a large number of projects that produce local benefits for the
region that implements them, and externalities for the rest of the regions. Conflict or
disagreement arises since different regions value projects differently. The classic assignment
problem consists of deciding who decides these projects, either the union or the regional
governments. It is well known that regional governments are insensitive to externalities. The key
observation here is that the union government is insensitive to local benefits. Thus, each
government maximizes only a piece of the value of projects, and disregards the other one. This
observations leads to simple and clear rules for solving the assignment problem.


Jaume Ventura
CREI
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005-Barcelona
SPAIN
and Barcelona GSE
and also NBER
jventura@crei.cat
                                     1   Introduction

The topic of this lecture is the costs and bene...ts of centralizing or decentralizing political
decisions. This is a timely topic given the pace at which the European project is moving
forward. Notwithstanding recent setbacks, such as the Brexit vote, the European Union
holds more political power now than ever before. And yet, this power pales when compared
to that of the United States federal government. Should the power of the European Union
grow up to that of the US federal government? Should it stop short of this? Why? What
sort of decisions should be made by the European Union? Which ones should remain in the
member states?
   Europe has a long and robust tradition of empire-building and subsequent breakup,
which is the old way to move from a decentralized to a centralized political system and
back. Hopefully, the use of war to change the political structure of the state is a thing
of the past. But the tensions to change country borders will remain alive and strong for
the foreseeable future. They are indeed at the forefront of political debates in the United
Kingdom, Belgium, Spain and elsewhere. And these tensions are nothing but a struggle
between central governments that want to impose their decisions on regions that want to
decide on their own. What decisions should be made by the central government? What
decisions should be left to the regional governments?
   Finding a democratic and e¢ cient way to decide the geographical shape of the state is a
major problem facing Europe today. And I strongly believe that academic economists have
much to contribute to its solution. The questions are clear, but the answers are complex
and tend to generate strong disagreement. Some of this disagreement is opportunistic. For
instance, majority groups favor centralization because this allows them to impose their views
on geographically concentrated minorities. But much of this disagreement is honest, and
it reects instead competing assumptions about the workings of governments. Thus, an
important research goal is to sort out the arguments and explore the precise role that di¤erent
assumptions play in them.
   Let me state quickly, though, that I do not have an `
                                                       easy ...x'or a `
                                                                      quick solution'to this
problem. My modest goal here is of an academic and methodological nature. It relates to
the way I think we should approach this problem, and not about making a speci...c proposal
to solve it. To make any serious progress, though, I must ...rst de...ne the problem in narrow,
concrete terms.
   Consider a set of regions, each with its own regional government, who share a union or



                                               1
central government. You can think of the union as the European Union and the regions as
the member states. You could also think of the union as the German federal government
and the regions as the Länder. These governments must decide whether to implement or
discard a large number of projects such as building a new infraestructure, changing public
health or pensions coverage, enacting new laws that regulate the banking industry, imposing
restrictions on school curricula, and many others. These projects produce local bene...ts
to the region that implements them, but they also produce externalities to the rest of the
regions. Conict or disagreement arises since di¤erent regions value projects di¤erently.
       The classic assignment problem consists of deciding who decides these projects, either the
union or the regional governments. The research goal is to identify, for a given project type,
which level of government makes the best decisions. For instance, it could be that regional
governments make better decisions on education, while the union government makes better
decisions on banking regulation. This is exactly what we want to know.
       The traditional or "public ...nance" approach (Oates 1972, 1999) assumes that govern-
ments are benevolent in the sense that they do what is best for their constituencies. Regional
governments maximize local bene...ts, but disregard externalities that do not a¤ect their con-
stituencies. The union government maximizes the total value of projects, including both local
bene...ts and externalities, since its constituency is the whole union. To avoid the boring (and
absurd!) conclusion that all policy decisions should be centralized, this approach assumes
that the union government cannot taylor or match policies to local preferences. This policy-
uniformity constraint makes the union government less e¢ cient than regional governments.
The latter can produce di¤erent decisions for each region, while the union government must
adopt the same decision for all regions.1
       Thus, the assignment problem consists of choosing the least of two evils: (i) regional
governments that are e¢ cient but have the wrong preferences; or (ii) a union government
that is ine¢ cient, but has the right preferences. If externalities are large in absolute value,
regional governments make poor decisions and it is best to let the union government decide.
If policy preferences are very heterogeneous, the union government makes poor decisions
and it is best to let regional governments decide. In policy applications, these are the simple
recipes that are used again and again to reach conclusions on who should decide on pensions,
infrastructures, monetary policy or education.
       There is also a modern or "political economy" approach that grew up from a dissatis-

   1
    The "public ...nance" approach often assumes that the union government is able to exploit economies of
scale, while the regional governments cannot coordinate to do so. I ignore this issue in this lecture.


                                                    2
faction with the assumption that governments are benevolent.2 The ...rst issue is preference
aggregation. If regions have di¤erent preferences, how is it exactly that the union govern-
ment aggregates these preferences in such a way that it ends up maximizing the total value
of the projects, including both local bene...ts and externalities with the right weights? We
know, at least since Arrow'
                          s impossibility theorem, that reasonable social choice mechanisms
are unreliable and often lead to suboptimal outcomes. This turns out to be the case also
in this context as shown, for instance, by Lockwood (2002), Besley and Coate (2003) and
Harstadt (2007).3 The second issue is agency. Even if preferences aggregate well, how is it
exactly that policymakers end up having incentives to maximize these preferences and not
their own? The answer, of course, is that often they do not, and this also leads to subop-
timal outcomes. The implications of this observation have been explored, for instance, by
Beasley and Case (1995), Seabright (1996),4 Bardhan and Mookherjee (2000), Besley and
Smart (2007) and Bo¤a, Piolatto and Ponzetto (2016).
       The modern approach is insightful, stimulating and full of novel ideas that capture in-
teresting aspects of reality. But it is fair to say too that this approach has not generated
yet a consensus view that either con...rms or replaces the traditional approach in policy ap-
plications. Some papers strive to ...nd micro-foundations or justi...cations for the traditional
approach. Other papers do the opposite, illustrating its shortcomings and limitations. And
still some papers do both things at the same time. Going through this literature is exciting
and fun, but one is left at the end a bit dizzy, somewhat confused about the big picture.
Is it possible to distill from this modern approach simple and sharp results that can guide
policy applications? If so, how do they compare to the basic recipes of the traditional view?
       I provide in this lecture partial and tentative answers to these questions. Throughout,
I ignore the agency problem and focus exclusively on preference aggregation. A integrated
treatment of both sides of the problem is obviously desirable, but I shall not attempt it here.
To study this issue, I use a model that is closely related to Lockwood (2002). I show that
this model exhibits a deep symmetry in the assignment problem that somehow has gone
unnoticed so far. The recipes for policy applications that emerge from it are as simple and
clear as those provided by the traditional approach. But they are quite di¤erent, as I explain

   2
     See Lockwood (2006) for an excellent survey of this literature. Treisman (2007) provides a book-length
treatment of arguments in favor and against centralization that covers both the "public ...nance" and the
"political economy" approaches.
   3
     Of course, one could also ask what happens if regional governments do not aggregate well the preferences
inside the region. See Lockwood (2008) on this point.
   4
     The arguments of Seabright (1996), are further developed and clari...ed in Persson and Tabellini (2000).



                                                     3
next.
       The key observation is that, once preference aggregation is modeled realistically, the union
government is characterized by a strong insensitivity to local bene...ts.5 Thus, the problem
turns out to be much more symmetric than it is usually recognized. Regional governments
maximize the value of local bene...ts and disregard externalities. But the union government
maximizes the value of externalities and disregards local bene...ts. Each government maxi-
mizes only a piece of the value of projects, and disregards the other one. An intuition for
this result is that governments have preferences that are close to those of their median voter.
In the region, the median voter cares only about local bene...ts. In the union, the median
voter cares only about externalities. This is a `
                                                quick and dirty'intuition because I study a
complex environment in which the median voter theorem does not apply generically. But it
kind of works out this way at the end.
       Throughout, I dispense with the policy-uniformity assumption. It is, at best, unclear why
union governments cannot taylor policies to local preferences. In Germany or the United
States, for instance, the federal government has far more resources and legal power than the
Länder or the states. Thus, this inability of federal governments cannot be of a `
                                                                                 technological'
nature. In the European Union resources and power are mostly held by member countries.
But even in this case, there does not seem to be any real impediment for the European
Union to adapt its policies to the speci...c needs of its member countries. Of course, union
governments might choose or prefer not to taylor policies to local preferences, but this is
another kettle of ...sh.
       According to the view presented here, the assignment problem still consists of choosing the
least of two evils. But these evils are of a di¤erent sort. Both regional and union governments
are equally e¢ cient. Both regional and union governments have the wrong preferences, but
each of them in their own special way. Thus, a speci...c decision should be assigned to the
level of government that has the least damaging preferences to handle it. If externalities
are large relative to local bene...ts, regional governments are likely to make worse decisions
that the union government. Thus, the latter should decide. If instead externalities are small
relative to local bene...ts, it is regional governments that should decide. What matters for the
assignment problem is not the size of externalities, but their size relative to local bene...ts.
And, since there is no policy-uniformity constraint, heterogeneity of preferences does play its

   5
    The point that the union government is less sensitive to local bene...ts than the traditional approach
suggests has been a key theme of the political-economy approach. What is perhaps surprising here is how
strong this insensitivity is.



                                                    4
usual role favoring regional governments. The union government can also taylor its decisions
to local conditions if it wishes to do so.
      The rest of the lecture is organized as follows. Section 2 develops a simple model with
many regions, each of them with projects that produce local bene...ts to the region and
externalities to other regions. To simplify the analysis, I assume that projects have no
costs and externalities are uniformaly distributed across regions. Section 3 uses a strategic
assumption about voting procedures that ensures that the median voter theorem literally
applies. This allows me to derive the main results and their implications quickly with minimal
e¤ort. Section 4 relaxes this assumption and shows the results in full generality. Section
5 introduces project costs and non-uniform externalities and shows how these compications
a¤ect the analysis. Finally, section 6 concludes.


      2    A model of public projects with local benefits and externalities

This section describes a world with many regions, each of them with a set of public projects.
If implemented, these projects produce both local bene...ts for the region and externalities
to the rest of the regions. The key issue is how to decide which projects to implement and
which ones to discard.


2.1       Projects

The world contains a set of regions, indexed by n = 1; :::; N . The citizens of this world are
uniformly distributed across these regions. There are many project types, and each region
has exactly one project of each type. These projects produce local bene...ts in the region, ,
and externalities in the other regions, ". Both local bene...ts and externalities are measured
in monetary terms. Ex-ante, all projects of a given type are identical. Ex-post, the quality
of projects can di¤er across regions however. Thus, I de...ne a project type as a distribution
F ( ; "); and the speci...c project of each region is a draw ( ; ") from F ( ; "). To streamline
the discussion, I assume that (i) projects have no costs, and (ii) externalities are uniformly
                                                                        "
distributed across regions so that each of them receives an amount           of externalities. I
                                                                     N 1
shall relax these assumptions in Section 5.
      Figure 1 shows the project space. Let Pr (A) be the expected share of projects in the
green area labeled A, that is:
                                              Z
                                   Pr (A) =             dF ( ; ")
                                              ( ;")2A



                                                  5
                                 Figure 1: The project space

Throughout, I make statements such as "if region n is in A." This is a shortcut for the
longer, but more precise statement "if the project of region n is in A." The expected value
or expected monetary payo¤ of a project in A is given by:
                                            Z
                           E ( + "j A ) =             ( + ") dF ( ; ")
                                            ( ;")2A


Thus, the expected value (per region) of all projects in A is given by E ( + "j A) Pr (A).
Throughout, I assume that N is large. Then, the probability that a project is in A is a
good approximation for the ex-post share of projects in A. Also, the expected value (per
region) of projects in A is a good approximation for the ex-post average value (per region)
of projects in A. This simpli...es some of the discussions.

   The welfare of all citizens equals the expected value of the monetary payo¤s received
by their region. Thus, I refer to "the preferences of region n" as short for "the preferences
of the citizens in region n." Projects in A in Figure 1 produce positive local bene...ts and
positive externalities. Thus, all regions unanimously prefer to implement these projects.
However, projects in B produce positive local bene...ts and negative externalities. Thus, the

                                                6
region prefers to implement these projects while the other regions prefer to discard them.
Note that conict is concentrated in the second and fourth quadrants of the project space.
Throughout, I refer to projects in these quadrants as conictual, and to projects in the ...rst
and third quadrants as non-conictual.


2.2     Parliaments

Decisions on projects are made by parliaments. There are N + 1 parliaments, one for each
region plus the union parliament. Representatives in regional parliaments are citizens from
the corresponding region, while representatives in the union parliament are citizens from all
regions in equal proportions. Parliaments always reach decisions by majority rule. But they
might have di¤erent rules on whether projects are bundled in a single bill or not, or the order
in which bills are voted, and so on.
      Parliaments decide which projects to implement after their quality is known. Typically,
parliaments decide on speci...c projects after researching and debating them, and this process
reveals a lot of information. Thus, I assume that decisions can be made contingent not only
on the project'
              s region and type, but also on its speci...c characteristics or quality.
      Project types are assigned to parliaments before the quality of speci...c projects is known.
There is an assignment rule that assigns project types to parliaments. Let P be the par-
liament to which the project type is assigned, with P 2 fR; U g, where R indicates the
corresponding regional parliament and U the union parliament.6 Since all regions are iden-
tical ex-ante, they all agree on the following assignment rule:

                                       P = arg max E ( + "j P )                                           (1)

That is, the assignment rule maximizes the ex-ante value of projects. The ...scal constitution
that embeds this rule is therefore an incomplete contract. It can be made contingent on a
project'
       s region and type, but it cannot be made contingent on the speci...c characteristics
of a project or its ex-post realization. This is, I think, a realistic assumption.

   6
     This is restrictive. It rules out, for instance, that a project type be assigned to both the regional and
union parliaments and require unanimity. It also rules out that a project type of a given region be assigned
to a regional parliament other than its own or the union'    s.




                                                      7
                                      Figure 2: The set S

2.3    Economic efficiency

Once a ...scal constitution is speci...ed, projects are assigned to parliaments and the latter
make decisions. This is enough to obtain positive results. But I also want to generate
normative results, and this requires choosing a criterion to evaluate outcomes. I choose
economic e¢ ciency and value projects by their monetary payo¤s. Thus, the set S          R2 of
e¢ cient or socially desirable projects is:

                                 S = ( ; ") 2 R2 :    +"     0                              (2)

This set is shown in Figure 2. Essentially, socially desirable projects are those with non-
negative value. Abusing language, I often say `
                                              the set of decisions S 'as short for `
                                                                                   the set of
decisions that would implement the set of projects S '
                                                     .

      Let me stress that adopting economic e¢ ciency as a normative criterion is not a foregone
conclusion. Ex-post, if o¤ered the chance to be a dictator, a citizen of region m would (i)
implement her region'
                    s project only if it o¤ers non-negative local bene...ts; (ii) implement
other region'
            s projects only if they produce non-negative externalities. Clearly, individual ex-

                                                8
post preferences di¤er from social preferences. But given the symmetry assumed, individual
ex-ante preferences coincide with social preferences. Indeed, ex-ante maximization of social
preferences leads to the assignment rule in Equation (1).
      Consider two sets of decisions X    R2 and Y      R2 , respectively. We de...ne the disagree-
ment set between X and Y as DX Y           X C \ Y [ X \ Y C . Thus, we can interpret DX S
as the set of mistakes in X , and de...ne the loss generated by X as follows:

                              LX = E ( j + "jj DX S ) Pr (DX S )    0                          (3)

Equation (3) simply says that the loss produced by a set X equals the average loss per
mistake times the share of mistakes. For instance, if R and U are the set of decisions
made by the regional and union parliaments, respectively, then DRS and DU S are the sets
of mistakes these parliaments make. And LR and LU are the costs of these mistakes. With
this notation, we can write the assignment rule in Equation (1) as follows:
                                          (
                                              R if LR     LU
                                    P =                                                        (4)
                                              U if LR > LU

That is, the assignment rule consists of choosing the parliament that minimizes the loss
produced by mistakes.


                              3   A first assignment result

Consider ...rst the case in which each project is voted in a separate bill. Project-by-project
voting means that the policy space is unidimensional, i.e. each vote consists of choosing
a scalar, say 1 for implement and 0 for discard. Since this scalar can take on two values
only, preferences are single-peaked and the median voter theorem applies. The identity of
the median voter depends on the parliament that makes the decision, and this parliament is
determined by the ...scal constitution.


3.1    Parliaments and their logic


Assume ...rst that projects are assigned to the regional parliaments. The median voter is a
citizen of the region and the project is implemented if and only if local bene...ts are non-




                                                9
                                      Figure 3: The set R

negative. Thus, regional parliaments implement the following set of projects:

                                  R = ( ; ") 2 R2 :         0                                 (5)

Figure 3 shows this set. Decisions by regional parliaments follow a strict logic of local-bene...t
maximization. This leads these parliaments to implement projects in the ...rst and fourth
quadrant of the project space, and to discard projects in the second and third quadrant.

   Assume instead that projects are assigned to the union parliament, and consider again
the decision on the project of region n. Since N     3, the median voter is not a representative
from region n and the project is implemented if and only if externalities are non-negative.
Thus, the union parliament makes the following decisions:

                                   U = ( ; ") 2 R2 : "     0                                  (6)

Figure 4 shows this set. Just opposite to regional parliaments, these decisions only consider
externalities and ignore local bene...ts. As a result, projects in the ...rst and second quadrant


                                               10
                                       Figure 4: The set U

of the project space are implemented, while projects in th third and fourth quadrant are
discarded.

    We can examine the mistakes made by the regional and union parliaments by looking at
these disagreement sets:

                            DRS = ( ; ") 2 R2 : " < 0 and j j < j"j                              (7)

                            DU S = ( ; ") 2 R2 : " < 0 and j j        j "j                       (8)

These sets are shown in Figure 5 in yellow and blue, respectively. Regional parliaments
make two types of mistake: (i) projects with small negative local bene...ts are discarded even
if they have large positive externalities, i.e. RC \ S ; and (ii) projects with small positive
local bene...ts are implemented even if they have large negative externalities, i.e. R \ S C .
The union parliament also makes two types of mistakes: (i) projects with small negative
externalities are discarded even if they have large positive local bene...ts, i.e. U C \ S ; and (ii)
projects with small positive externalities are implemented even if they have large negative
local bene...ts, i.e. U \ S C .

                                                 11
                                Figure 5: The sets DRS and DU S

      Parliaments never agree to make the wrong decision. In the ...rst and third quadrants (not
colored), there is no conict and both parliaments make the right decision. In the second
and third quadrants, there is conict. In the yellow region, the union parliament makes the
right decision and the regional parliament makes the wrong one. In the blue region, the
opposite occurs.


3.2     Efficient assignment

The following result follows quite naturally now:

Proposition 1 Assume there are N regional parliaments plus one union parliament, and
that each project is voted in a separate bill. Then, the assignment rule that maximizes
economic e¢ ciency assigns the projects to the union parliament if

               LR = E ( j + "jj DRS ) Pr (DRS ) > E ( j + "jj DU S ) Pr (DU S ) = LU

where DRS and DU S are de...ned in Equations (7) and (8), respectively. Otherwise, it assigns
the projects to the corresponding regional parliament.

                                                12
      This is our ...rst assignment result. It is based on the simple idea of assigning each project
type to the parliament that makes less costly mistakes. Basically, we need to compare the
absolute value of projects in the yellow and blue areas of Figure 5. If the absolute value of
projects in the blue area is smaller than in the yellow area, we assign the project type to the
union parliament. If the absolute value of projects in the blue area is not smaller than in
the yellow area, we assign it to the regional parliaments instead. This is all very simple and
intuitive, but it has some far-reaching implications.
      The ...rst one is the symmetry in treatment between local bene...ts and externalities.
Statements such as "we should assign projects with small externalities to the region, and
projects with large externalities to the union"do not follow from Proposition 1. It is not the
size of externalities that matters, it is instead their size relative to the size of local bene...ts.
Perhaps some project types produce large externalities. But if local bene...ts are even larger,
Proposition 1 says that they should be assigned to the regions. Note also that it is the
absolute size of local bene...ts and externalities that matters, that is, it is j j and j"j that
enter the relevant de...nitions and not      and ".
      The second important implication is that the only projects that matter are those for
which there is disagreement among parliaments. Statements such as "we should assign to
the union projects with large externalities and small local bene...ts"do not follow from Propo-
sition 1 either. The assignment rule does not depend on the unconditional characteristics
of projects, but instead on their characteristics conditional on disagreement. Proposition 1
supports statements such as "we should assign to the union projects such that, when there is
disagreement among parliaments, externalities are large relative to local bene...ts". Perhaps
these projects have tiny externalities and huge local bene...ts when there is no disagreement,
and perhaps there is disagreement only on a tiny share of projects. But this does not matter,
Proposition 1 says that they should still be assigned to the union.
      Figures 6­8 show some speci...c project types that help visualize the implications of Propo-
sition 1. To produce these ...gures, I have assumed that project types are bivariate normals
                                                                                                         2
de...ned by ...ve parameters: (i) two means, i.e.               and    ";   (ii) two variances, i.e.         and
 2
 ";   and (iii) one correlation coe¢ cient, i.e.      . In all examples, I start with the standard
                                                        2       2
bivariate normal, i.e.       =    "   =   = 0 and           =   "   = 1; and then explore the e¤ects of
speci...c changes in the shape of the distribution.
      Figure 6 shows a family of project types that vary in                 and   ",   with   +   "   = 0. The
project types in this family feature di¤erent average sizes of local bene...ts relative to the
average sizes of externalities, holding constant the average value of projects. The top middle


                                                   13
                Figure 6: E¤ects of changing           and   "   keeping   +   "   = 0.


panel shows the standard project type, while the top left and right panels show project types
for which which      is small relative   ",   and vice versa. The bottom panel plots the cost of
assigning projects to the regional and union parliaments against           =        ",   i.e. LR and LU .
These costs grow as we move away from the standard type. The reason is that disagreement
grows as project types contain more mass in the second and fourth quadrants. Interestingly,
though, the costs of regional and union parliaments grow together and they are always equal
to each other. Thus, it never makes a di¤erence whether we assign these project types to the
regional or the union parliament. Although at ...rst sight this result might seem paradoxical
or unexpected, it is indeed quite natural. As mentioned already, what matters is not the
simple size of local bene...ts and externalities, but instead their absolute size. And in all the
types plotted in Figure 6, this absolute size is being held constant.




                                                  14
                                                          2          2               2    2
                       Figure 7: E¤ects of changing           and    "   keeping          "   =1

                                                                           2             2            2   2
     Figure 7 shows a family of project types that vary in                     and       ",   with        "   = 1. The
project types of this family have di¤erent absolute sizes of local bene...ts relative to the
absolute sizes of externalities. Again, the top middle panel shows the standard type, while
                                                                2                                2
the top left and right panels show types for which                  is small relative to         ",   and vice versa.
The bottom panel now shows the cost of assigning project types to the regional and union
                        1
parliaments against 2 = 2 . Now the distribution of mistakes and their costs shifts from
                                  "
                                                                                                          2       2
one parliament to the other one as we move away from the standard type. If                                    >   ",   for
most projects the absolute value of local bene...ts exceeds the absolute value of externalities
and the union parliament makes costlier mistakes than the regional one. The opposite occurs
     2       2                               2            2
if       <   ".   Thus, project types with       1        "   should be assigned to regional parliaments,
and the rest to the union parliament.



                                                     15
                                Figure 8: E¤ects of changing

   Figure 8 shows a family of proect types that di¤er in the correlation between local bene...ts
and externalities, i.e. . As we move away from the standard type by making the correlation
negative, disagreement grows and this raises the number of mistakes and their costs. But
this a¤ects both parliaments in the same way. As we move away from the standard type by
making the correlation positive, disagreement shrinks and this lowers the number of mistakes
and their costs. But, again, this a¤ects both parliaments in the same way. For any project
such that the absolute size of local bene...ts exceeds that of externalities there is another one
for which the reverse occurs. Thus, it makes no di¤erence whether we assign these project
types to the regional parliaments or the union parliament.




                                               16
3.3     Choosing a benchmark

Proposition 1 provides a balanced and symmetric benchmark for the debate on centralization
vs. decentralization. It recognizes that a decentralized system maximizes local bene...ts and
it does not take externalities into account. But it also points out that a centralized system
maximizes externalities and it does not take local bene...ts into account. Which is the least
damaging alternative? How can we assign decisions so as to minimize inevitable losses?
      To appreciate the extent to which this constitutes a change in perspective assume, as
it is very often done, that decisions are made by social planners instead of parliaments.
There are N regional planners that maximize total value for their respective region, and one
union planner that maximizes total value for the union. Regional planners make the same
choices and mistakes as the regional parliaments, as described in Equation (5) and (7). By
de...nition, the union planner never makes mistakes: U = S and DU S = ;. This leads to a
highly unbalanced or asymmetric benchmark: the union should make all decisions!
      The traditional way to avoid this unrealistic result is to impose Oates' classic policy-
uniformity constraint. In our context, this constraint implies that, for each project type, the
union planner must either implement all projects or none: U 2 fR2 ; ;g. Thus, we have that
U = R2 if E ( + ")       0; and U = ; if E ( + ") < 0. This implies that:

                          DU S = ( ; ") 2 R2 : ( + ") E ( + ") < 0                          (9)

The union planner considers only the total or expected value of projects. If this value is
positive, it implements all projects. Otherwise, it implements none. The union planner
makes the right average decision, but it is then forced to apply this average decision to
all regions. Not surprisingly, the union planner works well when policy preferences are
homogeneous and there is little need for preference-matching.

      It is instructive to compare Figures 5 and 9-10. Figures 9 and 10 show the set of mistakes
of the regional and union planners. Figure 9 shows the case in which the expected value of
projects is positive, while 10 shows the opposite case. Not surprisingly, regional parliaments
and planners make the same decisions and therefore mistakes. But the union parliament and
planner make di¤erent decisions. If the average value of the projects is positive (negative)
and most of the projects are in the second (fourth) quadrant, their decisions are similar
and so are their mistakes. Otherwise, their mistakes can be quite di¤erent. Note also that
regional and union planners agree to make mistakes on some projects. For instance, in Figure


                                                17
                    Figure 9: The sets DRS and DU S with social planners

9, both planners mke the same decisions for all projects in the ...rst and fourth quadrant.
But these decisions are wrong if externalities are negative and larger in absolute value than
local bene...ts.
   The following proposition shows the solution to the assignment problem when govern-
ments are modeled as social planners rather than parliaments:

Proposition 2 Assume there are N regional planners plus one union planner whose de-
cisions cannot be contingent on n. Then, the assignment rule that maximizes economic
e¢ ciency assigns the projects to the union planner if

              LR = E ( j + "jj DRS ) Pr (DRS ) > E ( j + "jj DU S ) Pr (DU S ) = LU

where DRS and DU S are de...ned in Equations (7) and (9), respectively. Otherwise, it assigns
the projects to the corresponding regional planner.

   Proposition 2 describes the "public-...nance"or traditional approach in our context. Ap-
plications of this approach typically lead to statements such as "we should assign projects

                                               18
                  Figure 10: The sets DRS and DU S with social planners

with small externalities to the region, and projects with large externalities to the union."In
Figure 9 the union planner makes better decisions if most projects produce large positive
externalities. In Figure 10, the union planner makes better decisions if most projects produce
large negative externalities. The traditional approach also leads to statements such as "we
should assign projects to the region if policy preferences are su¢ ciently heterogeneous, and
to the union otherwise". Figures 9 and 10 also show that the region planner makes better
decisions if most projects are such that ( + ") E ( + ") < 0. These statements are often
inconsistent with Proposition 1.
   We should not be surprised though that the union parliament and planner behave dif-
ferently. The union parliament has a sharp tool (it can condition decisions on the quality of
projects), but it has the wrong objective (the preferences of the median voter). The union
planner has the right objective (economic e¢ ciency), but it has a blunt tool (it cannot con-
dition decisions on the quality of projects). Both approaches lead to ine¢ ciencies, but these
are of a di¤erent kind. Thus, the approach presented here cannot be interpreted as provid-
ing a microfoundation for the classic policy-uniformity constraint. It is indeed something
di¤erent.


                                             19
3.4     Trading rights to decisions

There is yet another way to approach the debate of centralization vs decentralization that
emphasizes markets rather than social planners. The Coasian approach argues that the
solution to the problem of externalities is not a union parliament or social planner, but
instead a union market for the rights to make decisions.
      In our context, this market would work under these conditions:

Proposition 3 Assume that (i) regions own the right to decide whether a project in their
territory is implemented or discarded; (ii) regions can sell these rights in exchange for a
monetary transfer by making take-it-or leave o¤ers to other regions; and (iii) regions can
solve free-rider problems and purchase these rights when it is in their common interest to do
so. Then, it follows that:
1. Regions sell their rights to decide on projects in DRS (as de...ned in Equation (7)).
2. Regions do not sell their rights to decide on projects not in DRS .
3. The e¢ cient decisions are adopted and total value is maximized.

      The Coasian approach provides another unbalanced and asymmetric benchmark for the
debate on centralization vs. decentralization: there is no need for a union, and all decisions
should be assigned to the regions!
      The assumptions needed for the Coasian bargain to work are too demanding, though.
Let us start with assumption (i). Assigning property rights over policies is far more di¢ cult
in practice that it might seem at ...rst sight. Should regions have the right to implement
public projects that, say, deplete shared ...shing stocks or raise pollution in other regions?
If not, who owns these rights? Who decides and enforces them? Let us continue with
assumption (ii). Markets work well if competitive. But a market for the rights to decide
projects is essentially a bilateral monopoly, and there is little guarantee that outcomes be
e¢ cient in this context. Finally, consider assumption (iii). How do regions exactly solve
their free-riding problem and act as a single buyer? The decision to purchase the rights from
a given region constitutes a classic collective action problem from the point of view of the
other N       1 regions. And we know that voluntary exchange mechanisms do not solve the
underlying prisoner'
                   s dilemma situation of this problem. This requires coercive mechanisms
such as voting.
      Paradoxically, this takes us back to parliaments. Could it be that, rather than irrelevant,
the union parliament is precisely the "market"that implements a Coasian bargain?


                                                20
                   4   The union parliament: a market for policies?

If each project is voted in a separate bill, representatives cannot strike bargains such as "if
you vote for my project, I vote for yours".7 But project-by-project voting is just an arti...cial
restriction that I have used strategically to derive Proposition 1 with minimal e¤ort. Once we
relax it, projects can be bundled in a single bill and bargains are possible. Can these bargains
soften the externality-maximizing logic of the union parliament and make it sensitive to local
bene...ts? If so, how much?


4.1     Is it possible to beat externality maximization?

A bill consists of a set of decisions. As it will become apparent soon, there is no loss of
generality if we focus on "complete" bills that bundle all the decisions for a given project
type. For instance, the bill B implements all projects in the set B                   R2 . An impor-
tant bill is E = f( ; ") 2 R2 : "         0g.   This bill maximizes externalities and replicates
the outcome of project-by-project voting (see Equation (6)). Another important bill is
S = f( ; ") 2 R2 :      +"     0g. This bill maximizes value and it produces the e¢ cient or
socially desirable decisions (see Equation (2)). Our goal is to determine whether bundling
decisions moves the equilibrium away from the externality-maximizing logic of E and closer
to the value-maximizing logic of S .
       To determine this, assume that the union parliament operates under an open agenda.
This means that union representatives vote over pairs of bills, such that the winning bill
in one round is set against a new alternative in the next round and the set of alternatives
includes all feasible policies. A Condorcet winner is a bill that beats any other bill in a
pairwise vote. If such a bill exists, the union parliament chooses it. Condorcet cycles occur
when pairwise voting produces non-transitive collective preferences. In this case, the union
parliament exhibits voting cycles and it fails to choose any bill.
       The following result shows that a union parliament with an open agenda fails to deviate
from externality-mazimization:

Proposition 4 Assume the union parliament decides by majority rule with an open agenda.
Then, either (i) E is a Condorcet winner or; (ii) there are Condorcet cycles.

   7
    Consider a bargain of this sort, with many regions and projects involved. For it to be relevant, this
bargain changes the outcome of project-by-project voting for one or more projects. When the last of these
projects is voted, everyone except the region has incentives to renege. Thus, the bargain unravels.



                                                   21
   Thus, either the union parliament chooses the outcome of project-by-project voting, or it
fails to produce a choice. This negative result essentially means that, with an open agenda,
the union parliament cannot play the role of a "market for policies" where value-raising
trades are made. In the rest of this subsection, I sketch the proof of Proposition 4 and
develop intuitions that will help us sharpen the analysis.
   Consider a given bill B and ask: who votes for B when paired against E ? Regions with
projects not in DBE will not vote for B . Both bills o¤er them the same local bene...ts, but
E o¤ers more externalities than B . Thus, if there are regions that vote for B we must ...nd
them in DBE . But not all regions in DBE vote for B . Some might vote still vote for the bill E
because the bill B o¤ers them a loss in local bene...ts, or a gain in local bene...ts that is too
small to compensate for the loss of externalities. Thus, the coalition of regions that vote for
B are those with projects located in:

                CBE = f( ; ") 2 DBE : " < 0 and j j        E ( j"jj DBE ) Pr (DBE )g         (10)

The bill B changes (with respect to E ) all the decisions on projects in DBE . Since the decisions
in E maximize externalities, the bill B destroys positive externalities for projects such that
" > 0, and creates negative externalities for projects such that " < 0. The total value of this
loss is E ( j"jj DBE ) Pr fDBE g and it a¤ects all regions. Bill B also produces a change in local
bene...ts equal to   j j in regions with non-conictual projects, i.e.      " > 0; and equal to j j
in regions with conictual projects, i.e.       " < 0. Thus, Equation (10) says that the regions
that join the coalition are those with conictual projects whose gain in local bene...ts exceeds
the loss of externalities.
   Figure 11 shows this graphically. The set DBE is shown as a circle (it could take any other
shape, of course!). Regions not in DBE vote against B . Regions in the red area in DBE also
vote against B . The coalition CBE that supports B consists of the regions with projects in
the two green areas. The bill B beats E in a pairwise vote if and only if these areas contain
at least half of the regions, i.e. Pr (CBE )      0:5. How likely is this? I shall soon describe
the bill B that provides the toughest competition to E . This will allow us to obtain a more
precise answer to this question. But it should be already clear that externality-maximization
cannot be beaten easily. For instance, if more than half of the regions have non-conictual
projects, then E is a Condorcet winner.

   If there does not exist a bill B that beats E in a pairwise vote, then E is Condorcet winner
and the union parliament chooses it. This proves the ...rst part of Proposition 4. We need


                                                 22
                        Figure 11: The coalition CBE supporting B against E

to show now the second part. That is, we want to show next that, if there exists a bill B
that beats E in a pairwise vote, then the union parliament exhibits voting cycles and fails
to choose any bill.
   The proof is in two steps. First, we show that only E can be a Condorcet winner. Take
                                                               ^ that is identical to B except
any bill B that beats E and construct from it a modi...ed bill B
                                                                                 ^ to B , since
that it changes the decisions for some regions in CBE . All other regions prefer B
B^ o¤ers them more externalities with the same local bene...ts. Since it is always possible
to change the decisions for a set of regions in CBE whose combined size is less than half, a
               ^ that beats B always exists.8
modi...ed bill B
                                                                                ^ that beats B and
       Second, we show that it is always possible to construct a modi...ed bill B
it does not beat E . This is done by changing the decision of a set of regions whose combined
size exceeds a fraction Pr (CBE ) 0:5 of the total number of regions, but falls short of half of
them. Then, B beats E , B ^ beats B , and E beats B^. This proves that, if E is not a Condorcet

   8
    This logic does not work for E . It is not possible to ...nd regions such that, if their decisions are changed,
externalities grow. This is why E is the only bill that can be a Condorcet winner. For any other bill, these
regions can always be found in CBE .


                                                        23
winner, the union parliament exhibits Condorcet cycles.9
      The conclusion is clear: with an open agenda it is not possible to beat externality-
maximization in the union parliament. Even worse, the union parliament might fail to make
a choice. Thus, we are forced to consider restrictions on the agenda.


4.2    Parliamentary bargains

I use a model of legislative barganing that has been used before by Ferejohn, Fiorina and
McKelvey (1987) and Lockwood (2002) in very similar contexts. This is an agenda-setter
type of model. An agenda is an ordered list of bills to be voted. In this model, there is a
special bill called the status quo which is always included as the last item on the agenda.
Here, I choose externality-maximizing as the status quo.10 The rules of the game are as
follows:

   1. Representatives simultaneously propose bills. The agenda includes all proposed bills
        in a random order with the status quo added at the end: fB1 ; B2 ; :::; Eg.

   2. Representatives vote the bills sequentially, i.e. B1 against B2 , the winner against B3 ,
        the winner against B4 , and so on until E . A bill B that wins this contest is a political
        equilibrium.

      By winning the contest, I mean that B is a sub-game perfect equilibrium of this two-
stage game. The following proposition shows that a bill B always exists and is unique.
Moreover, despite the random formation of the agenda, the result of this voting game is not
random:

Proposition 5 Let B            R2 be the set of bills that that beats E in a pairwise vote. If B is
empty, then B = E . If B is not empty, then B = E , where E is the bill that maximizes
externalities in B.

   9
     We can see now why focusing on "complete" bills entails no loss of generality. Breaking a bill into two
or more bills, each of them with a partial set of decisions, is never a good idea. Each of these "partial" bills
always receives less support than the "complete" bill that incorporates all of them. Hence, if there exists
a set of "partial" bills that beats the externality-maximizing logic, the "complete" bill also beats it. The
converse is not true.
  10
     This role of E as the status quo captures the idea that, if a bargain cannot be agreed upon, we return
to project-by-project voting.




                                                      24
     Proposition 5 says that "if externality-maximizing can be beaten, it will be beaten." In
this sense, the procedural rules chosen give the union parliament the best chance to escape its
externality-maximization logic. But this escape does not seem to take us too far. Proposition
5 then adds " ... but it will be beaten by the closest bill among those that can beat it."
Obviously, the economic implications of Proposition 5 depend on how often B 6= E and,
when this happens, how di¤erent are E and E . I shall explore these questions soon enough.
But let us ...rst sketch the proof of Proposition 5.
     If B is empty, E will beat any bill that it meets in the last round. Thus, we just need
to prove that, if B is not empty, then B = E . The proof contains a couple of steps. The
...rst one is to show that, if B is not empty, the bill E is the Condorcet winner in B. By this,
I mean that E beats any other bill in B in a pairwise vote. To see this, take any bill B 2
B. In a pairwise vote with E , all regions in CEE prefer E to B . The bill B cannot o¤er these
regions more local bene...ts or more externalities than the bill E . Since E 2 B, we know that
Pr (CEE )   0:5 and, as a result, E beats any B 2 B. Thus, the bill E is the bill that earns more
support among those in B, and therefore the one that provides the toughest competition to
E.
     The second step of the proof is to show that, if B is not empty, then E is the political
equilibrium. This follows from two observations. The ...rst one is that, if E is in the agenda,
it will win the contest. The coalition that supports E against E will not vote for any other
bill. The reason is that, if there were an alternative bill that is preferred in a pairwise
competition aginst E , this bill is not in B and it would end up losing the contest to E . The
second observation is that, knowing this, members of the coalition CEE have an incentive
to propose E in the ...rst stage. Thus, we reach the conclusion that, if B is not empty, the
unique political equilibrium is E .
     How does the bill E look like? Since it maximizes externalities in B, it must be the
case that: (i) DEE = CEE ; and (ii) Pr (CEE ) = 0:5. Any decision that di¤ers from the
externality-maximizing bill lowers externalities. Thus, there is no need to change decisions
for regions that do not vote for the bill anyway, hence DEE = CEE . There is no need either
to change decisions for regions once their vote is no longer needed to pass the bill, hence
Pr (CEE ) = 0:5. Thus, the bill E changes the decisions (with respect to E ) of a minimum
winning coalition of regions that are unhappy with the low local bene...ts they obtain under
externality-maximization.

     To gain further insight on the shape of E , de...ne a new bill X that changes a set of
decisions DX E (with respect to E ), as shown in Figure 12. To construct this bill, I follow

                                               25
                                     Figure 12: The set X

a two-step procedure: (i) a call is issued to join a coalition against E to all regions whose
projects produce externalities less than x in absolute value; and (ii) regions that respond
positively to the call are included in DX E . Formally, I ...x a value x       0,and de...ne DX E as
the ...xed point of the following two equations:

                  DX E = ( ; ") 2 R2 : " < 0 and j j               z and j"j   x

                                  z = E ( j"jj DX E ) Pr (DX E )

This means that X changes decisions only for members of the coalition, i.e. DX E = CX E .
As Figure 12 shows, DX E consists of two green open rectangles in the second and fourth
quadrants next to the Y -axis. Thus, X consists of E minus the green open rectangle in the
second quadrant, plus the green open rectangle in the fourth quadrant.

   We can construct an entire family of bills X , indexed by x. Figure 13 shows some of its
members. Naturally, E is the member with index x = 0. As x increases, the base of the
open rectangles becomes wider, but it shifts away from zero. It becomes wider because the
call admits more members. It shifts shifts away from zero because, as new members enter,

                                               26
                                     Figure 13: A family of bills X

externalities shrink, and some old members abandon the coalition. This family is interesting
because it guarantees the best trade-o¤ between coalition size and externalities.11 If there is
no member of the family such that Pr (DX E )               0:5, then B is empty. Otherwise, the bill E
is the member of the family that minimizes x subject to Pr (DX E ) = 0:5.
       The bill E nicely formalizes the notion of a parliamentary bargain. Indeed, this bill
literally says "projects of coalition members are decided by the corresponding member, while
projects of non-members are decided to maximize externalities." These bargains can be
interpreted as attempts to correct the externality-maximizing logic of the union parliament
and give some weight to local bene...ts.

       Unfortunately, these attempts are quite clumsy. Figure 14 shows a bargain bill E that
only reverses bad decisions, i.e. DEE is in DES . This bill unambiguously improves e¢ ciency
with respect to externality maximization. For this bill to be an equilibrium, at least half of
the projects must be in DEE . The good news is that, if this bargain exists, the bill produces

  11
    A bill that that does not belong to this family has gaps, i.e. it does not include as members some regions
with low-externality projects. It is then always possible to construct a bill that increases both coalition size
and externalities by ...lling these gaps.


                                                      27
                 Figure 14: A bargain bill that only reverses bad decisions

a large improvement in e¢ ciency by reversing bad decisions for half of the projects. The bad
news is that, for this bargain to exist, the union parliament must be a worse social choice
mechanism than deciding projects by tossing a coin!
   Figure 15 shows a bargain bill that reverses both good and bad decisions, i.e. DEE is
not in DES . The good news is that such a bargain can now be successful even if the union
parliament is better than coin-tossing. The bad news is that this comes at the cost of
worsening the bargain. Projects not in DES are projects for which externality-maximization
makes the right decision and the bargain changes it. Let us say, for instance, that a bargain
is possible when the union parliament makes 25 percent of mistakes. Then, less than 25
percent of the decisions that the bargain reverses were bad, and more than 25 percent were
good. Thus, the bargain raises the share of mistakes!

   This discussion suggests that parliamentary bargains increase the e¢ ciency of the union
parliament only if externality-maximization is a very poor criterion to choose projects. But,
under these circumstances, regional parliaments with their local-bene...ts maximization logic
are likely to make better decisions than any bargain bill that comes out from the union
parliament.

                                             28
              Figure 15: A bargain bill that reverses good and bad decisions

   As a ...nal point, it is worth mentioning that bills that bundle project decisions and
regional transfers are not likely to work in this context either. A minimum winning coalition
of regions will arise that decides on the projects of coalition members to maximize local
bene...ts, decides on the projects of non-members to maximize externalities, and bundles
these decisions with a transfer scheme that redistributes as much as possible from non-
members to members. It might be possible to design some ex-ante restrictions on transfer
schemes that could help. A serious analysis of this point would force us however to delve
deeper into the question of how incomplete ...scal constitutions are. This is certainly an
important and very interesting topic, but I shall not explore it here.


                 5   Project costs and non-uniform externalities

Projects have costs, and taxes must be raised to fund them. If project funding were inde-
pendent of the assignment rule, all the analysis in the previous sections would apply directly.
We would only need to re-de...ne    as local bene...ts minus the part of the cost paid by taxes
on the region, and " as externalities minus the part of the cost paid by taxes on all the other


                                              29
regions. But project funding typically depends on the assignment rule. Parliaments raise
taxes to pay for the projects they decide. And taxation is proportional to representation. If
a project is assigned to a regional parliament, its cost is paid by the region. If the project
is instead assigned to the union parliament, its cost is paid by the union. How does this
cost-shifting e¤ect inuence the analyisis?
      Externalities are not uniformly distributed. For some projects, such as infraestructures
or pollution abatement, externalities are larger in nearby regions than in faraway regions.
For some other projects, such as regulation of industry standards or incentive programs for
R&D, externalities are larger for regions that are close competitors in export markets than
for regions that are not. It might even be that the same project has positive externalities for
some regions and negative for others. How do non-uniform externalities a¤ect the analysis?
      To simplify the exposition, I return to the case in which each project is voted on a
separate bill. We have seen already that it is unlikely that removing this assumption has
much of an impact on the analysis.


5.1     A generalization of the model

A project type is now de...ned by a distribution F ( ; "), a monetary cost , and a distribution
                                                            P 1           1
of externalities with support (! 1 ; :::; ! N 1 ) such that N j =1 ! j =       . Thus, a region that
                                                                         N 1
draws ! receives externalities equal to !". We assume that this distribution is symmetric
                                       1
across regions, so that E (! ) =             for all n 2 N . Thus, ex-ante all projects are identical
                                  N 1
not only in terms of their quality, but also on the distribution of externalities. Ex-post,
though, projects di¤er not only in their quality, but also on the distribution of externalities.
Let M (! ) be the median of this distribution. In the previous sections, M (! ) = E (! )
                                                                                      1
because externalities were uniformly distributed across regions: ! 1 = ::: = ! N 1 =     .
                                                                                     N 1
This need not be the case now. We keep the rest of assumptions.

      With project costs, the set S of e¢ cient or socially desirable projects is now given by:

                                  S = ( ; ") 2 R2 :     +"                                      (11)

Figure 16 shows the set S . Projects have three pieces now: local bene...ts, externalities
and costs, and the three have to be taken into account. Essentially, Equation (11) says
"implement projects whose value is not lower than its cost and discard the rest".
      Projects are funded by the parliament that decides them. The correspsonding region



                                                 30
                          Figure 16: The set S with project costs

                                                                                             1
pays the cost of projects assigned to regional parliaments. Each region pays a fraction
                                                                                            N
of the cost of projects assigned to the union parliament. Since all regions are still identical
ex-ante, they all agree on the following assignment rule:

                                P = arg max E ( + "         jP)                           (12)

That is, the assignment rule maximizes the ex-ante value of projects net of costs.


5.2   The assignment rule re-visited

In regional parliaments, the median voters are citizens of the region. Thus, regional parlia-
ments implement projects if and only if local bene...ts exceed the cost of the project:

                                 R = ( ; ") 2 R 2 :                                       (13)

Not surprisingly, regional parliaments remain unconcerned with externalities. They simply
maximize local bene...ts minus total cost.


                                              31
    The median voter of the union receives a fraction M (! ) of the externalities generated
                                    1
by the project, and pays a fraction    of it. Thus, the union parliaments implements the
                                    N
                   12
following projects:
                                                M (! )
                             U = ( ; ") 2 R 2 :        "                               (14)
                                                E (! )
                                                                                           M (! )
The union parliament values each unit of monetary costs as being equivalent to                    units
                                                                                           E (! )
                                                  M (! )
of monetary externalities. Thus, we can think of         as some sort of price of externalities
                                                  E (! )
in terms of project costs. If the median voter receives more externalities than average, then
this price exceeds one. If the median voter receives less externalities than average, then this
price falls short of one.
       Since nothing precludes the case in which M (! ) < 0, the price of externalities might be
negative. In this case, the union parliament not only disregards local bene...ts, but it also
dislikes externalities. This is apparent in the case in which there are no costs, i.e.            = 0.
Then, if M (! ) < 0 the union parliament implements projects if and only if " < 0. That
is, the union parliament disregards local bene...ts and minimizes externalities! Perhaps there
are some real-world project types that conform to this perverse outcome. But I rule out this
possibility from now on by assuming that M (! ) > 0.
       With this assumption, these are the sets of mistakes made by the regional and union
parliaments:
                        DRS = ( ; ") 2 R2 : (           ) " < 0 and j            j < j"j             (15)
                                 M (! )                                E (! ) M (! )        E (! )
 DU S =       ( ; ") 2 R2 :             "        < 0 and                             > "
                                 E (! )                                    M (! )           M (! )
                                                                                                     (16)
These sets converge to those in Equations (7) and (8) if the are no costs, i.e.              = 0; and
externalities are uniform, i.e. which implies M (! ) = E (! ).

       Figure 17 shows the case of uniform externalities: M (! ) = E (! ). The cost-shifting
e¤ect creates a bias towards discarding projects. The intersection of DRS and DU S produces
a triangle in which both parliaments agree on discarding projects that have positive social
value. Each parliament compares only a part of the bene...t of the project against its entire
cost. In this triangle the cost of projects in this triangle exceeds both local bene...ts and
externalities separately, but not their sum.


  12                                                                   1       1
       Here, I am using again the large N approximation E (! ) =                 .
                                                                   N       1   N


                                                     32
         Figure 17: The sets DRS and DU S with project costs and uniform externalities

       Figures 18 and 19 show the cases in which externalities are not uniform: M (! ) < E (! )
and M (! ) > E (! ), respectively. In Figure 18, the price of externalities is less than one, and
this ampli...es the cost shifting e¤ect. In Figure 19, the price of externalities exceeds one,
and this dampens the cost-shifting e¤ect.13 As it often happens in economics, two "wrongs"
can make a "right".
       We can now state a more general version of the assignment result that allows for project
costs and non-uniform externalities:

Proposition 6 Assume there are N regional parliaments plus one union parliament, and
that each project is voted in a separate bill. Then, the assignment rule that maximizes
economic e¢ ciency assigns the projects to the union parliament if

                LR = E ( j + "jj DRS ) Pr (DRS ) > E ( j + "jj DU S ) Pr (DU S ) = LU

  13
     These statements are a bit imprecise. Since other areas of the plane are shifting, too, the speci...c shape
of the distribution of projects F ( ; ") matters. Nevertheless, these statements convey the key intuitions that
the theory reveals.



                                                      33
    Figure 18: The sets DRS and DU S with project costs and non-uniform externalities

where DRS and DU S are de...ned in Equations (15) and (16), respectively. Otherwise, it
assigns the projects to the corresponding regional parliament.

   Essentially, project costs and non-uniform externalities do not a¤ect much the logic
behind the assignment rule derived in section 3. All the discussion around Proposition 1 still
holds, with some adjustments. The presence of project costs worsens the performance of both
regional and union parliaments, but it is unclear which one of the two is most negatively
a¤ected. The presence of non-uniform externalities has no e¤ect on regional parliaments,
but it distorts how the union parliament values externalities. These intuitions can help guide
the analysis of speci...c project types in applied work.


                                 6   Concluding remarks

I shall not repeat the main results, which were described in the introduction and then made
precise in the various propositions developed in the lecture. Instead, I shall now use these last
words to recognize that the analysis performed here is seriously incomplete. I have developed
a simple benchmark to think about the geographical structure of the state, and the practical

                                               34
      Figure 19: The sets DRS and DU S with project costs and uniform externalities

question of centralization vs decentralization of political decisions. Its most remarkable
aspect is how insensitive is the union government to local bene...ts. This benchmark needs to
be extended in many directions. In particular, I have taken two radical or brutal shortcuts
to obtain simple results quickly and comfortably. I believe the intuitions behind these results
are robust. But we need to explore how they look like when we go through the full route,
without taking the easy shortcuts.
   The ...rst shortcut has been a very generous use of symmetry and the large group case.
The world depicted here contains many symmetrical and small regions. We need only look at
the map of Europe to understand that some regions (whether we think of them as countries or
Länder) are large and asymmetric in many di¤erent ways. Extending the theory to consider
large regions and key asymmetries is likely to deliver important new and unexpected results.
   The second shorcut is that I have simply ignored the selection of representatives and
projects. That is, I have ignored at least half of the literature on the "political economy"
approach I mentioned in the introduction. How are representatives selected for parliament?
How are projects selected for voting? We know the answers to these questions depend on
the ...scal constitution, and this is likely to a¤ect the results derived here. How much of


                                              35
the overall view that emanates from the approach presented here will survive after these
important aspects of the problem are no longer ignored?
   The analysis presented here broadly suggests how to make the theory operative. But the
devil is always in the details. Is it possible to identify projects types empirically and estimate
the joint distribution of their local bene...ts and externalities? If so, are empirically observed
assignment rules consistent with the theory? If not, are there recognizable patterns to the
observed deviations?
   I started by saying that the topic of this lecture, centralization vs decentralization of
political decisions, is timely given the pace at which the European project is moving forward.
I also said that academic economists have much to contribute to our understanding of this
problem. The ideas put forward here constitute my grain of sand towards this goal.


                                         References

 [1] Besley, Timothy, and Anne Case (1995). "Incumbent Behavior: Vote-Seeking, Tax-
     Setting, and Yardstick Competition,"American Economic Review, 85, 25­45.

 [2] Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate (2003). "Centralized versus Decentralized Provision
     of Local Public Goods: A Political Economy Approach," Journal of Public Economic
     87(12): 2611­2637.

 [3] Besley, Timothy, and Michael Smart (2007). "Fiscal Restraints and Voter Welfare,"
     Journal of Public Economic 91(4): 755­773.

 [4] Bardhan, Pranab, K., and Dilip Mookherjee (2000). "Capture and Governance at Local
     and National Levels." American Economic Review, 90 (2): 135-139.

 [5] Bo¤a, Federico, Amedeo Piolatto, and Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto (2016). "Political Cen-
     tralization and Government Accountability," Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(1):
     381­422.

 [6] Harstad, Bård (2007). "Harmonization and Side Payments in Political Cooperation,"
     American Economic Review 97(3): 871­889.

 [7] Lockwood, Benjamin (2002). "Distributive Politics and the Costs of Centralization,"
     Review of Economic Studies 69(2): 313­337.




                                               36
 [8] Lockwood, Benjamin (2006). "The Political Economy of Decentralization." In Hand-
    book of Fiscal Federalism, edited by Ehtisham Ahmad and Giorgio Brosio, 33­60. Chel-
    tenham: Edward Elgar.

 [9] Lockwood, Benjamin (2008). "Voting, Lobbying, and the Decentralization Theorem,"
    Economics and Politics, 20, 416-461.

[10] Oates, Wallace E. (1972). Fiscal Federalism. New York, NY: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

[11] Oates, Wallace E. (1999). "An Essay on Fiscal Federalism," Journal of Economic Lit-
    erature, 37, 1120­1149.

[12] Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (2000), Political Economics: Explaining Eco-
    nomic Policy. MIT Press.

[13] Seabright, Paul (1996). "Accountability and Decentralization in Government: An In-
    complete Contracts Model,"European Economic Review, 40, 61­89.

[14] Treisman, Daniel (2007). The Architecture of Government: Rethinking Political Decen-
    tralization. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.




                                           37
