                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE EFFECTS OF FOREIGN MULTINATIONALS ON WORKERS AND FIRMS
                           IN THE UNITED STATES

                                         Bradley Setzler
                                         Felix Tintelnot

                                       Working Paper 26149
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26149


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 2019, Revised February 2020




The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not reflect the views of
the Internal Revenue Service, the U.S. Treasury Department, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We thank our discussant at the NBER Summer Institute, Emanuele Colonnelli, as well
as Pol Antras, David Atkin, Nick Bloom, Victor Couture, Ben Faber, Aaron Flaaen, Rick
Hornbeck, Erik Hurst, Mina Kim, Cailin Slattery, Jim Tybout, Danny Yagan, Stephen Yeaple,
and seminar participants at ASSA, Berkeley, Chicago, EIIT, Dallas Federal Reserve, NBER
International Trade and Investment, NBER Summer Institute, SED, Stanford, and UBC for useful
comments that have substantially improved the paper. Setzler gratefully acknowledges the
financial support of the Washington Center for Equitable Growth and NSF Grant SES-1851808.
Tintelnot gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the Becker Friedman Institute for
Economics at the University of Chicago.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Bradley Setzler and Felix Tintelnot. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Foreign Multinationals on Workers and Firms in the United States
Bradley Setzler and Felix Tintelnot
NBER Working Paper No. 26149
August 2019, Revised February 2020
JEL No. F23,J3,R1

                                          ABSTRACT

Governments go to great lengths to attract foreign multinationals because they are thought to
raise the wages paid to their employees (direct effects) and to improve outcomes at local domestic
firms (indirect effects). We construct the first U.S. employer-employee dataset with foreign
ownership information from tax records to measure these direct and indirect effects. We find the
average direct effect of a foreign multinational firm on its U.S. workers is a 7 percent increase in
wages. This premium is larger for higher skilled workers and for the employees of firms from
high GDP per capita countries. We find evidence that it is membership in a multinational
production network--instead of foreignness--that generates the foreign firm premium. We
leverage the past spatial clustering of foreign-owned firms by country of ownership to identify
the indirect effects. An expansion in the foreign multinational share of commuting zone
employment substantially increases the employment, value added, and--for higher earning
workers--wages at local domestic-owned firms. Per job created by a foreign multinational, our
estimates suggest annual gains of 16,000 USD to the aggregate wages of local incumbents, of
which about two-thirds is due to indirect effects. Our estimates suggest that--via mega-deals for
subsidies from local governments--foreign multinationals are able to extract a sizable fraction of
the local surplus they generate.


Bradley Setzler
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
bradley.setzler@gmail.com

Felix Tintelnot
Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
University of Chicago
5757 South University Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
tintelnot@uchicago.edu
1       Introduction
    Foreign multinational enterprises account for a sizable fraction of value added, exports,
and R&D in the U.S. (BEA, 2017). These firms are affected by regulations on foreign invest-
ment, trade policies, and local subsidy competition.1 It is widely believed that attracting a
foreign multinational to a location will have transformative effects on the outcomes of local
workers and producers. The hard evidence on this has been limited by data unavailability
and the challenge of identifying causal effects. The key questions for policy makers and local
stakeholders center around the direct and indirect effects of a job created by a foreign multi-
national. How much more does a worker earn when she is hired by a foreign multinational?
How are domestic firms and their workers in nearby locations affected by foreign firms?
    This paper makes four main contributions to understanding the effects of foreign multi-
nationals. First, we use tax records to construct a panel data set for the U.S. that links the
population of workers and firms with foreign ownership information of the firms. Second,
we develop a model which provides the theoretical underpinnings to study the direct effects
that foreign multinationals have on their own workers and the indirect effects that they have
on domestic-owned firms and their workers in the local labor market. Third, we leverage the
movers between firms to identify the foreign firm premium, i.e., the wage gain for the same
worker when moving from a domestic to a foreign firm. Fourth, we document and exploit
the spatial clustering of foreign firms to construct an instrument for foreign investment in
the local labor market, allowing us to identify the indirect effects of foreign multinationals
on the output, employment, and wages paid at domestic firms.
    Our data is created by merging the population of annual U.S. corporate tax filings with
the population of annual W-2 tax filings on the wage payments made by employers to workers
during 1999-2017.2 Then, we identify foreign multinationals in these data from a filing
requirement for each 25 percent or more foreign-owned U.S. corporation. This information
also includes the country of foreign ownership. To our knowledge, this is the first paper
to combine linked employer-employee panel data with foreign ownership information in the
U.S.3 These panel data provide a unique opportunity to investigate the direct and indirect
    1
      OECD (2019) ranks the U.S. slightly above the OECD average in terms of foreign direct investment
restrictiveness. Prominent examples of subsidy deals offered to foreign multinationals include the BMW
plant in Spartanburg, South Carolina (1992); the Toyota plant in Blue Springs, Mississippi (2007); and the
Foxconn plant in Mount Pleasant, Wisconsin (announced 2017).
    2
      Findings from the matched firm-worker tax records have been reported in studies by Yagan (2019),
Kline, Petkova, Williams, and Zidar (2019), Lamadon, Mogstad, and Setzler (2019), and Smith, Yagan,
Zidar, and Zwick (2019).
    3
      Prior studies on foreign multinationals in the U.S. rely on firm-level data without worker-level informa-
tion. Several studies combine the Bureau of Econonomic Analysis (BEA) survey of foreign direct investment
in the U.S. and the Census of Manufactures data. Boehm, Flaaen, and Pandalai-Nayar (2019) merge owner-
ship information from LexisNexis Directory of Corporate Affiliations into the Longitudinal Business Database
at the Census Bureau. Saha, Firkri, and Marchio (2014) document regional patterns of FDI based on NETS

                                                      1
effects of foreign multinationals in the U.S. labor market.
    Regarding direct effects, we find in our data that foreign firms pay 25 percent higher
average wages than domestic firms, after controlling for industry and location. To under-
stand the direct effects of foreign multinationals on the earnings of their workers, the key
empirical challenge is to distinguish between foreign firms paying higher wages because they
disproportionately employ high-skilled workers and foreign firms paying higher wages to a
worker of a given skill level. In order to disentangle worker composition from the foreign
firm premium, we leverage the panel data to follow workers who move between foreign and
domestic firms and state-of-the-art methods for identifying and estimating firm premiums
(Bonhomme, Lamadon, and Manresa, 2019). We find that the typical worker earns 7 per-
cent more at the average foreign firm relative to the average domestic firm, indicating that
most of the foreign firm wage differential is due to worker composition, but also indicating a
substantial foreign firm premium. Quantitatively, the wage premium paid by foreign multi-
nationals is quite large in the aggregate--accounting for 34 billion USD annually in wages
(about 0.6 percent of the entire private sector wage bill).
    We document four important properties of the direct effects. First, we estimate the
foreign firm premium by country of origin, finding larger premiums in origin countries with
greater GDP per capita. Second, we show that the wage premium is larger for higher-skilled
workers and absent for the lowest decile of worker skill. Third, we find that the foreign
wage premium is not explained by size differences between foreign and domestic firms, as
the foreign wage premium is greatest when comparing small foreign firms and small domestic
firms. Fourth, domestic-owned multinationals have nearly identical firm premiums to foreign
multinationals on average. This suggests that belonging to a multinational network, rather
than foreignness, is the main driver of the foreign firm premium.
    Regarding the indirect effects of job creation at foreign firms on local domestic firms and
their workers, the key identification challenge is that foreign multinationals may increase
investment in a location due to other factors that also cause contemporaneous growth at
local domestic firms. In order to overcome this endogeneity, we document in our data that
foreign firms cluster into locations by country of ownership, then exploit this clustering to
construct an instrumental variable for local foreign investment. Our identification strategy is
analogous to the immigration literature that uses spatial clustering of immigrants to identify
the effects of immigrants on native workers' wages (see Card 2001). Due to the large size
of our data, we are able to include a rich set of fixed effects as controls in the empirical
analysis, such as granular industry-year fixed effects and a commuting-zone-specific time
trend. These controls ameliorate identification concerns arising from the fact that ownership-
data. The closest data set is the one described by Bureau of Labor Statistics (2019), which has employer-
employee links and country of ownership. However, it is for the 2012 cross-section only, and the questions
we address in this paper require a panel in order to observe changes over time.

                                                    2
country-specific shocks can be correlated with confounding factors, such as industry-specific
shocks.
    Equipped with this identification strategy, we find that an increase in employment at
foreign-owned firms significantly raises value added, employment, and wage bill at domestic-
owned firms in the same commuting zone. The effects are larger in the tradable than in
the non-tradable sector and largest among domestic firms with more than 100 employees.
In terms of wage effects for continuing workers at domestic firms, we only find positive
effects for higher-earning workers but not for lower-earning workers. Our estimates imply
that, for every 1 job created by a foreign multinational, approximately 0.42 jobs and 91,000
USD in value added are generated by domestic firms in the same local labor market. In
an extension, we construct analogous instrumental variables for foreign employment growth
at horizontal, upstream, and downstream industries in the same location. We find that the
indirect effects on domestic firms are greatest when investment occurs at upstream foreign
multinationals, suggesting that a greater supply of inputs locally sourced by domestic firms
from foreign-owned firms is an important driver of the indirect effects. We also find no
evidence of negative effects on horizontal firms, suggesting that the costs of competition do
not outweigh the agglomeration benefits even when the domestic and foreign firms are in the
same industry.
    In terms of policy implications, our estimates of the direct wage premium by foreign
firms highlight sizable benefits of trade and investment policies that promote foreign firms
to invest in the U.S. Furthermore, our estimates imply incentives for local policy makers to
compete for investments by foreign multinationals, since in addition to direct wage benefits,
we find positive and sizable local indirect effects on domestic firms and their workers--in
particular the higher earning ones. Together, the direct and indirect wage effects imply that
one additional job created by a foreign multinational generates, on average, annual aggregate
wage gains for incumbent workers in the commuting zone of approximately 16,000 USD, two-
thirds of which is due to the indirect effects. Outside data suggests that, in the aggregate,
foreign multinationals in the U.S. receive about 3 to 6.5 billion USD in economic development
subsidies per year.4 Abstracting from any indirect effects, the value of these subsidies is
much below the aggregate foreign wage premium of 34 billion USD per year. However, when
focusing on the mega-deals for the establishment and expansion of large plants, the subsidies
per job can be quite large. Specifically, when comparing our estimates to the analysis by
Slattery (2018), it appears that foreign multinationals are able to extract a sizable fraction

   4
     According to data retrieved from the policy group Good Jobs First 's subsidy tracker database, the
foreign firm share in total annual economic development subsidies in the U.S. between 2012 and 2017 ranges
between 10 and 35 percent. The so called mega-deals (with subsidies larger than 50 million USD) play an
important role for the overall volume of foreign firm subsidies--accounting for about half of all subsidies to
foreign firms.

                                                      3
of the surplus from such investments in the bargaining with local governments for mega-
deals. We note that while there may be local benefits to competing for foreign multinational
investments with subsidies, this does not imply that such subsidies are beneficial from a
national welfare perspective.
    Our paper contributes to several literatures. Regarding the direct effects of foreign multi-
nationals, numerous studies have found that foreign multinationals pay higher wages than
domestic firms. For the U.S., Doms and Jensen (1998), Feliciano and Lipsey (1999), and
others find that at the firm-level the average wage at foreign-owned firms is higher than
at domestic-owned firms. We contribute to this literature by--for the first time for the
U.S.-- separating worker-skill composition from foreign firm wage premiums. We show that
the average wage difference shrinks substantially, but is still positive, when accounting for
worker composition. Several studies outside the U.S. have found that the foreign wage pre-
mium shrinks and sometimes disappears when accounting for worker composition (Heyman,
Sj¨oholm, and Tingvall 2007; Balsvik 2011; and Hijzen, Martins, Schank, and Upward 2013).
One possible explanation for a significant wage gain for workers at foreign multinationals
even after controlling for worker types is that the U.S. is relatively remote from its major
sources of foreign firms (e.g., Europe and Asia), and therefore the selected firms that estab-
lish affiliates in the U.S. are especially productive. Another possibility is that firms anchor
their wages to headquarter levels as suggested by Hjort, Li, and Sarsons (2019).
    The existing studies on the effects of foreign multinationals on domestic firms in host
countries outside the U.S. have found diverse effects. Aitken and Harrison (1999) and Lu,
Tao, and Zhu (2017) find negative effects from foreign multinationals on revenue productivity
of domestic firms in the same industry in Venezuela and China, respectively.5 Other papers
find positive effects on productivity at domestic-owned firms, which are sometimes associated
with buyer-supplier linkages (Javorcik 2004; Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter 2007; Alfaro and
Chen 2018; Jiang, Keller, Qiu, and Ridley 2018; Kee 2015; and Alfaro-Urena, Manelici, and
Vasquez 2019b, Alfaro-Urena, Manelici, and Vasquez 2019a). Poole (2012) finds positive
effects on wages at domestic firms from a greater share of co-workers with experience at
foreign firms in Brazil, and Driffield and Girma (2003) find that foreign firm entry causes
domestic firms to bid up wages.
    The closest antecedents of our research on the indirect effects of foreign multinationals
on domestic U.S. firms are Head, Ries, and Swenson (1995), Figlio and Blonigen (2000), and
Keller and Yeaple (2009).6 Head et al. (1995) document the local clustering of Japanese

    5
      Consistent with competition effects, Atkin, Faber, and Gonzalez-Navarro (2018) document a decline in
Mexican grocery store prices in response to entry by foreign retailers. See Gorg (2004) for a survey of the
empirical literature on FDI spillovers. A method to separate technology spillover from competition effects
is provided by Bloom, Schankerman, and Van Reenen (2013).
    6
      Other related work on the indirect effects of foreign multinationals in the U.S. includes Aitken, Harrison,

                                                       4
affiliates in the U.S. Such clustering by country of origin forms the basis of our identification
strategy. Figlio and Blonigen (2000) use between-county variation in foreign investment
in South Carolina and find that foreign multinationals raise local real wages.7 Keller and
Yeaple (2009) use firm-level data from Compustat and variation in foreign-firm activity
across industries. They find that spillovers from foreign multinationals can account for 14
percent of productivity growth in U.S. firms between 1987 and 1996. We contribute to this
literature by providing a novel identification strategy for the indirect effects of foreign firms
and an improved measurement of outcomes for both workers and firms. We also contribute
to this literature by providing a local labor market perspective and investigating indirect
effects on horizontal, upstream, and downstream industries within local labor markets.
     While our identification strategy for the indirect effects of foreign multinationals on do-
mestic firms is distinct from the prior literature on FDI spillovers, it is more closely related
to prior work on agglomeration in urban economics (Moretti, 2010; Combes, Duranton, Gob-
illon, Puga, and Roux, 2012; Allcott and Keniston, 2018; Helm, 2019). Going back to Bartik
(1991), many studies have used a shift-share research design to measure local agglomera-
tion benefits.8 Our identification approach for measuring the indirect effects of foreign firms
on domestic firms exploits past spatial clustering of firms by country of ownership and is
analogous to the large empirical literature on immigration that exploits past spatial clus-
tering by immigrants' country of origin (Card, 2001). Our identification strategy for the
indirect effects of foreign firms on domestic firms complements the study on the spillover
effects from new plant openings by Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010), particularly
whenever data on runner-up locations is unavailable. Aside from providing an alternative
identification strategy on the effects of plant expansions, the activities by foreign firms are
of particular policy interest for both the local and national level.
     Our paper is also related to the literature on local labor market benefits of various place-
based policies in spatial equilibrium. In addition to the work by Slattery (2018), most closely
related are the papers by Gaubert (2018) and Ossa (2015), who model local policymakers
using subsidies to compete for firms in spatial equilibrium with agglomeration. See Slattery
and Zidar (2020) for a recent review of the effects of mega subsidy deals, though they do
not discuss the foreign­domestic firm distinction. Other related studies include business
relocation responses to state-level corporate tax changes (Suarez Serrato and Zidar, 2016),
agglomeration effects of infrastructure investment (Kline and Moretti, 2013), and indirect
effects of employment tax credits (Busso, Gregory, and Kline, 2013). As in our discussion
and Lipsey (1996), Branstetter (2001) and Blonigen and Slaughter (2001).
    7
      As their data does not distinguish between wages at domestic and foreign firms, this estimate combines
both direct and indirect effects.
    8
      An evolving literature discusses the econometric properties of this approach including Goldsmith-
Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift (forthcoming), Adao, Koles´    ar, and Morales (2019), and Borusyak, Hull, and
Jaravel (2018).

                                                     5
of policy implications, this literature distinguishes between the value of the indirect effects
from the perspective of a local policymaker versus a national policymaker, where the local
policymaker does not discount the stealing of business from other locations and the national
policymaker does; see also the discussion by Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009).


2       Data and Descriptive Evidence
2.1     Data
    We construct a matched worker-firm panel data set from the population of annual U.S.
Treasury tax filings from 1999 to 2017. For each worker-firm-year, W-2 tax forms provide
information on earnings, the firm's employer identification number (EIN, which is masked
to us), and the worker's residential ZIP code.9 Earnings are defined as all remuneration
for labor services deemed taxable by the IRS, including wages and salaries, bonuses, and
exercised stock options. We obtain year of birth and sex information from SSA birth records
for each worker. Following Lamadon et al. (2019), the analysis sample focuses on workers
aged between 25 and 60 at the highest-paying employment relationship in each worker-year
with earnings above the full-time equivalence (FTE) threshold, which we approximate using
the minimum wage.
    For each firm-year, forms 1120 (C-corporations), 1120S (S-corporations), and 1065 (part-
nerships) provide information on value added and the NAICS industry code, where value
added equals sales minus cost of goods sold.10 We refer to the 3-digit NAICS code as the
firm's industry. Foreign-ownership is indicated by the filing of form 5472, which is the in-
formation return for a 25 percent or more foreign-owned U.S. corporation and includes the
country of foreign ownership. We link worker data to firm data using the EIN. We keep only
those firms that have at least one FTE worker. We use the terms "foreign" and "foreign-
owned" interchangeably throughout this draft.11 Due to difficulties in interpreting value
added, we omit the finance, insurance, and real estate (FIRE) industries from all analysis.

    9
       In the event that the ZIP code is missing or invalid in year t but not in year s with |t - s|  2, and the
worker receives a W-2 from the same EIN in t and s, we impute it in t using the value from s.
    10
       In the manufacturing and mining sectors, the cost of goods sold contains production wages (labor
compensation to workers directly involved in the production process). We construct a measure of production
wages to add back into value added for these sectors (the difference between total wages associated with the
firm through worker tax forms and non-production wages reported by the firm).
    11
       Similarly, we refer to "domestic" and "domestic-owned" firms interchangeably. We note that even a
domestic-owned firm could be in the hands of many small foreign owners, in particular when the company
is publicly listed. While we do not have hard data on this, we think these cases are likely to be rare and not
necessarily associated with the same effects. In the event that the employer fails to file form 5472 in year t
but files as foreign owned with ownership country c in one of (t - 2, t - 1) as well as one of (t + 1, t + 2), we
impute foreign ownership in year t as c.

                                                       6
     To our knowledge, ours is the first panel data set for the U.S. that links the population of
workers and firms with foreign ownership information of the firms. However, there are two
challenges in working with this data. First, since corporate tax filings provide the foreign
ownership information while the W-2s provide the information on employment and wages,
we can only classify the foreign status of a worker's firm for those workers whose EIN on the
W-2 is also an EIN associated with a corporate tax filing. As emphasized by Yagan (2019),
many workers cannot be linked to a corporate tax filing, often because the employer is not
required to file (especially because the employer is a government or non-profit organization)
or because the employer is a subsidiary and only the parent corporation files while the
subsidiary uses its distinct EIN to issue W-2s. To overcome this challenge, we combine
two sources of information on subsidiary linkages. The first source is Schedule K, Line 3b,
which provides the EIN of the parent corporation in the years in which the subsidiary is a
filer, from which we learn the EIN of the parent corporation in future years in which the
subsidiary is a non-filer. The second source is the Affiliations Schedule from form 851, which
defines a subsidiary as 80 percent owned by another corporation. However, we only observe a
running list of parent-subsidiary relationships taken from the Affiliations Schedules through
2016, so changes over time due to extensive margin changes in subsidiary relationships may
be mismeasured when using the second source. For this reason, we only utilize the second
source for subsidiary linkages that are not covered by the first source, i.e., subsidiaries that
are missing Schedule K filings.
     The second challenge is that our analysis requires a firm's activity to be associated with
each commuting zone in which it is active. This differs from using the address of the firm's
headquarters to define its location, as the headquarters may be chosen to obtain favorable
state-level tax rates rather than to represent the firm's actual location of activity, and the firm
may be active in many locations. Since specific establishments of multi-establishment firms
are not observable in U.S. tax data, we follow Yagan (2019) by inferring firms' commuting
zone-level operations from workers' residential locations. We aggregate number of workers
and wages within the commuting zone of the worker's address on the W-2 to define the
firms' local employment and wage bill. However, we do not observe value added at the
firm-commuting zone level directly because it is reported only on firm-level tax forms. To
overcome this challenge, we use the share of wage bill paid in the commuting zone of each
firm to allocate value added to commuting zones. For example, if 75 percent of a firm's wage
bill is paid in the first commuting zone and 25 percent in the second commuting zone, we
allocate 75 percent of value added to the first and 25 percent to the second.




                                                7
                                                  Figure 1: Employment at Foreign-owned Firms




              Foreign Employment Share (%)
                                             10


                                             8


                                             6


                                             4


                                             2


                                             0
                                                      1980               1990               2000                2010
                                                                                     Year
                                                   BEA, All excl. Banks              IRS, excl. FIRE - All Workers
                                                   BEA, Majority-owned excl. Banks   IRS, excl. FIRE - Restricted Sample of Workers
                                                   BEA, Majority-owned incl. Banks



Notes: This figure displays the share of American private sector employees at foreign-owned firms between
1977 and 2017. It compares three series available from BEA to the analysis sample of firms we construct
from tax data, both for all workers and for only the workers that satisfy our FTE and other restrictions.
Each of the series use different sample selection rules.


2.2     Comparison to aggregate statistics from BLS and BEA
    This subsection documents statistical patterns of FDI observed in our data and compares
them to statistics from the BLS and BEA. We find that between 5 and 6 percent of American
workers are employed at foreign firms and the average worker at a foreign firm earns 25
percent more than the average worker at a domestic firm, which match the statistics from
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2019).
    We validate that the data is representative of the share of workers employed by foreign
firms. Figure 1 visualizes the share of American workers employed at foreign firms between
1977 and 2017. It compares three series available from BEA to the series we construct from
tax data. Each series follows different sample selection rules, yet during the years of overlap,
the series are generally consistent. It shows that the share of employees at foreign-owned
firms rose rapidly from 2 percent to 5 percent during the late 1970s and 1980s, remained
around 5 percent during the 1990s, and jumped to 6 percent in 2000. It then returned to
5 percent through much of the 2000s, before rising again to 6 percent in the 2010s. By
plotting separately the foreign employment share for all workers in the U.S. and those for
workers in our restricted sample, we see that foreign firms hire relatively more prime-aged
FTE workers.



                                                                                     8
2.3    Observed Differences between Domestic and Foreign Firms
    We next use our matched worker-firm panel data from tax records to examine differences
between domestic and foreign firms. We first investigate the number and size of firms. Cross-
sectional statistics on the number of foreign firms and the number of firm-location pairs are
presented in Appendix Table A1 for the year 2015. We find that 1.1 percent of firms and 4.6
percent of firm-location pairs are foreign. As implied by the share of workers at foreign firms
being greater than the share of firms that are foreign, the average foreign firm is much larger
than the average domestic firm, with about 28 workers per domestic firm and 172 workers per
foreign firm. The fact that foreign firms are larger is consistent with theories of foreign direct
investment that emphasize selection of only the most productive firms able to overcome the
entry hurdles of establishing a foreign affiliate (see Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple (2004)).
However, foreign firms may be larger simply because they select into industries or regions in
which more workers per firm are greater also among domestic firms.
    To disentangle industry and region selection from foreign ownership, Figure 2 visualizes
the distribution of foreign firm concentration by size after controlling for industry and com-
muting zone effects. The horizontal axis displays residual firm size--the log of the number
of FTE workers per firm-year residuals from a regression on industry-year and commuting
zone-year indicators, which has mean zero. The vertical axis displays the fraction of firms
within each size bin that are foreign. We plot the share of foreign firms within each log size
residual bin (black line), as well as the unconditional share (blue line). Firms are equally
weighted when estimating averages within log size bins. When comparing within each size
bin, we see that foreign firms comprise less than 2 percent of firms in the distribution when
firm size is less than 2 log points above the mean. However, foreign firms comprise more
than 10 percent of all firms, conditional on firm size being 5 log points above the mean. This
indicates vast over-representation of foreign firms among the largest firms within an industry
and region.
    Second, we examine differences in wages and value added at foreign and domestic firms.
Appendix Table A1 shows that, in 2015, value added per worker was 82,700 USD at domestic
firms and 153,100 USD at foreign firms, indicating nearly twice as much value added per
worker at foreign firms. When restricting to the analysis sample of workers (i.e., prime-
aged FTE workers), which are relatively more concentrated at foreign firms, value added
per worker is about 44 percent higher at foreign firms. Furthermore, the average worker in
the restricted sample earns 60,700 USD at domestic firms and 75,700 USD at foreign firms,
indicating 25 percent higher wages at foreign firms. The findings on larger value added and
wages at foreign firms are consistent with evidence presented for the U.S. in much earlier
work by Doms and Jensen (1998), Feliciano and Lipsey (1999), and Moran and Oldenski



                                                9
           Figure 2: Share of Firms that are Foreign-owned by Firm Size

                                                        0.12




                      Share of Firms that are Foreign
                                                                                                                             q

                                                        0.10

                                                                                                                         q

                                                        0.08
                                                                                                                    q


                                                        0.06
                                                                                                                q

                                                                                          Mean by Size Bin
                                                        0.04                                               q



                                                                                                       q


                                                                                                   q
                                                        0.02                                   q       Unconditional Mean
                                                               q                          q
                                                                    q                q
                                                                             q   q
                                                                        q


                                                        0.00
                                                               -2                0                 2                4
                                                                                           Log Size
                                                                        (deviation from industry and location average)


Notes: In this figure, the x-axis indicates bins constructed from the log of the number of prime-aged FTE
workers per firm-year (log size). The blue line indicates the unconditional fraction of firms that are foreign
owned, while the black line indicates the fraction of foreign-owned firms within each log size bin, both
presenting equally weighted averages across firms. Log size is residualized on indicators for CZ-year and
industry-year, and the x-axis omits the bottom and top 1 percentile tails of the residual log size distribution.


(2013) based on matched BEA FDI survey and the Census of Manufactures data.12
    A natural question is whether or not foreign firms produce more value added and pay
greater wages than other firms of the same size in the same industry and location. Figure
3 compares log size residuals to log value added residuals (subfigure a) and log mean wage
residuals (subfigure b), where residuals are again taken from a regression on industry-year
and commuting zone-year indicators. It plots the conditional mean difference within each
log size residual bin (black lines), as well as the unconditional mean difference (blue lines).
In Figure 3(a), the blue line indicates that value added is 76 percent higher in foreign-owned
firms, controlling for industry-year and commuting zone-year, while the black line indicates
that this difference for firms of the same size ranges from around zero among smaller firms
up to around 40 percent among larger firms.13 In Figure 3(b), the blue line indicates that
the mean wage is 26 percent higher in foreign-owned firms, controlling for industry-year and
   12
       Weber, Kim, and Mason (2011) find that also U.S.-owned multinational firms pay higher wages in the
U.S. than non-multinationals.
    13
       While it may at first blush appear counter-intuitive that the unconditional mean difference is greater
than any of the conditional mean differences for log value added, this is explained by differences in the
share of foreign and domestic firms across the size bins. This phenomenon is known as Simpson's Paradox.
To illustrate this with a simple numerical example, suppose that there are two size bins (small and large).
Suppose that 10 percent of foreign firms are small while 90 percent of domestic firms are small. Suppose the
mean log wage for foreign firms is 12 if small and 11 if large, while the mean log wage for domestic firms is
11 if small and 10 if large. The conditional mean difference at small firms is 1.0 and the conditional mean
difference at large firms is 1.0. The unconditional mean difference is (0.9*11 + 0.1*10) - (0.1*10 + 0.9*9) =
1.8. Thus, the average of conditional mean differences is 1.0 while the unconditional mean difference is 1.8.

                                                                                          10
                                         Figure 3: Differences between Foreign and Domestic Firms

                         (a) Difference in Mean Log Value Added                                                                              (b) Difference in Mean Log Earnings
                        0.8                                                                                                            0.5
                                       Unconditional Mean Diff.




                                                                                                        Difference in Log Mean Wage
                                                                                                                                              q


                        0.6                                                                                                            0.4
Difference in Log VA




                                                                                               q

                        0.4                               Mean Diff. by Size Bin       q   q
                                                                                                                                       0.3
                                                                              q    q                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                          q                                                                           q

                                                            q
                                                                  q   q                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                 Unconditional Mean Diff.
                        0.2                           q
                                                                                                                                       0.2                               q

                                                                                                                                                  q                          q

                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                              q                                                                                                                                                                     q
                        0.0               q
                                              q                                                                                        0.1                     Mean Diff. by Size Bin   q   q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q




                       -0.2        q
                                                                                                                                       0.0


                       -0.4                                                                                                           -0.1
                              -2                  0                   2                4                                                     -2                 0                  2                4
                                                            Log Size                                                                                                     Log Size
                                         (deviation from industry and location average)                                                               (deviation from industry and location average)


Notes: In this figure, the x-axis indicates bins constructed from the log of the number of prime-aged FTE
workers per firm-year (log size). Subfigures (a) and (b) plot the mean differences in log value added and
log mean earnings per firm, where firms are equally weighted when estimating averages within log size bins.
The blue line indicates the unconditional mean across all firms in the analysis sample. Log size, log value
added, and the log mean wage are residualized on indicators for CZ-year and industry-year, and the x-axis
omits the bottom and top 1 percentile tails of the residual log size distribution.


commuting zone-year, while the black line indicates that this difference for firms of the same
size is greater than 10 percent throughout the distribution and above 25 percent around
the mean residual firm size. It is interesting that even conditional on size--an endogenous
outcome that itself may already reflect higher firm productivity (see Helpman et al. 2004 and
Yeaple 2009)--foreign firms have higher value added (except at the smallest firms, where
foreign ownership is rare) and earnings per worker. One possible explanation for this finding
is that firms obtain valuable inputs from their foreign headquarters. Hence, conditional on
their employment size in the U.S., foreign firms are more productive than a domestic firm
without the same headquarter input. Another possible explanation is that foreign firms
simply hire better workers, which we investigate in Section 4 below.


2.4                               The Geographic Concentration of Foreign Employment
   Lastly, we discuss an important feature of the data: the spatial concentration of FDI.
Our records on the residential addresses of workers employed by foreign firms allow us to
pinpoint the geographic locations of the economic activity of foreign multinationals. In this
subsection, we will examine two aspects of the spatial distribution. First, we compare the
FDI distribution near the beginning of our sample to the FDI distribution near the end of our
sample, revealing that FDI was initially concentrated along the East Coast and the Rust Belt,
but the growth has been especially concentrated in southern states. Second, we examine the
share of FDI within each location that is owned in Asia, Canada, or Europe, revealing that

                                                                                                   11
      Figure 4: The Spatial Distribution of Employment at Foreign Firms




(a) Share of employment at foreign firms by com- (b) Change in share of employment at foreign
muting zone in 2001                              firms by commuting zone from 2001 to 2015.

Notes: The two figures display spatial variation in employment at foreign-owned firms observed in the tax
data for the workers sample of interest. In the first figure, the share of workers employed at foreign-owned
firms is plotted in 2001 for each commuting zone. In the second figure, changes from 2001 to 2015 in the
share of employment at foreign-owned firms are plotted by commuting zone.


Asian employment is disproportionately concentrated on the West Coast, Canadian employ-
ment is disproportionately concentrated on the northern border, and European employment
is disproportionately concentrated on the East Coast. While it is not a novel finding that
distance to the country of origin of the foreign investor plays a role in the location decision,
it is reassuring to confirm this feature in our data. In Section 5, we will leverage both the
spatial distribution of FDI growth and the variation in relative concentration by ownership
country in order to identify the indirect effects of FDI on local markets.
    Figure 4 presents spatial variation in employment at foreign firms observed in the tax
data for the analysis sample of prime-aged FTE workers. In Figure 4a, the share of workers
employed at foreign firms is plotted in 2001 for each commuting zone. It shows particularly
high levels of employment at foreign firms along the East Coast and in Rust Belt cities in
Indiana, Michigan, and Ohio, but especially low levels in the South. In Figure 4b, changes
from 2001 to 2015 in the share of employment at foreign firms are plotted by commuting
zone. There have been substantial changes across the U.S., with Gulf Coast states like
Alabama, Louisiana, and Mississippi experiencing especially rapid growth, while parts of the
East Coast and the Rust Belt have experienced sharp declines in FDI concentration.
    In Figures 5a, 5b, and 5c we display the share of employment at Canadian, Western
European, and East Asian firms as a share of total employment at foreign-owned firms by
commuting zone, averaging across all of our sample years. A clear visual pattern emerges
from the three figures: Canadian firms are more likely to be near the Canadian border,
European firms are primarily engaged on the eastern part of the U.S., and Asian firms


                                                    12
    Figure 5: Geographic Clustering of Foreign Firms by Country of Origin

(a) Share of workers at foreign firms that are (b) Share of workers at foreign firms that are
owned in Canada                                owned in Western Europe




                         (c) Share of workers at foreign firms that are
                         owned in East Asian




Notes: The figures display spatial variation in the concentration of foreign employment that is at firms
owned in particular groups of owner countries.


account for a large share of foreign-owned firms near the West Coast as well as in the
Midwest. The maps suggest that distance to the country of origin of the foreign investor
plays a role in the location decision. We conclude this section by discussing a number of
plausible reasons why firms cluster by nationality and distance to home country matters.
    First, the cost of shipping intermediate goods from the home country or the costs of
communication between headquarter and subsidiary are positively correlated with distance
(Keller and Yeaple, 2013). Communication costs may be reduced by the availability of airline
routes to the home country, and places across the U.S. differ with respect to the availability
of air travel to the foreign headquarters (Giroud 2013 and Campante and Yanagizawa-Drott
2017). Second, it is well known that foreign firms are more likely to employ employees

                                                  13
(in particular, managers) from their country of origin that already had business experience
at the firm's headquarters. These employees may prefer to live near other employees of the
same country of origin for the same reasons that immigrants cluster by nationality. Relatedly,
Burchardi, Chaney, and Hassan (2019) document for the U.S. that foreign investment follows
past ancestors' regional choices. Fourth, foreign firms of a particular country of origin
may share information, for example, by using similar plant site selection firms that already
have business and political contacts in certain regions. Fifth, it is well known that foreign
firms from particular countries are specialized in certain industries and that firms cluster
by industry (Head et al., 1995). While the first four reasons for clustering by nationality
appear to be rather idiosyncratic and reasonably exogenous, the fifth reason for clustering by
nationality implies that the instrument could be correlated with other shocks at the industry
level. We will come back to this concern when discussing the empirical strategy below.


3    A Model of Foreign Multinationals, Workers, and
     Domestic Firms
    Before diving into the empirical analysis, we develop a simple model that characterizes
direct and indirect effects of foreign multinationals on domestic firms and workers. Following
recent work by Card, Cardoso, Heining, and Kline (2018), Lamadon et al. (2019), Berger,
Herkenhoff, and Mongey (2019), and others, we assume that workers have idiosyncratic tastes
for firms, which gives firms market power in their wage setting. We allow for the possibility of
local technology spillovers from foreign to domestic firms and illustrate how spillovers affect
the predictions for domestic firm outcomes as the employment at foreign-owned firms in a
location rises. We assume there is a large set of locations in the U.S. All regions are trading
friction-less within the U.S. and workers are immobile across locations. We focus on the
outcomes in one particular location and, to simplify notation, omit the locations subscript.
There are two types of firms--domestic and foreign--and two types of workers--skilled and
unskilled.
    Suppose there are MD domestic firms and MF foreign firms in a particular location.
We denote by LD and LF the number of workers working at domestic and foreign firms,
respectively. The number of workers working at each type of firm will be equilibrium objects.
We allow domestic and foreign firms to differ in productivity.
    Consider a production function of a firm with nationality N  {D, F } that is linear in
skilled and unskilled labor:

                                 Q(N, lu , ls ) = N (lu + N s ls )                          (1)


                                                14
The nationality of a firm is either domestic, D, or foreign, F . The skilled labor augmenting
productivity term, N s > 1, is allowed to differ by ownership nationality. We assume that
foreign firms are more productive than domestic firms in their usage of both unskilled labor
(i.e., F  D ) and skilled labor (i.e., F F s  D Ds ). See Helpman et al. (2004) for a
micro-foundation of this pattern resulting from selection combined with larger fixed cost of
establishing a foreign rather than a domestic plant. While we take as given the productivity
of foreign firms, F > 1, we allow for spillovers of productivity from foreign to domestic
firms. The productivity of a domestic firm is given by D = 1 +  LDL          F
                                                                            +LF
                                                                                (F - 1). The
parameter  , with 0    1, governs the degree of spillovers from workers at foreign to
domestic firms. The spillovers to domestic firms rise in the fraction of workers in this location
that are employed at foreign firms.


3.1    Labor supply
    Each region is equipped with a number of potential skilled workers L    ¯ s and unskilled
        ¯ u that is taken as exogenous. A worker of skill type h has idiosyncratic preferences
workers L
for which firm to work for and an outside option of home production. Let j denote a firm
and i denote a worker with skill type h(i):

                                     Vij = log wjh(i) +   ij ,                               (2)

where human capital type h is either skilled, s, or unskilled, u. We denote the wage of the
outside option of not-working at any firm by w0 . Assuming that ij is distributed i.i.d. type
1 extreme value with dispersion parameter 1/ , the labor supply for firm j is a function of
its own wage wjh for worker type h and a composite term that includes the wage offerings
of everyone else in the market:

                                         
                                              ¯h
                                              L
                                  Ljh = wjh      ,   h  {u, s}                               (3)
                                              Wh
              MD +MF    
with Wh =     k=0      wkh .


3.2    Labor demand
    Each firm produces a homogeneous good that is freely traded. We normalize the price
of the output good to 1. We assume the firm exploits the idiosyncratic worker tastes in
its labor demand decision. While the firm does not know the tastes of each worker, the
firm knows the distribution of tastes and can offer different wages for skilled and unskilled
workers. We further assume that there are many firms of its type in its region, so each firm
acts monopsonistically competitive, meaning it does not take the effect of its own choice of

                                                15
wj or lj on W into account. Given the production function in equation (1) and the labor
supply function in (3) a firm with nationality N offers the following wage for workers of each
skill type:

                                      
                             wN h =      N N h     N  {D, F }                             (4)
                                      +1
where we normalize N h = 1 for h = u.


3.3    Direct wage effect on workers employed at foreign firms
    According to equation (4), a firm sets the wage equal to a constant mark-down of the
marginal product of labor at the firm. As skilled workers are more productive, they earn
higher wages. As productivity is higher at foreign firms, foreign firms pay higher wages.
The direct effect of foreign firms on its workers is that they earn higher wages than at a
domestic firm. Furthermore, more productive workers will earn dis-proportionally more at
foreign firms if F s > Ds .


3.4    Indirect effects of an expansion of foreign firms
    We next describe the model's predictions for increases in the number of foreign firms,
MF . Here, we focus on the indirect effects, i.e., the outcomes at domestic owned firms. We
show in the Appendix that if the initial employment share at foreign owned firms is small
and employment is roughly constant during the counterfactual, the model suggests that the
following equation approximates the wage effect at domestic owned firms:

                                                           LF - LF
                         log(wDh ) - log(wDh )   (F - 1)                                  (5)
                                                           LD + LF
   The equation suggests that the wage at domestic firms depends on the change in the
                                      L -L   F
employment share at foreign firms, LD    F
                                           +LF
                                               . With technology spillovers (i.e.,  > 0), an
increase in the number of foreign firms, MF , raises LF and thereby also wDu and wDs . In the
absence of productivity spillovers (i.e.,  = 0), there is no wage increase at domestic firms
when the number of foreign firms increases.
    A change in foreign firm activity also affects other outcomes at domestic firms. Due to
labor market competition effects, the model without productivity spillovers implies a decline
in the output at domestic firms as the activity by foreign firms in a location increases. The
effect on output at domestic-owned firms can be positive or negative--depending on other
parameters--in the model with technology spillovers. While the labor market competition
effect from foreign firms lowers output at domestic firms, the technology spillover effect
raises output at domestic firms. We derive these model predictions in Appendix B. Overall,

                                             16
the model suggests that the indirect effect of foreign firms on domestic firms can be either
positive or negative. The sign of the indirect effect depends, among other parameters, on
the technology spillovers parameter,  .


3.5      Model limitations
    Before proceeding to the empirics, we note several limitations of the model. Clearly,
the model is highly stylized with only two types of workers and two types of firms. We
allow for more worker and firm types in the empirical application below. By assuming
firms' output is freely tradable, the model abstracts away from product market competition
effects associated with foreign firm entry in a commuting zone (see Bloom et al. 2013 for a
method of separating product market competition effects from technology spillover effects).
Furthermore, the simple model abstracts away from input-output linkages between firms.
We examine in Section 5 the extent to which the indirect effects are associated with input-
output linkages. Finally, the technology spillover is assumed to affect the technology of
domestic firms in a factor-neutral way. In Section 5 we also investigate the extent to which
the indirect wage effects differ by income group.


4        Direct Effects of Foreign Multinationals
    We next empirically examine the direct effects of foreign multinationals on workers in the
U.S. Our primary goal is to disentangle the extent to which higher wages at foreign owned
firms are due to worker quality differences as opposed to firm premiums.


4.1      Main Estimates of the Foreign Firm Premium
4.1.1     Main Estimation Strategy

   In order to empirically distinguish average worker quality in the firm from the firm
premium when comparing foreign to domestic firms, we estimate the two-way fixed effects
wage regression originally proposed by Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999):

                                log wi,t = j (i,t) + xi + i,t  +   i,t ,                           (6)

where j (i, t) denotes the firm j that employs worker i in year t,  denotes the firm premium,
x denotes worker quality, and  denotes a vector of observable determinants of earnings.14


    14
     Song, Price, Guvenen, Bloom, and von Wachter (2018) and Lamadon et al. (2019) also estimate (6) on
the U.S. tax data, but do not examine foreign ownership.

                                                  17
    Equation (6) is a generalization of the equilibrium wage setting presented in equation
(4) to allow for each firm and each worker to have its own productivity. However, it is less
general in that it imposes skill-neutrality. To see this, note that in the model, log wi,t =
     
log +1   + log N (j ) + log N (j )h(i) , where h(i) is the skill level of individual i. This can be
generalized by replacing N (j ) with j so that each firm has its own productivity, by replacing
log N (j )h(i) with ij so that each worker-firm pair has its own productivity, and by adding
worker-specific observable wage determinants i,t  and unobservable determinants i,t to the
log wage equation. Equation (6) assumes ij = xi , which can be interpreted in our model
as imposing that the technology is skill-neutral, i.e., N (j )h(i) does not vary with h(i). We
relax the skill-neutrality assumption in the next subsection. Identification of this regression
requires that workers do not select into firms based on the idiosyncratic time-varying error
term i,t (see the discussions by Card et al. 2018 and Lamadon et al. 2019). Selection based
on the workers effects, firm effects, or observable controls does not violate identification.
    Before estimating the wage equation, we note that limited mobility makes it challenging to
precisely estimate firm premiums and worker effects (Andrews, Gill, Schank, and Upward,
2008). The earnings changes for workers who are observed at multiple firms ("movers")
provides the identifying content on firm premiums, and the bias in those firm premium
estimates declines as the number of movers per firm grows. However, the modal firm in the
U.S. has a single mover, providing the opportunity for massive limited mobility bias in our
context. To address this, we follow the approach of Bonhomme et al. (2019) (hereafter, BLM)
and estimate a set of grouped-fixed effect models. Instead of obtaining a fixed effect for each
firm, we allocate all firms in our data to k = 10 clusters (k = 20 in a robustness check)
with similar wage structures using k -means cluster analysis.15 These clusters preserve the
wage structure while reducing the number of fixed effects that must be estimated. Indeed,
we find that 86 (90) percent of all between firm wage variance is captured by only these 10
(20) clusters. Since there is much more mobility between these clusters than between the
millions of unique firms, any bias should be mitigated.

4.1.2    Results from the Main Estimation Strategy

    In Figure 6, we provide the first estimates of firm premiums and worker quality by foreign
ownership for firms in the U.S. The results allow us to distinguish the direct effect of foreign
firms from the worker quality composition. Our main specification uses the bias-correction

  15
     Lamadon et al. (2019) are the first to provide bias-corrected estimates of firm premiums and sorting
for the U.S. Using the BLM bias correction with k = 10 clusters, they document that the variance of firm
premiums is inflated by a factor of about three when ignoring limited mobility bias, while the correlation
between worker quality and firm premiums is deflated by a factor of about four. They find that the results
are nearly identical when considering k = 20, 30, 40, 50 clusters. They find similar results when using the
bias-correction procedure of Kline, Saggio, and Sølvsten (2018).

                                                    18
                                             Figure 6: Foreign Ownership, Firm Premiums, and Worker Quality

                                                (a) Total Residual Wage Difference                                                                                                                 (b) Firm Premium Difference
                                    0.4                                                                                                                                                0.15
                                            q




                                                                                                                                                         Difference in Firm Premium
                                                                                                                                                                                               q



                                    0.3
 Difference in Wages




                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q

                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.10
                                                                      q                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q

                                    0.2                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                                                                                              q
                                                                                                          Unconditional Mean Diff.                                                                                                 Unconditional Mean Diff.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                      q                                                                                0.05                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q       q                   q
                                    0.1                              Mean Diff. by Size Bin                     q
                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                q                                                               Mean Diff. by Size Bin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q

                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                            q




                                    0.0                                                                                                                                                0.00


                                            -2                                0                                 2                       4                                                     -2                 0                   2                 4
                                                                                Log Size                                                                                                                                  Log Size
                                                             (deviation from industry and location average)                                                                                            (deviation from industry and location average)

                                                     (c) Worker Quality Difference                                                                                                                 (d) Wage Difference Explained
                                     0.25                                                                                                                                              100
Difference in Mean Worker Quality




                                                 q




                                                                                                                                                         % Wage Difference Explained
                                     0.20                        q


                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                        80             Worker Quality (%)
                                                                          q                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                  q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q    q    q
                                     0.15                                         q                                                                                                           q                                      q

                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                        60                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q          q
                                                                                                  q           Unconditional Mean Diff.                                                                                                                        q

                                     0.10                                                                 q                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q   q        q


                                                                                                                    q                                                                   40                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q

                                                                                                                                                                                              q    q   q    q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q   q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                     0.05                                     Mean Diff. by Size Bin                        q
                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                    q           q

                                                                                                                                            q


                                                                                                                                                                                        20             Firm Premiums (%)
                                     0.00


                                    -0.05                                                                                                                                                0

                                                -2                                0                              2                      4                                                     -2                 0                   2                4
                                                                                    Log Size                                                                                                                              Log Size
                                                                 (deviation from industry and location average)                                                                                        (deviation from industry and location average)


Notes: This figure presents estimates of equation (6) from the BLM bias-correction procedure with k = 10
clusters during 2010-2015. The observable determinants of earnings are a cubic polynomial in worker's age
and indicators for CZ-year and industry-year, so firm premiums and worker quality do not reflect differences
due to location or industry selection.


procedure of BLM for 2010-2015 on the largest connected set of firms, with robustness checks
presented below.16 Figure 6(a) presents the total residual wage differential between foreign
and domestic firms. It plots the conditional mean within each log size residual bin (black
line), as well as the unconditional mean across the population of firms (blue line). We find
that the foreign residual wage differential is about 19 percent on average when controlling for
location-year, industry-year, and worker covariates, and the differential is declining in size,
so that large foreign and domestic firms are more similar in mean wages than small foreign
and domestic firms.
    Figure 6(b) presents the main estimates of firm premium differences across the firm size
distribution. The blue line indicates that the mean firm premium is 7.2 percent greater at

                                    16
     Equation (6) is typically estimated on short time intervals, as fixed effects are a worse approximation
to the wage structure over a longer period of time (see the discussion by Lamadon et al. 2019).

                                                                                                                                                    19
foreign than domestic firms, while the black line indicates that this difference for firms of the
same size is more than 12 percent at smaller firms and as low as 4 percent at larger firms.
To put these estimates in context, Lamadon et al. (2019) find that the standard deviation
of firm premiums in the national population is about 12 percent. By contrast, Appendix
Figure A.2 demonstrates that we would find a negative foreign firm premium if we did not
correct for limited mobility bias when estimating the wage model, indicating that limited
mobility bias is an empirically important consideration when measuring the direct effects of
foreign firms.
     Figure 6(c) presents the estimates of worker quality differences. We find that foreign
firms on average employ workers of 12.7 percent greater quality. The differences are more
pronounced among smaller firms than larger firms, though average worker quality is higher
at foreign than domestic firms throughout the distribution. Finally, Figure 6(d) quantifies
the relative contribution of firm premiums and worker quality composition in explaining the
total wage differential between foreign and domestic firms. While we find little variation
across the size distribution, with around 60 percent due to worker quality and 40 percent
due to firm premiums, firm premiums explain a greater share of the wage differential in
larger firms, in which the wage differential is smaller.

4.1.3   Robustness of the Main Estimation Strategy

    Our main estimate of the average foreign firm premium is robust to four specification
checks. First, the BLM bias correction procedure we used in estimating equation (6) requires
one to specify the number of clusters in which to group firms using the k -means algorithm
in the first stage of the estimation. Appendix Figure A.4 demonstrates that the results
are nearly identical when allowing for k = 20 clusters rather than k = 10. Second, we
find that the results are robust to controlling for a third-order polynomial in log firm size,
with a mean foreign firm premium estimate of 6.3 percent. Third, Appendix Figure A.5
demonstrates that the results are nearly the same when performing the estimation for the
2001-2006 sample rather than the 2010-2015 sample considered above. The fourth, discussed
in the next section, is to allow for firm-worker interactions in the BLM estimator. We
will show nearly identical average estimates when accounting for interactions, although the
interactions provide evidence of interesting heterogeneity across worker skill levels.


4.2     Heterogeneity in the Firm Premium
4.2.1   Heterogeneity by Country of Ownership

   Up to this point, we have grouped together all countries of ownership, but one may wonder
how firms from different ownership countries differ in their direct effects on workers and skill-

                                               20
intensities of employment. Using our estimates, we now document wage differentials, firm
premiums, and worker quality differences by country of foreign ownership. The results are
presented in Figure 7, where the x-axis is the total wage differential, the y-axis in subfigure
7a is the average firm premium differential, and the y-axis in subfigure 7b is the share of the
wage differential explained by the firm premium differential. It presents estimates for the
40 countries with the most firms represented in the 2010-2015 connected set, omitting the
6 large tax havens (e.g., Cayman Islands), as it is difficult to interpret direct effects of tax
shelter ownership on workers. Recall that the estimates are residualized on industry-year
and location-year fixed effects, so the differentials are not due to the concentration of certain
country's economic activity in specific industries or regions.
    We find substantial heterogeneity across countries. The Northern European countries of
Norway, Finland, Sweden, and Denmark, as well as Ireland, and New Zealand have large firm
premiums, above 11 percent for the average firm. Western and Southern European countries
such as Austria, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Switzerland, and the U.K. are joined by
Australia, Israel, and Japan with firm premiums above 7 percent (approximately the overall
average) but less than 11 percent. Countries with below average firm premiums, but still
above 3 percent, include Brazil, Canada, Hong Kong, India, South Africa, South Korea, and
Turkey. Small positive firm premiums are estimated for Colombia, Mexico, Russia, Taiwan,
and Venezuela, while a negative 4 percent premium is estimated for China. The share of the
wage differential explained by firm premiums is approximately the same across all countries
at almost 40 percent.
    There are many possible reasons for average firm premiums to vary by country. As the
cost of entry increases, we expect the average firm premium of firms that enter to increase
(see Helpman et al. 2004). This may explain why many of the countries in the Americas, such
as Mexico and Canada, have relatively low premiums. Egger, Jahn, and Kreickemeier (2018)
find a pattern of foreign firm wage premia that increase in distance to the headquarter country
in Germany. Another possibility is that firms anchor their wages to headquarter levels as
suggested by Hjort et al. (2019), which may explain the large firm wage premium estimated
for Norwegian firms in the U.S. Finally, it could be that countries with access to greater
technology have more productive, which could explain why firms from higher-GDP-per-capita
countries tend to also have higher firm premiums. Indeed, regressing the firm premium on log
distance from the U.S. and log GDP per capita yields a statistically insignificant coefficient
of 0.009 on log distance and a highly statistically significant coefficient of 0.031 on log GDP
per capita (R2 = 0.49), suggesting that GDP per capita is more important than distance in
explaining heterogeneity in the firm premium by country of ownership. Related, Bloom and
Van Reenen (2010) find that firms from high GDP per capita countries tend to have better
management practices.


                                               21
        Figure 7: Country-specific Wage Differentials and Firm Premiums

                                                                                                             (a) Firm Premiums



                                                                                                                                                                                                               SW                NZ
                                                          0.15                                                                                                                                                                                       q
         Firm Premium Differential



                                                                                                                                                                               AU                                                          NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                               BE           FI    q
                                                                                                                                                                                              SZ                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                     GM                                                qq                           IR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                   IS                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q    q                DN
                                                          0.10                                                                                      JA               FR                           q           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LU
                                                                                                                                                                                   qq

                                                                                                                                TU                               q
                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                               q              IT                 NL
                                                                                                                                                SF                                                                          AS
                                                                                                                                                                      BR            SP                        UK
                                                                                                                                IN              q
                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                              SK                                             qq
                                                          0.05                                                                              q       q

                                                                                             CO                            q        q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                      SN
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                            q               CA
                                                                               TW                                                                                AE
                                                                                                     q       VZ
                                                                                     q       q                                 HK
                                                          0.00
                                                                                                 MX               RS

                                                                           CH
                                                                      q

                                                         -0.05
                                                                                    0.0                                0.1                                            0.2                                           0.3                             0.4
                                                                                                                   Log Wage Differential
                                                                 (b) Share of Wage Differential Explained by Firm Premiums
              % Wage Differential due to Firm Premiums




                                                         100


                                                          80

                                                                          CH
                                                                  q
                                                          60                                         q
                                                                                                                                    TU
                                                                                          CO                                                                              GM                          AU                    BE
                                                                                                                                                        JA                                                                                FI
                                                                                                              SK                IN                                                       IT
                                                                                                                                                            q        FR                                        SZ           SW                          NO
                                                                                                                                                    SF                                                                                     NZ
                                                          40                                                           q

                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                   q          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                    q                                                     qq         q
                                                                                                         VZ                     q               q                    BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q       q                 q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                 q                 HK                                        q                      IS                                      DN                 IR
                                                                                                                                CA              q                                                 NL
                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                        q                                             SP
                                                          20                    MX                            RS                        AE                  SN                      UK                           LU

                                                                                                                                                                                                      AS

                                                           0

                                                                                0.0                                0.1                                               0.2                                         0.3                                0.4
                                                                                                                  Log Wage Differential

Notes: This figure presents estimates of equation (6) from the BLM bias-correction procedure with 10
clusters during 2010-2015. The observable determinants of earnings are a cubic polynomial in worker's age
and indicators for CZ-year and industry-year, so firm premiums and worker quality do not reflect differences
due to location or industry selection.




                                                                                                                                        22
4.2.2   Heterogeneity by Worker Skill Level

    We now consider relaxing the skill-neutrality assumption implicitly made earlier in equa-
tion (6). BLM suggest and provide a bias-correction procedure for the following wage model:

                              log wi,t = j (i,t) + j xi + i,t  +   i,t ,                      (7)

where j may be correlated with j and xi . This replaces the term log N (j )h(i) from the
wage setting model (4) with ij = j xi . It yields (6) as a special case when j = 1. If the
technology is skill-augmenting, with the strength of skill augmentation varying across firms as
in our model of foreign and domestic firms, then the equation (6) estimates of firm premiums
and worker quality may be biased by not accounting for the correlated unobservable j . In
Appendix Figure A.3, we provide estimates from equation (7) of firm premiums for a worker
of average quality as well as mean worker quality differences by foreign ownership when
accounting for skill-augmenting technology. We find nearly identical estimates to those from
equation (6), so it seems this equation provides a good approximation on average.
    Figure 8 presents the mean difference in firm premiums between foreign and domestic
firms for workers who have above average and below average quality using the estimated
parameters from equation (7), finding substantial differences. For a worker at the 10th
percentile of the skill distribution, the wage gain when moving from the average domestic
firm to the average foreign firm is less than 5 percent if the firms are small and about 0 percent
if the firms are large. By contrast, a worker at the 90th percentile of the skill distribution
experiences about a 20 percent wage gain when moving from the average domestic to the
average foreign firm if the firms are small and a 8 percent wage gain if the firms are large. We
conclude that there is little to no direct effect of foreign employment on low-skilled workers
but large positive effects on high-skilled workers. This evidence is consistent with our model,
when foreign firms have stronger skill-augmentation than domestic firms.


4.3     Mechanisms behind the Foreign Firm Premium
4.3.1   Belonging to a Multinational Production Network

   In Section 3, we model the foreign firm premium as being generated by higher average
productivity at foreign firms. This is rationalized through a standard selection mechanism:
productive firms disproportionately select into multinational activity (Helpman et al., 2004).
An implication is that domestic and foreign multinationals are expected to have similar firm
premiums, as both select into multinational activity based on high productivity.
   To investigate this hypothesis, we define a domestic firm as multinational if it pays a
non-zero foreign business tax. We then estimate the average firm premium separately for


                                               23
                                      Figure 8: Firm Premiums with Firm-Worker Interactions
 Difference in Firm Premium
                               0.25
                                       q

                               0.20               q

                                       q
                                            q         q
                                                          q
                                                  q
                                       q
                               0.15    q    q     q   q
                                                                 q
                                                          q
                                                                         q
                                       q    q     q   q                       q
                                                          q      q

                               0.10    q

                                       q
                                            q
                                            q
                                                  q

                                                  q
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                          q      q       q
                                                                              q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                                             q
                                                                 q       q                      q    q                q   q
                                                          q                        q       q
                                                                              q
                                       q    q     q   q                                                      q
                                                          q      q       q                      q    q                q   q
                                                                              q    q       q                 q
                                                                                                q                         q
                               0.05    q
                                            q
                                                  q
                                                      q

                                                      q
                                                          q      q
                                                                 q
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                          q
                                            q                                              q                 q
                                                          q                        q            q    q       q        q   q
                                                  q                      q    q            q    q    q
                                                                 q                 q       q                 q        q   q
                                            q         q                  q                      q    q                    q
                                                          q                   q    q       q                          q
                                                                                                             q
                               0.00                              q
                                                                         q    q    q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                                q    q
                                                                                                                      q   q




                              -0.05
                                       -2                 0                        2                         4
                                                                    Log Size
                                                 (deviation from industry and location average)

                                                Worker Quality       q
                                                                         10   q
                                                                                  30   q
                                                                                           50   q
                                                                                                    70   q
                                                                                                                 90
                                                Quantile             q
                                                                         20   q
                                                                                  40   q
                                                                                           60   q
                                                                                                    80


Notes: This figure presents estimates of the model in equation (7) from the BLM bias-correction procedure
with k = 10 clusters during 2010-2015 when allowing for firm-worker interactions. The observable determi-
nants of earnings are a cubic polynomial in worker's age and indicators for CZ-year and industry-year, so
firm premiums and worker quality do not reflect differences due to location or industry selection.


foreign multinationals, domestic multinationals, and domestic non-multinationals using the
method of Subsection 4.1. The results are displayed in Figure 9, showing the difference in
the firm premium relative to the domestic non-multinationals in the same size group. We
find that the mean firm premium for foreign and domestic multinationals of the same size is
nearly identical. Hence not foreignness, but the status as a multinational firm, appears to
be critical for the foreign multinational wage premium.
    We caution that this result does not imply that the country of ownership is unimportant.
We showed above that high GDP per capita countries of ownership have higher premiums.
This suggests that belonging to a high-productivity multinational production network confers
greater premiums on workers than belonging to a low-productivity network, even if the
average foreign and domestic multinational wage premia are the same.




                                                                         24
        Figure 9: Firm Premiums for Foreign and Domestic Multinationals



           Average Premium (vs Dom. non-MNE)
                                               0.20


                                                      q

                                               0.15

                                                      q



                                                             q   q
                                               0.10              q

                                                             q
                                                                       q
                                                                            q
                                                                       q    q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                          q                                           q
                                                                                  q       q
                                               0.05                                             q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                      q                         q
                                                                                                                                q              q
                                                                                                      q     q      q     q
                                                                                                                   q     q            q
                                                                                                            q




                                               0.00
                                                      -2                    0                         2                        4
                                                                                        Log Size
                                                                     (deviation from industry and location average)

                                                          Average Firm Premium:       q   Domestic Multinational   q   Foreign Multinational



Notes: This figure presents estimates of the model in equation (6) from the BLM bias-correction procedure
with k = 10 clusters during 2010-2015. We define a domestic firm as multinational if it pays a non-zero
foreign business tax. The estimates displayed are mean differences relative to the mean firm premium of
domestic non-multinationals.


4.3.2    Other Potential Mechanisms

    We now briefly discuss five alternative explanations for the existence of a foreign firm
premium. We do not find any as convincing as the productivity selection mechanism of
Helpman et al. (2004).
    First, it could be that workers at foreign firms simply work longer hours. While the tax
data does not include information about hourly wages, according to survey data by Bureau
of Labor Statistics (2019), foreign firms pay 20 percent more than domestic firms even for
workers in production occupations for which the reported wages should be primarily at the
hourly wage instead of the annual salary level.17 We therefore think it is unlikely that hours
worked are the main driver of the foreign firm wage premium.
    Second, foreign firms may be perceived as more risky employers, as existing research
has found (domestic) multinationals to be at greater risk of shutting down plants than non-
multinational firms of similar size (Bernard and Jensen 2007). However, plant shutdowns
account for only a small fraction of overall job separations. We find that the probability of

  17
     According to the Current Population Survey, 80 percent of workers in production occupations receive
hourly wages as opposed to a fixed annual salary. The instructions for the Occupational Employment Report
ask to report part-time worker wages on an hourly basis and for salaried workers, who do not work a standard
2080 hours per year (40 hours per week), to also report wages on an hourly basis.

                                                                                          25
staying at the same employer next year is actually higher for workers at foreign firms than for
workers at domestic firms. We also find a lower likelihood of separations due to mass layoffs
at foreign firms (the mass layoff sample is described in the next subsection). Therefore, the
risk of job separation appears to be lower at foreign firms.
    Third, it could be that foreign firms have lower amenities than domestic firms. We have
not been able to find systematic data on this claim. Plenty of anecdotes, however, suggest
that foreign firms tend to be attractive employers overall. Examining the 20 employers ranked
as having the "Top 20 Employee Benefits and Perks for 2017" in the U.S. by Glassdoor, we
see that 5 (25 percent) are foreign-owned.18
    Fourth, there may be a stigma associated with working at a foreign-owned firm, for
which higher wages compensate. While such a stigma may exist, our evidence presented in
subsection 4.2.1 shows that the wage premium is rising with GDP per capita of the owner
country, and we might expect stigma to be negatively associated with GDP per capita of
the owner country.
    Fifth, foreign firms may have worse information about the quality of the workers they hire
and over-pay them. While we do not have much evidence in favor or against this hypothesis,
we note that this would not affect our conclusion of a positive effect of foreign firms on their
workers.


4.4     Alternate Estimation Strategy: Difference-in-Differences for
        Movers between Firms
    As an alternate to the model in equation (6), we use a difference-in-difference design for
workers that move across firms. Here, we allow for asymmetric wage changes between workers
that move from domestic and foreign firms and those that move the other way. However,
as in the theory, domestic and foreign are the only firm types. By looking at within-worker
differences in wages, we remove the worker-specific time-invariant wage level. To implement
this design, we define the following indicator variables:
       Mi,t,DF : worker i moving from a domestic firm in t - 1 to a foreign firm in t;
       Mi,t,F D : worker i moving from a foreign firm in t - 1 to a domestic firm in t;
       Mi,t,DD : worker i moving from a domestic firm in t - 1 to a domestic firm in t; and,
       Mi,t,F F : worker i moving from a foreign firm in t - 1 to a foreign firm in t.




  18
    See https://www.glassdoor.com/blog/top-20-employee-benefits-perks-for-2017/ (accessed July 12,
2019).

                                                26
Equipped with these indicator variables summarizing the workers job transition status, we
estimate the following regression model:

  log wi,t+1 - log wi,t-2 = F F Mi,t,F F + F D Mi,t,F D + DF Mi,t,DF
                                            + µcz(i),t+1 + ind(i),t+1 + µ
                                                                        ~cz(i),t-2 + ~ind(i),t-2 +   i,t .   (8)

where we omit Mi,t,DD so that domestic to domestic moves serve as the control group. The
regression controls consist of the industry-year fixed effects (both for the industry in year
t + 1 and in year t - 2), commuting-zone-year fixed effects (both for the commuting zone in
year t + 1 and in year t - 2), and a polynomial in age (to remove age-related wage growth).
The sample consist only of workers that are in different firms in t + 1 and t - 2. We do not
measure the outcome during the intermediate years t - 1 and t because earnings may only
account for partial years employment while the worker is in the process of moving.
    The main results are visualized in Figure 10; see Appendix Table A2 for numerical values.
In the Baseline specification, we find that moving from any domestic to a foreign firm is
associated with about a 6 percent increase in wages (relative to wage growth for workers
who move between domestic firms), while a 4 percent decrease in wages is associated with
moving from a foreign to a domestic firm (either could be interpreted as an estimate of the
average foreign firm premium).19 Appendix Figure A.6 provides suggestive visual evidence
that the effects are not driven by trends that existed prior to the moves.
    We consider three sample restrictions. First, we restrict the sample of domestic firms to
only include non-multinationals. We find that the estimates become stronger at 8% when
moving to a foreign firm and 6% when moving from a foreign firm. Second, we further
restrict to workers that separate in a mass layoff event. To do so, we restrict the sample
to firms that had at least 10 workers in the first two years and 30% of those workers move
to a different firm in the latter two years.20 We find a 6% wage gain when moving from a
domestic to a foreign firm, and a 5% wage loss when moving in the reverse direction. Third,
we restrict the domestic firms to only include multinationals. We find a 0% wage gain when
moving from a domestic multinational to a foreign firm, and a 1% wage gain when moving
in the reverse direction. This is consistent with our finding above that there is little to no
difference in the average premiums of domestic and foreign multinationals.




  19
       Similar results for job movers are found by Martins and Esteves (2008) in Brazil.
  20
       We follow Yagan (2019) in using a 30% separation rate threshold when defining a mass layoff event.

                                                     27
    Figure 10: Difference-in-difference Estimates of the Average Foreign Firm Premium
      Difference-in-differences




                                   0.05



                                   0.00



                                  -0.05

                                            Baseline:           Check 1:               Check 2:           Check 3:
                                          Any Domestic     Non-MNE Domestic      Non-MNE Domestic       MNE Domestic
                                           to Foreign          to Foreign             to Foreign         to Foreign
                                                                                   in Mass Layoff
                                                                     Type of Mover

                                                    Direction of Move:        Reverse Move   Forward Move



Notes: This figure presents the main effects of interest in the difference-in-differences specification described
in the text. The sample consists of only workers who moved firms between t - 2 and t + 1, and the outcome
is measured as the within-worker change in log earnings from t - 2 to t + 1. Forward Move refers to a
move to a foreign firm, and Reverse Move refers to a move away from a foreign firm. Domestic to domestic
moves serve as the control group (note: the domestic firm type differs across the specifications). In the
Baseline specification, the sample includes foreign and all domestic firms. In Check 1, we restrict the sample
to domestic non-multinationals and foreign firms. In Check 2, we restrict the sample to domestic non-
multinationals and foreign firms, and also restrict to workers who separated from a firm as part of a mass
layoff. In Check 3, we restrict the sample to domestic and foreign multinationals. Standard errors are
clustered by commuting-zone-year (95% confidence intervals are displayed).


5                   Indirect Effects of Foreign Multinationals
    As discussed in theory section, in addition to directly affecting the wages of their workers,
foreign multinationals may also affect domestic firms indirectly. The theory suggests that
these effects can be positive or negative.


5.1                               Empirical Strategy to Estimate Indirect Effects
    In this section, we seek to measure the indirect effects of employment growth at foreign-
owned firms on outcomes at domestic firms. Using a similar functional form as in equation
(5), we consider the following regression equation:

                                                 log yj,t - log yj,t-1 = mcz(j ),t +  Kj,t +    j,t ,                  (9)


                                                                         28
where j is the firm; y is its outcome on a measure such as value added or wage bill; cz (j ) is its
commuting zone; mcz,t denotes the growth in the employment share by foreign-owned firms
in that commuting zone; and Kj,t is a vector of controls such as industry-year indicators, CZ
indicators, and a polynomial in t - 1 firm size. The parameter of interest is  , which is the
indirect effect.
    Identifying  is challenging for at least two reasons. First, there is a classic selection
issue with foreign-owned firm activity by commuting zone. Foreign-owned firms may choose
to hire in regions in which wages are already set to grow. For example, the foreign-owned
firm may be aware of new regional investments in production infrastructure or education and
increase hiring in this region to benefit from the infrastructure or workforce improvements.
Then, a naive regression of earnings growth on employment growth at foreign-owned firms
would overstate the impact of foreign-owned firm activity. Conversely, foreign-owned firms
may choose to hire in regions in which wages are already set to decline. For example, the
foreign-owned firm may be aware that wages or intermediate goods prices are set to decline
in this region, possibly because a large existing employer plans to layoff its workforce, so
the foreign-owned firm may increase activity to take advantage of falling prices. This case
is further confounded by the importance of local tax incentives, which are estimated to be
large in the U.S. and may be targeted especially towards attracting foreign-owned firms into
declining regions (see the discussion by Greenstone et al. 2010). Then, a naive regression of
earnings growth on employment growth at foreign-owned firms would understate the impact
of foreign-owned firm activity.
    Second, we may be mismeasuring growth in the employment share of foreign firms in
the commuting zone, mcz,t . As discussed in the data section, we expect there to be some
measurement error in the linkages between the parent and its subsidiaries and how these
change over time.
    In order to overcome these identification challenges, we adapt the identification strategy
common in the literature about the effects of immigration on non-immigrants in the same
region (Card, 2001). This literature uses the fact that immigrants cluster into regions in the
U.S. based on country of origin. To adapt this instrument to identify the effects of foreign-
owned firm activity on workers, we first notice that employment at foreign-owned firms tends
to be clustered by region and country of origin (see Sec 2.3). For example, German-owned
firms disproportionately employ workers in South Carolina in 2010 if they do so in 2005.
This is analogous to the clustering of immigrants into regions.
    We construct the instrument as the predicted change in employment at, for example,
German-owned firms in South Carolina between 2009 and 2010 using only information about
(i) the share of workers at German-owned firms in South Carolina in 2005 and (ii) the change
in aggregate employment by German-owned firms in any other region in the US between


                                                29
2009 and 2010. Since this instrument is not formed using information about the change in
employment by German-owned firms in South Carolina between 2009 and 2010, it does not
depend directly on changes in South Carolina's business climate between 2009 and 2010. In
particular, it does not depend directly on infrastructure investments, improved educational
opportunities, or changes in the generosity of tax incentives in South Carolina between 2009
and 2010, so it does not depend directly on the confounding factors discussed above.
   To formalize the approach, relative foreign-owned firm employment growth in the com-
muting zone, mcz,t , is defined by,

                                                 LF       F
                                                  cz,t - Lcz,t-1
                                   mcz,t                                                (10)
                                                LF         D
                                                 cz,t-1 + Lcz,t-1


where LF          D
        cz,t and Lcz,t are the number of employees at foreign- and domestic-owned firms in
commuting zone cz and year t, respectively. The parameter of interest is the effect of a
change in the regional share of employment at foreign-owned firms, Xcz,t , on the change in
an outcome, such as the earnings growth of a worker at a domestic firm in the region.
   In order to form the instrument, we use the tax data on the firm's country of foreign
                                  o
ownership to construct the share Scz,t of all employment in commuting zone cz at firms whose
owners are located in origin country o, defined by,

                                         o              LFo
                                                         cz,t
                                        Scz,t                                           (11)
                                                        cz   LFo
                                                              cz ,t


Analogous to Card (2001) and the subsequent immigration literature, we then construct the
instrumental variable Zcz,t as,
                                                   Fo       Fo       o
                                   o(     cz =cz Lcz ,t - Lcz ,t-1 )Scz,t-5
                         Zcz,t =                                                        (12)
                                             LF           D
                                               cz,t-5 + Lcz,t-5

    This is interpreted as the prediction of mcz,t , formed only from the share of employment
by firms from country o in cz dated at t - 5 and the change in aggregate employment by o in
the US from t - 1 to t. Note that we modify the approach from the immigration literature
slightly by leaving out own-commuting-zone employment when constructing the aggregate
change from t - 1 to t, which helps to rule out confounding factors. The denominator is
the total number of FTE workers in the commuting zone 5 years ago. Because Zcz,t is not
a function of cz -specific changes between t - 1 and t, it should satisfy that Zcz,t and the
unexplained component of wage growth are orthogonal (conditional on observed covariates
that explain wage growth). However, we see four major threats to identification, which we
discuss below.
    First, the instrument includes the past share of employment at foreign-owned firms from

                                                   30
various origin countries, as well as the contemporaneous change in the employment at such
firms in other regions. This raises the concern that there may be regional shocks that are
correlated with our instrument. For example, regions near the Canadian border may be
affected also by trade shocks originating in Canada that are correlated with the instrument.
To deal with this concern, we include Census Division-year fixed effects in the regressions,
which absorb all contemporaneous effects at the regional level.
    Second, recent work by Jaeger, Ruist, and Stuhler (2018) suggests that, in the context
of immigration, the past share of immigrants could have a direct effect on contemporaneous
outcomes if the adjustment to former immigrant waves is delayed. The analogous concern in
our setting is that adjustment to past investment by foreign-owned firms is ongoing. Since
our instrument leverages variation in the country of origin of foreign-owned firm investment
across commuting zones, we can include as a control variable the share of past employment at
foreign-owned firms (not separated by country of origin) in the commuting zone. We provide
robustness results to our main regressions when also including the share of employment
at foreign-owned firms in t - 5 as a control variable. We find that our main results are
quantitatively robust to adding this control.
    The third threat to identification is that industry shocks may be correlated with the
instrument. For example, German- or Japanese-owned firms may be more likely to be in
the car industry and select commuting zones that are also abundant with other car industry
firms. To deal with this concern, we also include fine industry-year fixed effects that absorb
any contemporaneous nation-wide growth trends by industry.
    The fourth threat to identification is that FDI from a specific country of origin may
lower transportation costs for U.S. exports to that country. For example, if Germany opens
a plant in South Carolina and invests in shipping lanes from Germany to South Carolina,
these shipping lanes could also be used by South Carolina domestic firms to increase ex-
ports to Germany. Fortunately, we observe multinational activity of domestic firms in our
data. When restricting the domestic sample to only non-multinationals, we find that the
estimates are unaffected, indicating that the effects are not due to transportation costs faced
by domestic exporters.
    Before proceeding to the results, note that by including CZ-fixed effects in our differenced
specification, we control for a CZ-specific linear time trend in the outcome variable. By
including a polynomial in size in the differenced specification, we allow for trends based on
number of employees at the firm.


5.2    Estimates of Indirect Effects on Local Labor Markets
   We next discuss our estimates of indirect effects. The instrument and endogenous variable
are constructed from information on both foreign and domestic firms, while the sample in

                                              31
the regression includes only continuing domestic firms. We focus on wage bill, value-added,
and employment effects at domestic firms, and the sample size may vary across outcomes.
(For example, value added can be negative, in which case log value added is not defined.)
All standard errors are clustered at the CZ-year level, which is also the level at which our
instrument varies. All observations in the firm-level regressions are weighted by the number
of FTE workers in t - 1.
    The full sample results are presented in the first column of Table 1. The first-stage
coefficient is 0.60 with F-statistic close to 300. This implies that the origin-country-specific
initial shares of foreign employment in the region interacted with contemporaneous growth
in aggregate employment by origin country provides a strong predictor of contemporaneous
relative FDI growth in the region.
    Using the instrument, we estimate that a 1 percentage point increase in the share of
employment at foreign firms in the region increases the value added, employment, and wage
bill at domestic firms by 0.64 percent, 0.45 percent, and 0.47 percent, respectively. These
estimates are statistically significant. Since the estimated value added increase exceeds the
employment increase, these findings are consistent with a productivity increase at domestic
firms. We note, however, that the difference in the estimated coefficients is statistically
insignificant. Appendix Table A3 compares these estimates to what we would obtain using
OLS, with and without our rich set of controls. We see that OLS is downward-biased,
though the downward bias is not as strong when including the controls. As we discussed
in the previous section, one reason for the IV estimate to be larger than the OLS estimate
is measurement error in Xcz,t ; another reason is the selection of foreign investment into
declining regions induced, for example, by tax incentives or declining prices.
    Next, we consider heterogeneity in the effects across firm types using the same empirical
specification but applied to various subsamples. Columns 2-4 of Table 1 explore heterogeneity
in the indirect estimates for three size groups, using the number of FTE workers measured at
time t - 1. Columns 5-6 consider heterogeneity in the effect on tradable versus nontradable
industries, using the classification of Mian and Sufi (2014). We then repeat the regression in
9 for each of these groups of firms. We find statistically significant indirect effects on value
added for firms in the 10-99 and 100+ FTE workers size groups and in the tradable sector.
The effects are much larger among large firms and firms in the tradable sector. We estimate
that a 1 percentage point increase in the share of employment at foreign firms in the region
increases value added by 1.7 at firms with at least 100 workers and 3.4 percent at firms in
the tradable sector. By contrast, the point estimate is small and insignificant for firms with
fewer than 10 workers and firms in the non-tradable sector. The patterns are similar for
FTE employment and wage bill.21

  21
       Iacovone, Javorcik, Keller, and Tybout (2015) find qualitatively similar differences of the effects of FDI

                                                        32
                      Table 1: Indirect Effect Estimates: Results by Firm Type

                                Full Sample               By Firm Size                           By Sector
                                              Size 1-9       Size 10-99   Size 100+   Tradables     Non-tradables


 Panel A.                                                 Outcome: Log Value Added
 2SLS Indirect Effect             0.64**       0.11           0.42***       1.66*       3.37*           0.31
                                   (0.27)      (0.08)          (0.15)       (0.99)      (1.98)          (0.19)
 First Stage Coefficient          0.60***     0.63***         0.59***      0.53***     0.56***          0.52***
                                   (0.03)      (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.04)           (0.04)
 First Stage F-statistic            299         431             292          147         169             197
 Firm Observations (Millions)      41.7         34.9            6.3          0.5         3.9              5.9


 Panel B.                                               Outcome: Log Full-time Workers
 2SLS Indirect Effect             0.45***      0.08           0.39***      1.23***     0.89**          0.54***
                                   (0.12)      (0.06)          (0.14)       (0.43)      (0.38)          (0.20)
 First Stage Coefficient          0.60***     0.63***         0.58***      0.53***     0.56***          0.52***
                                   (0.03)      (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.04)           (0.04)
 First Stage F-statistic            297         434             292          151         171             192
 Firm Observations (Millions)      45.9         38.3            7.0          0.5         4.2              6.2


 Panel C.                                                    Outcome: Log Wage Bill
 2SLS Indirect Effect             0.47***      0.03           0.37**       1.15***     0.89**          0.90***
                                   (0.14)      (0.09)          (0.16)       (0.42)      (0.41)          (0.28)
 First Stage Coefficient          0.60***     0.63***         0.58***      0.53***     0.56***          0.52***
                                   (0.03)      (0.03)          (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.04)           (0.04)
 First Stage F-statistic            297         434             292          151         171             192
 Firm Observations (Millions)      45.9         38.3            7.0          0.5         4.2              6.2


Notes: Controls are industry-year fixed effects, Census Divison-year fixed effects, CZ fixed effects, and a
polynomial in t - 1 log firm size. Recall that firm fixed effects are removed through the first-differenced
specification. Standard errors are clustered at the CZ-year level. Observations are weighted by lagged firm
size. The outcome sample only includes continuing domestic firms. The symbols *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.


    Next, we examine indirect effects on wages. To do so, we perform a worker-level regression
for continuing workers in the same domestic firm and commuting zone. We use a within-
worker differenced specification to remove both worker fixed effects and firm fixed effects.
The regression specification is the same as above, except for individuals instead of firms
as the observations, and a polynomial in age is included to control for heterogeneous age
profiles in wage growth. To investigate inequality in the wage effects, we split the sample


growth on domestic firms by firm size. They find negative effects from Walmart's entry into Mexico on small
Mexican suppliers of retailers and positive effects on large suppliers.

                                                        33
              Table 2: Indirect Effect Estimates: Results by Worker Wage Quintile

                                                                By Income Quintile Group
                                  Full Sample   Quintile 1   Quintile 2   Quintile 3   Quintile 4   Quintile 5


                                                 Outcome: Log Wage (continuing workers)
 2SLS Indirect Effect               0.061        -0.098       -0.044        0.017       0.194**     0.295***
                                    (0.065)      (0.076)      (0.064)       (0.068)      (0.083)      (0.094)
 First Stage Coefficient           0.582***      0.583***     0.582***     0.582***     0.580***     0.578***
                                    (0.036)       (0.036)      (0.036)      (0.036)      (0.036)      (0.036)
 First Stage F-statistic              263          263          263          263          263          264
 Worker Observations (Millions)      369.6         73.9         73.9         73.9         73.9         73.9


Notes: The sample includes only workers employed by the same domestic firm in the same CZ during t
and t - 1. Controls are industry-year fixed effects, Census Division-year fixed effects, CZ fixed effects, a
polynomial in t - 1 log firm size, and a polynomial in worker age. Recall that worker and firm fixed effects
are removed through the first-differenced specification. Standard errors are clustered at the CZ-year level.
The sample only includes continuing workers at domestic firms. We divide workers into five wage groups
within each CZ-year based on the ordering of their lagged wages. The symbols *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.


into equally sized quintile bins by ranking lagged wages within the commuting-zone-year.
     The results are presented in Table 2 for about 370 million worker-year observations. The
full sample estimate indicates a positive but statistically insignificant effect on the average
worker's wage growth. This is somewhat larger than suggested by the first column of Table
1, as the log wage bill effect minus the log number of employees effect yields the effect on
log mean wages, which is 0.02 in Table 1 for all workers and 0.07 in Table 2 for continuing
workers only. While the wage bill growth associated with FDI indirect effects is nearly
all through the margin of hiring more workers rather than paying greater wages per worker,
there is some evidence that continuing workers capture more wage growth than new workers.
     In columns 2-6 of Table 2, we examine wage growth effects for continuing workers at
different lagged wage quintile bins. For the lowest three quintile bins, we find statistically
insignificant estimates near zero. For the top two quintile bins, we find statistically significant
estimates of about 0.2 and 0.3. This indicates that a one percentage point increase in the
share of employment at foreign firms in the region results in 0.3 percent wage growth for high-
paid continuing workers at domestic firms in the region, while low-paid workers experience
little to no wage growth. This suggests that FDI indirect effects primarily benefit high-skilled
workers at domestic firms, as predicted by an extension to our model in which the technology
spillover is skill-biased (see Section 4).




                                                     34
5.3    Robustness of the Main Indirect Effect Estimates
    To validate our empirical specification, Table 3 demonstrates that the main estimates
are robust to five alternative empirical specifications motivated by identification issues dis-
cussed in the previous section. First, motivated by the possibility that fine nation-wide
industry shocks are correlated with regional growth due to the concentration of fine indus-
tries in regions, we show that the results are robust to replacing the 3-digit industry-year
fixed effects with 6-digit industry-year fixed effects. Second, motivated by the concern that
regions growing faster may also be regions that are more (or less) open to foreign invest-
ment, we control for the share of total foreign employment in the commuting zone at t - 5.
We find that the coefficient of interest is invariant to adding this control. Third, motivated
by possible contamination of FDI effects by the lowering of transportation costs faced by
domestic multinationals, we exclude domestic multinationals from the outcome sample, find-
ing that the estimates are materially unaffected. Fourth, motivated by the possibility that
growth shocks in nearby commuting zones are driving both foreign investment and wages
in a given commuting zone, we leave out foreign investment made within a 250 mile radius
of the commuting zone when constructing the instrument, which results in stronger indi-
rect effect estimates. Fifth, we exclude tax havens (e.g., Cayman Islands) from the sample
when constructing the instrument and FDI measures, as these firms could be thought of as
misclassified domestic-owned firms. The estimated indirect effects become stronger when
omitting tax havens.


5.4    Understanding the Mechanisms behind the Indirect Effects
    We conclude this section by discussing a number mechanisms that could explain the
positive indirect effects estimates. In our model in Section 3, positive indirect effects arise
from knowledge spillovers from foreign to domestic firms. We first note that knowledge
spillovers could come in the form of technology or improved management practices. Bloom,
Brynjolfsson, Foster, Jarmin, Patnaik, Saporta-Eksten, and Van Reenen (2019) find evidence
for local spillovers in management practices associated with large plant openings using the
"Million Dollar Plants" research design. In fact, most million dollar plants in their study
belong to multinational corporations. Outside the scope of our model, increased competitive
pressure may lead to higher efficiency at domestic firms (see Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen
2015). However, competitive pressure also would predict that these firms become smaller
in the short-run, contrary to our results. Yet another channel for positive indirect effects
on local domestic firms is an increase in consumer demand for non-tradables (see Moretti
2010). While we do find evidence for a sizable increase in the wage bill for this sector,
the effects tend to be similarly positive or even larger in the tradable sector--suggesting


                                              35
                           Table 3: Indirect Effects Estimates: Robustness Checks

                                Baseline    6-digit NAICS    Lagged FDI     Exclude Dom.     Exclude 250m     Exclude
                                             Fixed Effects   as a Control   Multinationals   Radius from Z   Tax Havens


 Panel A.                                                      Outcome: Log Value Added
 2SLS Indirect Effect           0.644**       0.712***         0.629**        0.579***          0.610**       0.670**
                                 (0.266)        (0.220)         (0.268)         (0.221)          (0.286)       (0.295)
 First Stage Coefficient        0.598***       0.596***        0.591***        0.612***         0.647***      0.574***
                                 (0.035)        (0.034)         (0.035)         (0.034)          (0.046)       (0.035)
 First Stage F-statistic          299            300               291           333              196           268
 Firm Observations (Millions)     41.7           41.7              41.7          40.4             41.7          41.7


 Panel B.                                                    Outcome: Log Full-time Workers
 2SLS Indirect Effect           0.446***      0.434***         0.441***       0.410***         0.449***       0.457***
                                  (0.125)       (0.120)          (0.125)        (0.120)          (0.134)        (0.138)
 First Stage Coefficient        0.598***       0.597***        0.592***        0.609***         0.648***      0.574***
                                 (0.035)        (0.035)         (0.035)         (0.034)          (0.046)       (0.035)
 First Stage F-statistic          297            298               289           325              195           264
 Firm Observations (Millions)     45.9           45.9              45.9          44.5             45.9          45.9


 Panel C.                                                        Outcome: Log Wage Bill
 2SLS Indirect Effect           0.466***      0.457***         0.453***       0.455***         0.477***       0.487***
                                  (0.138)       (0.137)          (0.138)        (0.140)          (0.151)        (0.152)
 First Stage Coefficient        0.598***       0.597***        0.592***        0.609***         0.648***      0.574***
                                 (0.035)        (0.035)         (0.035)         (0.034)          (0.046)       (0.035)
 First Stage F-statistic          297            298               289           325              195           264
 Firm Observations (Millions)     45.9           45.9              45.9          44.5             45.9          45.9



Notes: Unless otherwise specified in the column header, controls are 3-digit-industry-year fixed effects,
Census Divison-year fixed effects, CZ fixed effects, and a polynomial in t - 1 firm size. Recall that firm
fixed effects are removed through the first-differenced specification. Standard errors are clustered at the
CZ-year level. Observations are weighted by lagged firm size. The outcome sample only includes continuing
domestic firms. The symbols *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
respectively.


consumer demand cannot be the only channel behind the indirect effects. Another source
of a change in local product demand is through the firms' input-output network (see Aitken
and Harrison 1999 and Javorcik 2004). To explore this further, we next investigate whether
the local indirect effects are more strongly associated with growth in employment at foreign
multinationals in the same sector (i.e., horizontal) or upstream or downstream sectors.

5.4.1      Indirect Effects in the Input-Output Network

   We extend our framework to allow for distinct indirect effects of foreign employment
growth on horizontal, upstream, and downstream industries. To do so, we define employment




                                                              36
growth at foreign-owned firms in cz in industry  as,

                                                   LF        F
                                                    cz,,t - Lcz,,t-1
                                    mHorizontal
                                     cz,,t         F                                                    (13)
                                                  Lcz,,t-1 + LD
                                                              cz,,t-1


Using this term, we then define downstream employment growth at foreign-owned firms in
cz in industry  (assuming time-invariant IO coefficients):22

                                    mDownstream
                                     cz,,t      =            mHorizontal
                                                              cz,,t                                     (14)
                                                       =


where  is the fraction of output of industry  that is sold to industry  according to IO
tables. We use the BEA input-output table for 2002, and an industry corresponds to a
NAICS 3-digit sector. Analogously, we define upstream employment growth as,

                                     mUpstream
                                      cz,,t    =            mHorizontal
                                                             cz,,t                                      (15)
                                                     =


where  is the fraction of intermediate inputs of industry  that is coming from industry 
out of total sector  intermediate input purchases.
   Using these definitions, we specify the change in an outcome at domestic firm j in com-
muting zone cz as,

                                                                                  Upstream
                log yj,t - log yj,t-1 =h mHorizontal          Downstream
                                          cz (j ),(j ),t + d mcz (j ),(j ),t + u mcz (j ),(j ),t

                                         +  ind Kj,t +     ind
                                                           j,t ,                                        (16)

In order to instrument for the three endogenous variables in this equation, we require three
instruments. The instrumental variables are defined similarly to the main instrument, but
one is based on horizontal growth and t - 5 country-of-ownership-industry-commuting-zone
shares, another is based on downstream growth and lagged shares, and the last one is based
on upstream growth and the corresponding lagged shares. The equations for constructing
these instruments using the input/output weights  and  are analogous to those used
to construct the endogenous variables and are presented in Appendix C.
    Table 4 displays the results from this regression. We find clear evidence of employment
growth at foreign firms to positively affect domestic firms downstream. The effects of em-
ployment growth at foreign firms in the same sector (i.e., horizontal) are precisely measured
  22
     In the data, we find that a large share of foreign-owned firms are concentrated in NAICS sector 55,
"management of other companies," while very few domestic firms belong to this sector. Because sector 55
does not correspond to any particular product market, it is difficult to define its upstream or downstream
industries. To avoid losing much of the sample of foreign-owned firms in the input/output network regression,
we use the NAICS code of the largest subsidiary for these foreign-owned firms.

                                                      37
                                     Table 4: Input/Output IV Regression

                                                                 Outcome: Log Value Added
                                      Effect of FDI Growth on     Effect of FDI Growth on    Effect of FDI Growth on
                                     Horizontal Domestic Firms    Upstream Domestic Firms   Downstream Domestic Firms
   2SLS Indirect Effect                         0.133                       -0.574                     0.410
                                                (0.118)                     (0.417)                    (0.326)
   First Stage F-statistic (3 IVs)             108                          13                         21
   Firm Observations (Millions)                                             37.0


                                                            Outcome: Log Full-time Workers
                                      Effect of FDI Growth on     Effect of FDI Growth on    Effect of FDI Growth on
                                     Horizontal Domestic Firms    Upstream Domestic Firms   Downstream Domestic Firms
   2SLS Indirect Effect                         0.038                       0.235                     0.389**
                                                (0.063)                     (0.218)                    (0.172)
   First Stage F-statistic (3 IVs)             109                          13                         23
   Firm Observations (Millions)                                             40.0


                                                                  Outcome: Log Wage Bill
                                      Effect of FDI Growth on     Effect of FDI Growth on    Effect of FDI Growth on
                                     Horizontal Domestic Firms    Upstream Domestic Firms   Downstream Domestic Firms
   2SLS Indirect Effect                         0.061                       -0.060                    0.352*
                                                (0.076)                     (0.306)                    (0.205)
   First Stage F-statistic (3 IVs)             109                          13                         23
   Firm Observations (Millions)                                             40.0


Notes: This table displays estimates from the regression with three endogenous variables and three instru-
mental variables. The endogenous variables are growth in foreign employment in the commuting zone at
the same ("horizontal") industry, a weighted average of downstream industries, and a weighted average of
upstream industries. The instrumental variables are defined analogously and using the same weights. See
Appendix C for details on the estimating equations. Controls are industry-year fixed effects, Census Divison-
year fixed effects, CZ fixed effects, and a polynomial in t - 1 log firm size. Recall that firm fixed effects
are removed through the first-differenced specification. Standard errors are clustered at the CZ-year level.
Observations are weighted by lagged firm size. The outcome sample only includes continuing domestic firms.
The symbols *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.


to be nearly zero or slightly positive. We lack the statistical precision to draw inference on
the effects of local employment growth at foreign firms on the domestic firms upstream. The
substantial downstream effects point to a clear channel of how these indirect effects transmit
to domestic firms. While our analysis focuses on local indirect effects, Javorcik (2004) inves-
tigated spillovers at the national level in Lithuania and found primarily positive effects from
foreign investment on domestic firms upstream. Similarly, Alfaro-Urena et al. (2019b) find
positive productivity effects for domestic firms selling to multinational firms in Costa Rica.
One explanation why we find strong downstream effects and inconclusive effects upstream
could be that multinationals do not procure their inputs primarily within the same commut-
ing zone (see Flaaen 2014 for a description of the import behavior of foreign multinationals
in the U.S.). The pattern that supply-side shocks propagate downstream is consistent with
the network model by Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr (2016).

                                                             38
6        Local and Aggregate Implications
    In this section, we use our estimates from Sections 4 and 5 to take a look at the lo-
cal and aggregate implications of foreign multinationals. We emphasize that the numbers
calculated below are not meant to summarize the overall welfare effect of foreign multina-
tionals. We abstract, for example, from any worker-firm-specific preference heterogeneity in
the calculations below. The calculations below are based on aggregate outcomes in 2015.


6.1      Aggregate Wage Gain due to Foreign Firm Premiums
    We start by conducting the following thought experiment: Suppose one replaces all
foreign multinationals with domestic firms--each equipped with the average productivity of
domestic firms. How much would this lower the aggregate wages in the U.S.? We abstract
away from any indirect effects (e.g., local spillovers). This is because our indirect effect
estimates were obtained comparing commuting zones with smaller and larger changes in
employment at foreign firms. By comparing one commuting zone with another, we can
estimate the local indirect effects of foreign firms but not the national indirect effects, which
are differenced out. For simplicity, we abstract from worker heterogeneity in the foreign firm
premiums in the calculations below.
    In Section 4, we estimate an average foreign firm wage premium of 7 percent--after
removing the effect of worker-quality differences from the larger raw wage differences between
foreign and domestic firms. The theory suggests that this wage premium arises because of
larger productivity of foreign firms. Given an aggregate wage bill at foreign multinationals in
the U.S. in 2012 of 515 billion USD, this suggests an aggregate national wage premium due
to foreign multinationals in the ballpark of 36 billion USD annually.23 These figures suggest
large aggregate gains for workers in the U.S. due to foreign multinationals. We emphasize
that measuring the foreign firm wage premium stripped of worker-quality differences is a key
ingredient for calculating the overall wage premium in the U.S. due to foreign multinationals.
These calculations depend critically on our data contribution--combining for the first time
worker-firm-level panel data and foreign ownership information in the U.S.--enabling us for
the first time to measure the foreign firm wage premiums in the U.S.




    23
    We calculate the aggregate wage bill at foreign multinationals from the average wage of a full-time
employee at foreign-owned firms (Table A1) and the number of workers at foreign multinationals from the
BEA (6.8 million). While we use per-worker estimates from tax data, we use BEA aggregate estimates
because it is not possible to link all workers to firms in the tax data, as discussed in Section 2.

                                                  39
6.2     Local Effects of a New Foreign Plant
    Beyond the aggregate wage effects of foreign firms, policy makers are often confronted
with the question of the local economic benefit of a foreign firm. To be concrete, consider the
establishment or expansion of a foreign firm that would create 1,000 new jobs in a commuting
zone. Unlike in the previous subsection, we do not compare to a domestic firm expansion
of similar size. The reason is that here we are interested in the direct as well as the local
indirect effects, and our identification strategy delivers the indirect effects of foreign firms
but not of domestic firms. Hence, the thought experiment is having a new foreign plant with
1,000 jobs over not having a new plant. Below, we describe some of the expected direct and
indirect local effects. We focus on a commuting zone with an initial employment share at
domestic firms of 94 percent, which corresponds to the national average.

6.2.1    Increase in wages for incumbents

    We first focus on the wages for incumbent workers in a commuting zone. From the
employer-employee panel data, we calculate that on average close to 90 percent of new
workers at a foreign multinationals were working at a domestic-owned firm from the same
commuting zone in the previous period.24 Therefore, the calculations below assume that
around 900 of the 1,000 positions are occupied by incumbent workers in the commuting zone
previously working at a domestic firm. Based on these assumptions and our foreign firm
wage premium estimate, we calculate direct wage gains of 4.8 million USD for incumbent
workers at a commuting zone that find a job at the foreign firm.25 In addition, the local
effects for incumbent workers include the wage gain that arises indirectly at domestic firms.
Recall that we estimate a wage increase of 0.2 and 0.3 percent for workers in the 4th and 5th
wage quintile, respectively, due to a 1 percentage point increase of the share of employment
at foreign firms in Table 2. We assume the indirect wage effect is zero for workers below the
4th wage quintile group. Again leveraging the worker-firm linked data, we calculate that a
full-time worker, who is in the top quintile (2nd highest quintile) of the income distribution
in a commuting zone and employed at a domestic firm, has an average wage of 156,700 USD
(63,200 USD).
    Combining these figures suggests an indirect wage effect on incumbent workers at domes-
tic firms of 11.2 million USD.26 Therefore, in total we calculate a 16 million USD wage gain

  24
      Specifically, we calculate that among the 250,000 FTE workers that worked at a domestic firm in 2014
and became FTE workers at a foreign firm in 2015, 87.1 percent remained in the same commuting zone.
Arguably the fraction of locally hired workers may be lower for very large plant expansions.
   25
       Specifically, 900 workers × 75,700 USD per worker × 7 percent = 4.8 million USD.
   26
      Specifically, let  denote the comuting zone size. The top quintile earners at domestic firms, which
consist of 20 percent of 94 percent of  workers, experience a 0.3 × 1,000
                                                                          × 156,700 USD wage gain, resulting
in an indirect gain of 8.8 million USD for this group of workers. Similar calculations suggest a wage gain of

                                                     40
for incumbent workers in a typical commuting zone due to a 1,000 employee foreign-owned
plant. This suggests aggregate annual wage gains for incumbent workers at the commuting
zone of about 16,000 USD per created job at a foreign-owned firm--of which about two-thirds
is due to the indirect effects. Interestingly, at a "per-job-at-the-foreign-owned-firm" basis,
the results are independent of the magnitude of the increase in employment at foreign owned
firms and independent of commuting zone size. The effects get slightly larger with a smaller
fraction of initial employment at foreign-owned firms in the commuting zone. Furthermore,
we note that these statistics reflect annual figures. The net present value is naturally bigger
and depends on the discount rate that is applied to these annual figures.

6.2.2    Increase in local economic activity

    Beyond affecting the wages for incumbents, foreign multinationals also affect the overall
size of economic activity in a location. While the theory suggests that the indirect effects on
output at domestic owned firms can be positive or negative, the empirical analysis in Section
5 suggests the local indirect effects are positive on average. We calculate that 1,000 positions
at a foreign-owned plant on average raise the value added in the commuting zone by 289
million USD per year.27 Furthermore, employment increases by around 1,420 positions (i.e.,
an indirect effect of 420 more jobs at domestic firms), and the total wage bill increases by 93.4
million USD on average.28 Our estimates of the total local job multiplier of about 1.42 (0.42
indirect jobs for 1 job created) are comparable to the estimates from the urban economics
literature discussed by Bartik and Sotherland (2019), which often range from 1.5 to 2.5.
While we lack a directly comparable estimate from the literature on the indirect number
of jobs created by foreign multinationals, Moretti (2010) finds for each job in the tradable
sector, 1.6 jobs are created in the non-tradable sector, resulting in a total job multiplier of
2.6.




2.4 million USD for the second highest earning quintile of workers at domestic firms.
   27
      The value added per worker at a foreign MNE is 220,100 USD and 154,300 USD at a domestic firm
on average. In addition to a direct increase in value added in the commuting zone by 220 million USD,
the estimates in Table 1 suggest an indirect increase in value added by 92.8 million USD (calculated as
1,000
      × 0.64 × 0.94 ×  × 154,300 USD).
   28
      The estimates in Panel B of 1 suggest an indirect increase in employment of about 420 workers (calcu-
lated as 1,000
            × 0.45 × 0.94 ×  ). If the foreign employment share is zero, the predicted indirect increase rises
to 450 workers. The foreign plant would lead, on average, to a direct increase of wage the wage bill at foreign
owned firms of 75.7 million USD. Using the estimates in Panel C of 1, we compute an indirect increase in
the wage bill at domestic owned firms of 27.7 million USD (calculated as 1,000     × 0.47 × 0.94 ×  × 62,600
USD). The increase in the total wage bill is substantially larger than the increase in the wage premium for
incumbents calculated in Section 6.2.1 above, as it includes wages paid to individuals that were previously
working outside the commuting zone or were non-employed.

                                                      41
6.2.3        Comparison to local subsidies given per direct job for mega-deals

    While, as discussed above, our estimates do not shed light on the national indirect effects
of foreign firms, they shed light on the local indirect effects. These figures are still policy-
relevant, as local governments actively engage in subsidy competition to attract firms (see
Gaubert 2018 and Ossa 2015). Extending data collected by the policy group Good Jobs
First, Slattery (2018) analyzes 485 large subsidy deals given by state and local governments
in the U.S.. In these data, the average firm promises to create 1,700 direct jobs and receives
a subsidy worth 156 million USD. About a quarter of these large subsidy deals go to foreign
multinationals. The median subsidy per direct job given to a foreign parent is 109,000 USD.29
    The estimate of 16,000 USD annual wage benefits to incumbent workers in a commuting
zone above is a conservative estimate for the total benefits as it omits other non-wage ben-
efits to the commuting zone (e.g., increased tax revenues, increased variety of employment
options). At a discount rate of 0.15, the average wage benefits per direct job at a foreign
firm equal the typical subsidy payment. At a discount rate of 0.10, the net present value of
the average wage benefits exceeds the typical subsidy by 51,000 USD per job. Since foreign
multinationals are mobile in their location choices for large plant openings or expansions,
it is intuitive that in the bargaining with local authorities over mega-deals they typically
extract a large fraction of the overall local benefits via subsidy payments.


7         Conclusion
    In this paper we use employer-employee panel data from 1999 to 2017 to conduct a
comprehensive analysis of the effects of foreign multinationals in the U.S.. We find that these
firms pay a wage premium of about 7 percent on average, meaning the same worker earns 7
percent more at a foreign-owned firm. The wage premium is larger for higher quality workers
and absent for the lowest decile of worker quality. Our theory rationalizes these findings with
a (skill-biased) productivity advantage of foreign firms. Empirically, we document that this
foreign firm premium is correlated with GDP per capita of the origin country. Furthermore,
on average, the firm premium is about the same for domestic multinational firms, suggesting
that the multinational status itself is associated with higher wages for the same worker. One
explanation is that tangible and intangible foreign inputs raise the productivity of these
firms. We also find that the wage premium cannot simply be explained by the domestic
size of the firm. Quantitatively, the wage premium paid by foreign multinationals is quite
large in the aggregate--accounting for 34 billion USD annually in wages (which is about 0.6
percent of the entire private sector wage bill).

    29
         We are grateful to Cailin Slattery for providing these statistics.

                                                          42
   In terms of policy implications, our estimates highlight sizable benefits of trade and in-
vestment policies that make it attractive for foreign firms to invest in the U.S.. Furthermore,
our estimates imply incentives for local policy makers to compete for investments by foreign
multinationals, since in addition to direct wage benefits, we find positive and sizable local
indirect effects on domestic firms and their workers--in particular the higher earning ones.
We note that while it is rational for local policy makers to compete for foreign multinational
investments with subsidies, this does not imply that such subsidies are beneficial from a
national welfare perspective. Our calculations suggest that the subsidies given to foreign
multinationals for large plant investment or expansions account for a sizable fraction of the
net present value of the wage benefits for incumbent workers. In other words, foreign multi-
nationals are able to extract a sizable fraction of the surplus from such investments in the
bargaining with local governments over mega-deals.




                                              43
References
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999): "High Wage Workers and
 High Wage Firms," Econometrica, 67, 251­333.

Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, and W. Kerr (2016): "Networks and the Macroeconomy:
 An Empirical Exploration," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 30, 273­335.

Adao, R., M. Kolesa   ´ r, and E. Morales (2019): "Shift-share designs: Theory and
 inference," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 1949­2010.

Aitken, B., A. Harrison, and R. E. Lipsey (1996): "Wages and foreign ownership A
  comparative study of Mexico, Venezuela, and the United States," Journal of international
  Economics, 40, 345­371.

Aitken, B. J. and A. E. Harrison (1999): "Do domestic firms benefit from direct foreign
  investment? Evidence from Venezuela," American Economic Review, 605­618.

Alfaro, L. and M. X. Chen (2018): "Selection and Market Reallocation: Productivity
 Gains from Multinational Production," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
 10, 1­38.

Alfaro-Urena, A., I. Manelici, and J. P. Vasquez (2019a): "The Effects of Multi-
 nationals on Workers: Evidence from Costa Rica," .

------ (2019b): "The Productivity Effects of Joining Multinational Supply Chains: Evi-
  dence from Firm-to-Firm Linkages," Tech. rep., Working Paper.

Allcott, H. and D. Keniston (2018): "Dutch disease or agglomeration? The local
 economic effects of natural resource booms in modern America," The Review of Economic
 Studies, 85, 695­731.

Andrews, M. J., L. Gill, T. Schank, and R. Upward (2008): "High Wage Workers
 and Low Wage Firms: Negative Assortative Matching or Limited Mobility Bias?" Journal
 of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (Statistics in Society), 171, 673­697.

Atkin, D., B. Faber, and M. Gonzalez-Navarro (2018): "Retail Globalization and
 Household Welfare: Evidence from Mexico," Journal of Political Economy, 126, 1­73.

Balsvik, R. (2011): "Is labor mobility a channel for spillovers from multinationals? Evi-
 dence from Norwegian manufacturing," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93, 285­
 297.


                                           44
Bartik, T. J. (1991): Who benefits from state and local economic development policies?,
 WE Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Bartik, T. J. and N. Sotherland (2019): "Local Job Multipliers in the United States:
 Variation with Local Characteristics and with High-Tech Shocks," .

BEA (2017): "Sarah Stutzman, Activities of US Affiliates of Foreign Multinational Enter-
 prises in 2015," Survey of Current Business, 1­11.

Berger, D. W., K. F. Herkenhoff, and S. Mongey (2019): "Labor Market Power,"
 Working Paper 25719, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bernard, A. B. and J. B. Jensen (2007): "Firm Structure, Multinationals, and Manu-
 facturing Plant Deaths," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89, 193­204.

Blonigen, B. A. and M. J. Slaughter (2001): "Foreign-affiliate activity and US skill
 upgrading," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 83, 362­376.

Bloom, N., E. Brynjolfsson, L. Foster, R. Jarmin, M. Patnaik, I. Saporta-
 Eksten, and J. Van Reenen (2019): "What Drives Differences in Management Prac-
 tices?" American Economic Review, 109, 1648­83.

Bloom, N., M. Draca, and J. Van Reenen (2015): "Trade Induced Technical Change?
 The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT and Productivity," The Review of
 Economic Studies, 83, 87­117.

Bloom, N., M. Schankerman, and J. Van Reenen (2013): "Identifying technology
 spillovers and product market rivalry," Econometrica, 81, 1347­1393.

Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen (2010): "Why do management practices differ across
 firms and countries?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24, 203­24.

Boehm, C. E., A. Flaaen, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2019): "Input Linkages and the
 Transmission of Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake," The
 Review of Economics and Statistics, 101, 60­75.

Bonhomme, S., T. Lamadon, and E. Manresa (2019): "A Distributional Framework
 for Matched Employer Employee Data," Econometrica, 87, 699­739.

Borusyak, K., P. Hull, and X. Jaravel (2018): "Quasi-Experimental Shift-Share
 Research Designs," Working Paper 24997, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                          45
Branstetter, L. G. (2001): "Are knowledge spillovers international or intranational in
 scope?: Microeconometric evidence from the US and Japan," Journal of International
 Economics, 53, 53­79.

Burchardi, K. B., T. Chaney, and T. A. Hassan (2019): "Migrants, ancestors, and
 foreign investments," The Review of Economic Studies, 86, 1448­1486.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2019): "Foreign Direct Investment Database," Data re-
 trieved from https://www.bls.gov/fdi/tables/home.htm.

Busso, M., J. Gregory, and P. Kline (2013): "Assessing the incidence and efficiency
 of a prominent place based policy," American Economic Review, 103, 897­947.

Campante, F. and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2017): "Long-Range Growth: Economic
 Development in the Global Network of Air Links*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 qjx050.

Card, D. (2001): "Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Im-
 pacts of Higher Immigration," Journal of Labor Economics, 19, 22­64.

Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, J. Heining, and P. Kline (2018): "Firms and Labor Market
 Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory," Journal of Labor Economics, 36, S13­S70.

Combes, P.-P., G. Duranton, L. Gobillon, D. Puga, and S. Roux (2012): "The
 productivity advantages of large cities: Distinguishing agglomeration from firm selection,"
 Econometrica, 80, 2543­2594.

Doms, M. E. and J. . B. Jensen (1998): "Comparing Wages, Skills, and Productivity
 between Domestically and Foreign-Owned Manufacturing Establishments in the United
 States," in Geography and Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting, National Bureau
 of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Chapters, 235­258.

Driffield, N. and S. Girma (2003): "Regional foreign direct investment and wage
 spillovers: Plant level evidence from the UK electronics industry," Oxford Bulletin of
 Economics and Statistics, 65, 453­474.

Egger, H., E. J. Jahn, and U. Kreickemeier (2018): "Distance and the Multinational
 Wage Premium," CESifo Working Paper.

Feliciano, Z. and R. E. Lipsey (1999): "Foreign ownership and wages in the United
 States, 1987-1992," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                            46
Figlio, D. N. and B. A. Blonigen (2000): "The Effects of Foreign Direct Investment
  on Local Communities," Journal of Urban Economics, 48, 338 ­ 363.

Flaaen, A. (2014): "Multinational firms in context," Tech. rep., Working paper, University
  of Michigan.

Gaubert, C. (2018): "Firm sorting and agglomeration," American Economic Review, 108,
 3117­53.

Giroud, X. (2013): "Proximity and Investment: Evidence from Plant-Level Data *," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 861­915.

Glaeser, E. L. and J. D. Gottlieb (2009): "The wealth of cities: Agglomeration
 economies and spatial equilibrium in the United States," Journal of Economic Literature,
 47, 983­1028.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., I. Sorkin, and H. Swift (forthcoming): "Bartik Instru-
 ments: What, When, Why, and How," American Economic Review.

Gorg, H. (2004): "Much Ado about Nothing? Do Domestic Firms Really Benefit from
 Foreign Direct Investment?" World Bank Research Observer, 19, 171­198.

Greenstone, M., R. Hornbeck, and E. Moretti (2010): "Identifying Agglomera-
 tion Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings," Journal of
 Political Economy, 118, 536­598.

Haskel, J. E., S. C. Pereira, and M. J. Slaughter (2007): "Does inward foreign
 direct investment boost the productivity of domestic firms?" The Review of Economics
 and Statistics, 89, 482­496.

Head, K., J. Ries, and D. Swenson (1995): "Agglomeration benefits and location
 choice: Evidence from Japanese manufacturing investments in the United States," Journal
 of International Economics, 38, 223 ­ 247.

Helm, I. (2019): "National Industry Trade Shocks, Local Labour Markets, and Agglomer-
 ation Spillovers," The Review of Economic Studies, rdz056.

Helpman, E., M. J. Melitz, and S. R. Yeaple (2004): "Export Versus FDI with
 Heterogeneous Firms," American Economic Review, 94, 300­316.

Heyman, F., F. Sjo ¨ holm, and P. G. Tingvall (2007): "Is there really a foreign own-
 ership wage premium? Evidence from matched employer­employee data," Journal of
 International Economics, 73, 355­376.

                                           47
Hijzen, A., P. S. Martins, T. Schank, and R. Upward (2013): "Foreign-owned firms
  around the world: A comparative analysis of wages and employment at the micro-level,"
  European Economic Review, 60, 170­188.

Hjort, J., X. Li, and H. Sarsons (2019): "Across-Country Wage Compression in Multi-
 nationals," mimeo, Columbia University.

Iacovone, L., B. Javorcik, W. Keller, and J. Tybout (2015): "Supplier responses
  to Walmart's invasion in Mexico," Journal of International Economics, 95, 1­15.

Jaeger, D. A., J. Ruist, and J. Stuhler (2018): "Shift-Share Instruments and the
  Impact of Immigration," Working Paper 24285, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Javorcik, B. S. (2004): "Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Do-
  mestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages," American Economic
  Review, 94, 605­627.

Jiang, K., W. Keller, L. D. Qiu, and W. Ridley (2018): "International Joint Ven-
  tures and Internal vs. External Technology Transfer: Evidence from China," Working
  Paper 24455, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kee, H. L. (2015): "Local intermediate inputs and the shared supplier spillovers of foreign
 direct investment," Journal of Development Economics, 112, 56 ­ 71.

Keller, W. and S. R. Yeaple (2009): "Multinational Enterprises, International Trade,
 and Productivity Growth: Firm-Level Evidence from the United States," The Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 91, 821­831.

------ (2013): "The Gravity of Knowledge," American Economic Review, 103, 1414­44.

Kline, P. and E. Moretti (2013): "Local economic development, agglomeration
 economies, and the big push: 100 years of evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority,"
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 275­331.

Kline, P., N. Petkova, H. Williams, and O. Zidar (2019): "Who profits from
 patents? Rent-sharing at Innovative Firms," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134,
 1343­1404.

Kline, P., R. Saggio, and M. Sølvsten (2018): "Leave-out estimation of variance
 components," Working paper.




                                            48
Lamadon, T., M. Mogstad, and B. Setzler (2019): "Imperfect Competition, Compen-
 sating Differentials and Rent Sharing in the U.S. Labor Market," Working Paper w25954,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lu, Y., Z. Tao, and L. Zhu (2017): "Identifying FDI spillovers," Journal of International
 Economics, 107, 75 ­ 90.

Martins, P. S. and L. A. Esteves (2008): "Foreign ownership, employment and wages
 in Brazil: Evidence from acquisitions, divestments and job movers," .

Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2014): "What explains the 2007­2009 drop in employment?"
 Econometrica, 82, 2197­2223.

Moran, T. H. and L. Oldenski (2013): Foreign Direct Investment in the United States:
 Benefits, Suspicions, and risks with special attention to FDI from China, vol. 100, Peterson
 Institute for International Economics.

Moretti, E. (2010): "Local multipliers," The American Economic Review, 100, 373­377.

OECD (2019): OECD International Direct Investment Statistics 2018.

Ossa, R. (2015): "A quantitative analysis of subsidy competition in the US," Tech. rep.,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Poole, J. P. (2012): "Knowledge Transfers from Multinational to Domestic Firms: Evi-
 dence from Worker Mobility," Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 120207095627009.

Saha, D., K. Firkri, and N. Marchio (2014): "FDI in US metro areas: the geography of
  jobs in foreign-owned establishments," Tech. rep., Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

Slattery, C. (2018): "Bidding for Firms: Subsidy Competition in the US," Available at
  SSRN 3250356.

Slattery, C. R. and O. M. Zidar (2020): "Evaluating State and Local Business Tax
  Incentives," Working Paper 26603, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Smith, M., D. Yagan, O. Zidar, and E. Zwick (2019): "Capitalists in the Twenty-first
 Century," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 1675­1745.

Song, J., D. J. Price, F. Guvenen, N. Bloom, and T. von Wachter (2018):
  "Firming Up Inequality," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 1­50.




                                             49
Suarez Serrato, J. C. and O. Zidar (2016): "Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax
  Cuts? A Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms," American Economic
  Review, 106, 2582­2624.

Weber, E., M. M. Kim, and L. Mason (2011): "Domestic employment in US-based
 multinational companies," Monthly Labor Review, 3.

Yagan, D. (2019): "Employment hysteresis from the great recession," Journal of Political
 Economy, 127, 2505­2558.

Yeaple, S. R. (2009): "Firm heterogeneity and the structure of U.S. multinational activ-
 ity," Journal of International Economics, 78, 206 ­ 215.




                                          50
A                             Additional Figures and Tables

                                             Table A1: Descriptive Statistics for the Main Sample of Firms, 2015

                                                                                                                                                                                               Domestic                   Foreign
                                         Firms in Main Sample of Firms (thousands)                                                                                                                 2,781.1                     30.3
                                         Firm-Location Pairs in Main Sample of Firms (thousands)                                                                                                   4,762.9                    218.7
                                         Number of Workers at Main Sample of Firms (millions):
                                           All Workers:                                                                                                                                              77.1                      5.2
                                           FTE Analysis Sample:                                                                                                                                      41.3                      3.6
                                         Mean Wage at Main Sample of Firms (thousands):
                                           All Workers:                                                                                                                                              41.4                     60.7
                                           FTE Analysis Sample:                                                                                                                                      62.6                     75.7
                                         Value Added per Worker at Main Sample of Firms (thousands):
                                            All Workers:                                                                                                                                             82.7                     153.1
                                            FTE Analysis Sample:                                                                                                                                     154.3                    220.1


Notes: This table displays descriptive statistics for domestic and foreign filers of forms 1120, 1120-S, and
1065, matched to subsidiaries and W-2 forms. The set of firms is the same across all rows, and already has
been restricted to satisfy the sample restrictions. The analysis sample restrictions on the workers are at
least FTE earnings ($15,000 per year), the firm is the worker's highest-paying W-2 in that year, the worker
is prime age (25-60 years old), and the ZIP code is non-missing and valid on the highest-paying W-2 form.


             Figure A.1: Time Trends and Control Variables in Value Added and Wages

                                       (a) Mean Log Value Added                                                                                                                       (b) Mean Log Wage
                        2.0                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                               Difference in Log Mean Wage




                                                                                               q
                                                                          q         Raw                                                                                                                                            Raw
                        1.5                                                     q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q     q     q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
Difference in Log VA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q   q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q   q
                                                                          q

                                                                                q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                           q   q
                                                                                                                                                             0.4                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Control for
                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                       q                                                                                             q

                        1.0                                      q
                                                                     q
                                                                                           q                q
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                              q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q    q             Industry-Year & Location-Year
                                   q                       q                                                                                                                      q                                 q     q    q
                                                      q                                                                                                                                                       q                      q
                                                                                                   q                                                                    q                                                                q
                              q          q    q   q                                                    q              q                                                                                                                      q    q
                                                                     q                                      q                                                                                                                                           q   q

                                   q
                                                      q
                                                           q
                                                                 q      Control for                               q                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q          q     q    q     q   q   q    q         q
                                                                                                                      q                                                                                       q                                         q

                        0.5
                              q
                                         q    q   q

                                                               Industry-Year & Location-Year                                                                 0.2              q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q

                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and Control for Size
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                        q                 q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                              q   q
                                                                                     q                                                                             q
                                                                          q                    q
                                                                                q          q                                                                            q
                                                                     q                             q   q                                                           q
                              q    q
                                         q    q   q
                                                      q    q     q
                                                                     and Control for Size                   q     q   q

                        0.0

                                                                                                                                                             0.0
                       -0.5
                                  2000                    2005                      2010                   2015                                                        2000                   2005                      2010                     2015
                                                                         Year                                                                                                                                Year



Notes: This figure displays the mean log value added and mean log wage differentials between foreign
and domestic firms over time for the IRS analysis sample. It presents raw data, residuals after removing
industry-year and location-year effects, and residuals when also controlling for a third-order polynomial in
firm size.




                                                                                                                          51
                                     Figure A.2: Estimates of Equation (6) without any Bias Correction

                                                      (a) Mean Firm Premium                                                                                                               (b) Mean Worker Quality
                              0.15                                                                                                                                         0.4




                                                                                                                                       Difference in Mean Worker Quality
Difference in Firm Premium




                              0.10                                                                                                                                         0.3            q

                                                                                                                                                                                 q    q

                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q

                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                              0.05                                                                                                                                                                         q

                                                                                                                                                                           0.2   Unconditional Mean Diff.       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q

                              0.00                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q     q
                                                                                                                      q
                                                                  q        q                                                                                                                                                                   q

                                                  q                                q   Unconditional Mean Diff.           q   q                                            0.1                       Mean Diff. by Size Bin                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q

                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                             q

                             -0.05                                                               q   q   q

                                                                      Mean Diff. by Size Bin
                                                                                                                                                                           0.0
                             -0.10
                                      -2                               0                             2                4                                                          -2                   0                  2                     4
                                                                         Log Size                                                                                                                                Log Size
                                                      (deviation from industry and location average)                                                                                          (deviation from industry and location average)



Notes: This figure presents estimates of equation (6) without the BLM bias-correction procedure during
2010-2015. The observable determinants of earnings are a cubic polynomial in worker's age and indicators
for CZ-year and industry-year, so firm premiums and worker quality do not reflect differences due to location
or industry selection.



Figure A.3: Estimates of equation (7) allowing for Firm-Worker Interactions in
BLM
                                                      (a) Mean Firm Premium                                                                                                               (b) Mean Worker Quality
                             0.15                                                                                                                                          0.3
                                                                                                                                       Difference in Mean Worker Quality
Difference in Firm Premium




                                      q


                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                      q


                             0.10                                                                                                                                          0.2            q
                                              q               q
                                                                       q                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                               q                                                                                                                      q
                                     Unconditional Mean Diff.
                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mean Diff. by Size Bin
                             0.05
                                                                                                 q

                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                           0.1   Unconditional Mean Diff.       q

                                                                                                     q                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                             q    q           q
                                                                                                                          q
                                                              Mean Diff. by Size Bin                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q         q              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q




                             0.00                                                                                                                                          0.0



                                     -2                                0                             2                4                                                          -2                   0                  2                     4
                                                                         Log Size                                                                                                                                Log Size
                                                      (deviation from industry and location average)                                                                                          (deviation from industry and location average)



Notes: This figure presents estimates of equation (7) from the BLM bias-correction procedure with 10 clusters
during 2010-2015 when allowing for firm-worker interactions. The observable determinants of earnings are a
cubic polynomial in worker's age and indicators for CZ-year and industry-year, so firm premiums and worker
quality do not reflect differences due to location or industry selection.




                                                                                                                                  52
                                    Figure A.4: Robustness of Equation (6) Estimates to 20 Cluster BLM

                                              (a) Mean Firm Premium                                                                                            (b) Mean Worker Quality
                             0.15                                                                                                               0.3
                                                                                                            Difference in Mean Worker Quality

                                     q
Difference in Firm Premium




                                                                                                                                                      q
                                              q

                             0.10                                                                                                               0.2            q

                                          q
                                                   q                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                           q

                                                           q                                                                                                                    q

                                    Unconditional Mean Diff.                                                                                          Unconditional Mean Diff. Mean Diff. by Size Bin
                                                                                                                                                                                    q

                             0.05                               q
                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                0.1                                      q
                                                                                          q
                                                                         q       q    q
                                                   Mean Diff. by Size Bin    q                 q
                                                                                                   q                                                                                          q

                                                                                                                                                                                                       q            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q        q               q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q




                             0.00                                                                                                               0.0



                                     -2                0                2                 4                                                           -2                   0                  2                     4
                                                                 Log Size                                                                                                             Log Size
                                              (deviation from industry and location average)                                                                       (deviation from industry and location average)



Notes: This figure presents estimates of equation (6) from the BLM bias-correction procedure with 20
clusters during 2010-2015. The observable determinants of earnings are a cubic polynomial in worker's age
and indicators for CZ-year and industry-year, so firm premiums and worker quality do not reflect differences
due to location or industry selection.




                                                                                                       53
Figure A.5: Foreign Ownership, Firm Premiums, and Worker Quality: 2001-
2006
                                                    (a) Total Wage Difference                                                                                                           (b) Worker Quality Difference
                                                                                                                                                                      0.3




                                                                                                                                  Difference in Mean Worker Quality
                             0.3
Difference in Wages




                                    q


                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                            q

                             0.2            q
                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                            q

                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                    Unconditional Mean Diff.                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q

                                                                                             q                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                                                            Unconditional Mean Diff.                        q   Mean Diff. by Size Bin
                             0.1                                                                 q

                                                                    Mean Diff. by Size Bin           q
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q



                             0.0                                                                                                                                      0.0



                                    -2                               0                           2               4                                                          -2                              0                         2                  4
                                                                       Log Size                                                                                                                                    Log Size
                                                    (deviation from industry and location average)                                                                                              (deviation from industry and location average)

                                                (c) Firm Premium Difference                                                                                                         (d) Wage Difference Explained
                             0.15                                                                                                                                     100
                                                                                                                                   % Wage Difference Explained
Difference in Firm Premium




                                                                                                                                                                       80                   Worker Quality (%)
                             0.10       q
                                                                                                                                                                                q       q       q       q       q       q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                          q
                                                        q
                                                                q                                                                                                      60                                                             q
                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                          q   q
                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                         q     q       q
                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                    Unconditional Mean Diff.                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q


                             0.05                                                            q   q                       q                                             40                                               q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q

                                                                                                             q                                                                  q       q               q       q
                                                                                                     q   q                                                                                      q

                                                                Mean Diff. by Size Bin                           q   q




                                                                                                                                                                       20                   Firm Premiums (%)
                             0.00

                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                     -2                               0                          2               4                                                          -2                              0                         2                  4
                                                                       Log Size                                                                                                                                Log Size
                                                    (deviation from industry and location average)                                                                                          (deviation from industry and location average)


Notes: This figure presents estimates of Equation (6) from the BLM bias-correction procedure with 10
clusters during 2010-2015. The observable determinants of earnings are a cubic polynomial in worker's age
and indicators for CZ-year and industry-year, so firm premiums and worker quality do not reflect differences
due to location or industry selection.




                                                                                                                             54
                              Figure A.6: Event Study for Movers to and from Foreign Firms
       (a) Full Sample: Raw Log Wage (not controlling for age, industry-year, or CZ-year)

                            0.2
                                                                                          Type of Move:
           Mean Log Wage

                                                                                      q


                                                                                          q
                                                                                              Non-MNE Domestic -> Non-MNE Domestic
                            0.1
                                                                                              (Omitted Category)
                                                                                 q
                                                                                              Foreign -> Foreign
                                   q
                                                                    q
                                                                                              Foreign -> Non-MNE Domestic
                            0.0                           q
                                                                                              Non-MNE Domestic -> Foreign
                                           q                                                  Non-MNE Domestic -> MNE Domestic
                                                                                              MNE Domestic -> Non-MNE Domestic
                           -0.1

                                   -3      -2             -1        0            1    2
                                               Event Time relative to Move

   (b) Mass Layoff Sample: Raw Log Wage (not controlling for age, industry-year, or CZ-year)

                            0.2
                                                                                          Type of Move:
           Mean Log Wage




                                                                                      q




                            0.1                                                           q
                                                                                              Non-MNE Domestic -> Non-MNE Domestic
                                                                                 q
                                                                                              (Omitted Category)
                                   q                                                          Foreign -> Foreign
                            0.0                                     q                         Foreign -> Non-MNE Domestic
                                           q
                                                          q                                   Non-MNE Domestic -> Foreign
                                                                                              Non-MNE Domestic -> MNE Domestic
                           -0.1
                                                                                              MNE Domestic -> Non-MNE Domestic


                                   -3      -2             -1        0            1    2
                                               Event Time relative to Move

       (c) Full Sample: Residual Log Wage (controlling for age, industry-year, or CZ-year)

                            0.05
                                                                                          Type of Move:
           Mean Log Wage




                            0.00       q
                                               q
                                                              q     q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                      q   q
                                                                                              Non-MNE Domestic -> Non-MNE Domestic
                                                                                              (Omitted Category)
                                                                                              Foreign -> Foreign
                           -0.05
                                                                                              Foreign -> Non-MNE Domestic
                                                                                              Non-MNE Domestic -> Foreign
                                                                                              Non-MNE Domestic -> MNE Domestic
                                                                                              MNE Domestic -> Non-MNE Domestic
                           -0.10


                                   -3      -2             -1        0            1    2
                                                   Event Time relative to Move

   (d) Mass Layoff Sample: Residual Log Wage (controlling for age, industry-year, or CZ-year)


                            0.05                                                          Type of Move:
           Mean Log Wage




                                                              q     q                     q
                                                                                              Non-MNE Domestic -> Non-MNE Domestic
                            0.00       q
                                               q                                 q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                              (Omitted Category)
                                                                                              Foreign -> Foreign
                           -0.05
                                                                                              Foreign -> Non-MNE Domestic
                                                                                              Non-MNE Domestic -> Foreign
                                                                                              Non-MNE Domestic -> MNE Domestic
                           -0.10                                                              MNE Domestic -> Non-MNE Domestic


                                   -3      -2             -1        0            1    2
                                                   Event Time relative to Move


Notes: This figure plots mean log wages for the sample of workers that move firms. Mean log wages are
normalized to be zero on average over event times -3 and -2. This figure considers two samples: Full Sample
(subfigures a and c), which indicates all workers satisfying the employment spell requirements, and Mass
Layoff Sample (subfigures b and d), indicating workers at firms which lost 30% or more of employees in a
given year. It provides two measures of the mean log wage: Raw Log Wage (subfigures a and b), indicating
the unadjusted log wage, and Residual Log Wage (subfigures c and d), indicating the log wage residuals from
a regression on an age polynomial, CZ-year fixed effects, and industry-year fixed effects.
                                                                                     55
    Table A2: Difference-in-difference Estimates of the Average Foreign Firm Premium


                                       Baseline          Check 1          Check 2              Check 3


   Type of Move:
     Domestic to Foreign               0.063***         0.078***          0.059***              -0.002
                                        (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.003)             (0.004)
                                     (N=291,002)       (N=242,207)      (N=126,178)          (N=48,795)
     Foreign to Domestic               -0.041***        -0.056***         -0.052***           0.014***
                                        (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.004)             (0.004)
                                     (N=210,862)       (N=172,896)       (N=46,729)          (N=37,966)
     Foreign to Foreign                0.017***         0.020***          0.042***             0.006*
                                        (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.004)             (0.003)
                                     (N=246,192)       (N=246,192)      (N=128,396)          (N=246,192)
     Domestic to Domestic                  0                0                 0                   0
     (Omitted Category)              (N=8,804,019)    (N=7,900,458)     (N=3,290,933)        (N=223,424)


   Specification Details:
    Domestic Firms Restriction            All         Exclude MNE      Exclude MNE       Only include MNE
    Type of Separation                    All              All          Mass Layoff             All


Notes: This figure presents the main effects of interest in the saturated difference-in-differences specification
described in the text. The sample consists of only workers who were employed for two straight years at one
firm followed by two straight years at a different firm. In the Baseline specification, the sample includes
foreign and all domestic firms. In Check 1, we restrict the sample to domestic non-multinationals and foreign
firms. In Check 2, we restrict the sample to domestic non-multinationals and foreign firms, and also restrict
to workers who separated from a firm as part of a mass layoff. In Check 3, we restrict the sample to domestic
multinationals and foreign firms. Standard errors are clustered by commuting-zone-year.




                                                       56
                   Table A3: Indirect Effect Estimates: OLS and IV Results

                                                               (1)        (2)             (3)


        Panel A.                                                 Outcome: Log Value Added
        Indirect Effect Estimate                             -1.21***    0.32**          0.64**
                                                               (0.22)    (0.13)          (0.27)
        Firm Observations (Millions)                           41.7       41.7            41.7
        Specification:
          Controls for CZ-Year, Industry-Year, and Size         
          Instrument for FDI Growth                                        


        Panel B.                                              Outcome: Log Full-time Workers
        Indirect Effect Estimate                              -0.07     0.17***         0.45***
                                                              (0.07)     (0.04)          (0.12)
        Firm Observations (Millions)                           45.9       45.9            45.9
        Specification:
          Controls for CZ-Year, Industry-Year, and Size         
          Instrument for FDI Growth                                        


        Panel C.                                             Outcome: Log Full-time Wage Bill
        Indirect Effect Estimate                             -0.60***   0.23***         0.47***
                                                               (0.14)    (0.05)          (0.14)
        Firm Observations (Millions)                           45.9       45.9            45.9
        Specification:
          Controls for CZ-Year, Industry-Year, and Size         
          Instrument for FDI Growth                                        


Notes: Controls are 3-digit-industry-year fixed effects, Census Divison-year fixed effects, CZ fixed effects,
and a polynomial in t - 1 firm size. In the continuing workers sample, a polynomial in age is also included
as a control. Recall that firm fixed effects are removed through the first-differenced specification. Standard
errors are clustered at the CZ-year level. Observations are weighted by lagged firm size. The outcome sample
only includes continuing domestic firms.




                                                     57
B     Model Appendix
  In this Appendix section we provide more details on the model and prove several claims
made in Section 3.

Wage setting

   Recall that all firms produce the same homogeneous good whose price is normalized to
one. Each firm solves the following problem:

                       
                                 ¯u
                                 L          
                                                  ¯s
                                                  L           +1
                                                                   ¯s
                                                                   L         ¯
                                                                          +1 Lu
                max j wju             + js wjs            - wjs       - wju
               wjs ,wju          Wu               Ws               Ws        Wu
    The F.O.C. to this problem imply the wage setting in equation (4).

Claim 1 If the initial employment share at foreign-owned firms is small and employment
is roughly constant during the counterfactual, the model suggests that the following equation
approximates the wage effect at domestic owned firms.

                                                              LF - LF
                          log(wDh ) - log(wDh )   (F - 1)
                                                              LD + LF

From equation (4), for h  {s, u},
                                
                          wDh =    D Dh
                                +1
                                          LF
                              =    1+           (F - 1) Dh
                                +1      LF + LD
                                                  wDh
Define wage change at domestic firms as w
                                        ^Dh =     wDh
                                                      .   Therefore,

                                                   L
                                     D   1+L +   F
                                                    (F - 1)
                                               F LD
                             w
                             ^Dh   =   =                    ,
                                     D   1 +  LFLF
                                                +LD
                                                    (F - 1)

and

             ^Dh ) = log(wDh ) - log(wDh )
         log(w
                                LF                         LF
                    = log 1 +         (F - 1) - log 1 +          (F - 1)
                              LF + LD                    LF + LD
                        LF                  LF
                              (F - 1) -          (F - 1)
                      LF + LD            LF + LD
                             L - LF
                      (F - 1) F       .
                             LF + LD

                                             58
The first approximation utilizes the assumption that the initial employment share at foreign
owned firms is small and the relation where log(1 + x)  x for small x. The second approxi-
mation utilizes the condition that employment is roughly constant during the counterfactual,
which implies LF + LD  LF + LD .

Claim 2 When there is a technology spillover (i.e.,  > 0), an increase in the number
of foreign firms improves domestic firms productivity. If there is no technology spillover,
domestic technology does not change.
                                      
                               dD  = 0 if  = 0
                              dMF  > 0 if  > 0

                                             dD
   When  = 0, from D = 1 +  LDLF
                               +LF
                                   (F - 1) , dM F
                                                  = 0.
   When  > 0, let

                                                          LF
                        F (D , MF )  1 + (F - 1)                - D .
                                                        LF + LD

                                                  dD        F
From Implicit Function Theorem, we know that      dMF
                                                        = - FM
                                                             
                                                              F
                                                                . First, we provide the elements
                                                                D
that are used to compute the numerator, FMF .

                                        LFLF
                                          +LD
                      FMF = (F - 1)
                                         MF
                                        LF
                                        MF
                                          (LF + LD ) - LF  (LM
                                                             F +LD )

                           = (F - 1)                            F

                                              (LF + LD )2
                                        LF        LD
                                           L - LF M
                                        MF D
                           = (F - 1)                F

                                          (LF + LD )2

Using equations (3) and (4),

                 MD (D )         ¯u +         MD (D Ds )            ¯s
     LD =                        L                                  L
          MF (F ) + MD (D ) + w0      MF (F F s ) + MD (D Ds ) + w0
                 MF (F )         ¯            MF (F F s )           ¯s
     LF =                        Lu +                               L
          MF (F ) + MD (D ) + w0      MF (F F s ) + MD (D Ds ) + w0
                                                     
                    w0           ¯                  w0              ¯
     L0 =                       Lu +                               Ls
          MF (F ) + MD (D ) + w0      MF (F F s ) + MD (D Ds ) + w0




                                             59
Therefore,

        LD    (F ) (D ) MD ¯      (F F s ) (D Ds ) MD ¯
           =-        2
                            L u -                       Ls < 0
        MF          Wu                     Ws2
                                                                
        LF   (F ) [(D ) MD + w0  ]¯     (F F s ) [(D Ds ) MD + w0 ]¯
           =           2
                                  L u +              2
                                                                   Ls > 0
        MF           Wu                            Ws

which implies
                                          FMF > 0.

   Next, we provide the elements that are used to compute the denominator, FD .

                                       LFLF
                                         +LD
                     FD = (F - 1)              -1
                                        D
                                      LF
                                      D
                                         (LF   + LD ) - LF  (LF +LD )
                                                                D
                         = (F - 1)                                      -1
                                         (LF + LD )2
                                   LF
                                   D D
                                      L - LF LD
                                                D

                         = (F - 1)                -1
                                    (LF + LD )2

where
                                              
                LD (D )-1 MD [MF (F ) + w0     ]¯
                   =               2
                                                Lu
                D                Wu
                                                       
                       (D Ds )-1 Ds MD [MF (F F s ) + w0 ]¯
                     +                    2
                                                          Ls > 0
                                         Ws
                LF     (F ) (D )-1 MD MF ¯
                   =-             2
                                            Lu
                D                Wu
                       (F F s ) (D Ds )-1 Ds MD MF ¯
                     -                             Ls < 0
                                     Ws2

Therefore,

                                      FD < 0
                                     dD      FM
                                         = - F > 0.
                                     dMF     F D

Claim 3 The wage of unskilled workers at domestic firms increases with the number of
foreign firms when there is a technology spillover. There is no effect on the wage at domestic




                                             60
firms if there is no technology spillover.
                                             
                                  dwDu       > 0 if    >0
                                  dMF        = 0 if    =0

                            
From here on, we let        +1
                                 to save on notation. Based on the results from Claim 2,
                                                      
                       dwDu   d(D )   dD              > 0 if  > 0
                            =       =
                       dMF     dMF    dMF             = 0 if  = 0

Claim 4 The wage of skilled workers at domestic firms increases with the number of foreign
firms when there is a technology spillover.
                                         
                                dwDs > 0 if  > 0
                                dMF = 0 if  = 0

Based on the results from Claim 2,
                                                        
                   dwDs   d(D Ds )      dD              > 0 if  > 0
                        =          = Ds
                   dMF      dMF         dMF             = 0 if  = 0

Claim 5 Employment of unskilled workers at a domestic firm decreases with the number of
foreign firms if there is no technology spillover. If there is technology spillover, the employ-
ment of unskilled workers at domestic firms may decrease or increase with the number of
foreign firms--depending on other parameters.
                                       
                                dlDu  0 or > 0 if  > 0
                                dMF < 0                 if  = 0




                                               61
From equation (3),

                       ¯u
                       L               (D )
               lDu =    
                       wDu =                         ¯
                                                     Lu
                       Wu    MD (D ) + MF (F ) + w0
                        -1 dD                     -1 dD
             dlDu      D dMF Wu ¯     (D ) [MD               
                                                 D dMF + (F ) ] ¯
                   =       2
                                 Lu -             2
                                                               Lu
             dMF        Wu                       Wu
                             Spillover effect                 Labor market competition effect
                                -1 dD
                          
                              D dMF [Wu         - (D ) MD ] - (D ) (F )
                                                           
                   =                                                                   ¯u
                                                                                       L
                                      Wu2
                          -1 dD
                                                     
                         D dMF [(F ) MF + w0 ] - (D ) (F )
                                                          
                   =                                                   ¯u
                                                                       L
                                                      Wu2

                                    ¯u
                          (D ) (F ) L                MF dD        
                                                                 w0       1
                   =            2
                                                           1+         
                                                                       -
                              Wu                     D dMF    MF (F )     

   dlDu                                                  F dD                            w
   dMF
         is positive (negative or zero) if and only if MD dMF
                                                                  1 + MF ( 0
                                                                             F)
                                                                                  -1
                                                                                     is positive
(negative or zero). In particular, when  = 0, there is no spillover of foreign technology into
                                    dlDu          F dD      d log D
domestic technology. Therefore, dM     F
                                         < 0 as MD dMF
                                                          = d log MF
                                                                      = 0. Moreover, we show
dlDu
dMF
     > 0 by providing a numerical example, where we choose a set of parameters under
       dlDu                                                           dlDu
which dM  F
             > 0 holds. Given parameters specified in Table A4, dM       F
                                                                             > 0. By continuity,
                                 dlDu
there exists a ¯ > 0 such that dMF  0 for   (0,       ¯]. Note in addition that there exists a
                              dlDu
set of parameters such that dMF = 0, which is a result of continuity and the intermediate
value theorem.

                                      Table A4: Numerical Example

                       MF        MD     F       ¯u
                                                L     ¯s
                                                      L       w0    Ds     F s          

                       0.05       1     1.1      1     1      1.5   1.5    1.5    6    0.9



Claim 6 Employment of skilled workers at a domestic firm decreases with the number of
foreign firms if there is no technology spillover. If there is technology spillover, the employ-
ment of skilled workers at domestic firms may decrease or increase with the number of foreign
firms--depending on other parameters.
                                       
                                dlDs  0 or > 0 if  > 0
                                dMF < 0                 if  = 0




                                                       62
                ¯s
                L                 (D Ds )
               
        lDs = wDs   =                                ¯
                                                    Ls
               Ws     MD (D Ds ) + MF (F F s ) + w0
                       -1 dD                              -1 dD
       dlDs   (Ds )   D dMF Ws ¯    (Ds D ) [MD (Ds )                    
                                                         D dMF + (F s F ) ] ¯
            =                  Ls -                                        Ls
       dMF          Ws2                              Ws2
                    Spillover effect                     Labor market competition effect
                           -1 dD
               (Ds )      D dMF        [Ws - (Ds D ) MD ] - (Ds D ) (F s F )
                                                     
           =                                                                               ¯s
                                                                                           L
                                        Ws2
                      - 1 dD                 
               (Ds ) D dM    [(F s F ) MF + w0 ] - (Ds D ) (F s F )
           =               F                                                           ¯s
                                                                                       L
                                                Ws2
                                 ¯s
                (D Ds ) (F F s ) L            MF dD         
                                                           w0        1
           =             2
                                                    1+            
                                                                   -
                       Wu                     D dMF    MF (F F s )   

dlDs                                                  F dD                     w
dMF
     is positive (negative or zero) if and only if MD dMF
                                                             1 + MF (F  0
                                                                          F s )
                                                                                - 1
                                                                                    is positive
(negative or zero). In particular, when  = 0, there is no spillover of foreign technology into
                                    dlDs          F dD       d log D
domestic technology. Therefore, dM     F
                                         < 0 as MD dMF
                                                          = d log MF
                                                                     = 0. Moreover, we show
dlDs
dMF
     > 0 by providing a numerical example, where we choose a set of parameters under
        dlDs                                                         dlDs
which dM   F
             > 0 holds. Given parameters specified in Table A4, dM      F
                                                                           > 0. By continuity,
                                 dlDs
there exists a ¯ > 0 such that dMF  0 for   (0,       ¯]. Note in addition that there exists a
                              dlDs
set of parameters such that dM   F
                                    = 0, which is a result of continuity and the intermediate
value theorem.

Claim 7 Total labor demand at domestic firms decreases with the number of foreign firms
if there is no technology spillover. If there is technology spillover, the total labor demand
at domestic firms may decrease or increase with the number of foreign firms--depending on
other parameters.                     
                               dL      0 or > 0 if  > 0
                                        D
                                   dMF      < 0            if    =0


                                        LD = MD · (lDu + lDs )
                                       dLD          dlDu     dlDs
                                           = MD ·        +
                                       dMF          dMF     dMF
                                                     dLD
From Claims 5 and 6, it is sufficient to prove that dM F
                                                         < 0 when  = 0. Moreover, given
                                    dLD
parameters specified in Table A4, dMF > 0. By continuity, there exists a   ¯ > 0 such that
dLD
dMF
     0 for   (0,      ¯]. Note in addition that there exists a set of parameters such that
dLD
dMF
    = 0, which is a result of continuity and the intermediate value theorem.



                                                   63
Claim 8 Total wage bill at domestic firms decreases with the number of foreign firms if there
is no technology spillover. If there is technology spillover, the total wage bill at domestic firms
may decrease or increase with the number of foreign firms--depending on other parameters.
                                          
                               dW BD  0 or > 0 if  > 0
                                dMF       < 0             if  = 0



                 W BD = MD (wDu lDu + wDs lDs )
                dW BD       dwDu        dlDu         dwDs       dlDs
                      = MD        lDu +        wDu +      lDs +      wDs
                 dMF         dMF        dMF          dMF        dMF

From Claims 3, 4, 5, and 6, it is sufficient to prove that dW BD
                                                            dMF
                                                                 < 0 when  = 0. Moreover,
                                          dW BD
given parameters specified in Table A4, dMF > 0. By continuity, there exists a   ¯ > 0 such
that dW BD
      dMF
            0 for   (0,     ¯]. Note in addition that there exists a set of parameters such
     dW BD
that dMF = 0, which is a result of continuity and the intermediate value theorem.

Claim 9 Production at a domestic firm decreases with the number of foreign firms if there
is no technology spillover. If there is technology spillover, the production at a domestic firm
may decrease or increase with the number of foreign firms--depending on other parameters.
                                        
                                dqD      0 or > 0 if  > 0
                                dMF < 0                 if  = 0



                       qD = D (lDu + Ds lDs )
                     dqD    dD                       dlDu      dlDs
                          =      (lDu + Ds lDs ) + D      + Ds
                     dMF    dMF                      dMF       dMF
                                                        dqD
From Claims 2, 5, and 6, it is sufficient to prove that dM F
                                                             < 0 when  = 0. Moreover, given
                                      dqD
parameters specified in Table A4, dMF > 0. By continuity, there exists a    ¯ > 0 such that
dqD
dMF
     0 for   (0,      ¯]. Note in addition that there exists a set of parameters such that
dqD
dMF
    = 0, which is a result of continuity and the intermediate value theorem.

Claim 10 Total value added at domestic firms decreases with the number of foreign firms
if there is no technology spillover. If there is technology spillover, the production at domes-
tic firms may decrease or increase with the number of foreign firms--depending on other




                                                64
parameters.                               
                             dV AD         0 or > 0 if               >0
                              dMF         < 0       if               =0

As prices are normalized to one, we can write total value added at domestic firms as follows.

                                       V AD = MD qD · 1
                                     dV AD        dqD
                                            = MD
                                      dMF        dMF

Thus, the claim holds directly as a result of Claim 9.


C      Input/Output Equations
    Use firms' countries of ownership to construct

                                      o              LFo
                                                      cz,,t
                                     Scz,,t                                             (17)
                                                     cz   LFo
                                                           cz ,,t


    Construct IV for horizontal term:
                                                    Fo       Fo         o
                      Horizontal     o(    cz =cz Lcz ,,t - Lcz ,,t-1 )Scz,,t-5
                     Zcz,,t      =                                                      (18)
                                               LF           D
                                                 cz,,t-5 + Lcz,,t-5


    Construct IV for Downstream term:

                                Downstream               Horizontal
                               Zcz,,t      =          , Zcz,,t                          (19)
                                                =


    Construct IV for Upstream term:

                                 Upstream              Horizontal
                                Zcz,,t    =           Zcz,,t                            (20)
                                               =




                                                65
