                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE VALUE OF INTERMEDIATION IN THE STOCK MARKET

                                        Marco Di Maggio
                                          Mark L. Egan
                                       Francesco Franzoni

                                       Working Paper 26147
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26147


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




We thank Malcolm Baker, Vyacheslav Fos, Robin Greenwood, Boris Groysberg, Vincent van Kervel,
Brian Levine, Amit Seru, Daniel Strack, Vish Viswanathan and Mao Ye for their comments and the
seminar participants at the 2019 Boston Conference on Markets and Competition, Erasmus University,
the Finance UC International Conference at Catholic University of Chile, Harvard Business School,
Maastricht University, Norges Bank, University California Berkeley Haas School of Business, and
at the UNC-Duke Corporate Finance Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Marco Di Maggio, Mark L. Egan, and Francesco Franzoni. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Intermediation in the Stock Market
Marco Di Maggio, Mark L. Egan, and Francesco Franzoni
NBER Working Paper No. 26147
August 2019, Revised April 2020
JEL No. G14,G2,G23,G24,G28,L14

                                              ABSTRACT

Brokers play a critical role in intermediating institutional transactions in the stock market. Despite
the importance of brokers, we have limited information on what drives investors' choices among them.
We develop and estimate an empirical model of broker choice that allows us to quantitatively examine
each investor's responsiveness to execution costs, access to research, and order flow information. Studying
over 300 million institutional trades, we find that investor demand is relatively inelastic with respect
to trading commissions and that investors are willing to pay a premium for access to formal (top research
analysts) and informal (order-flow information) research. There is also substantial heterogeneity across
investors. Relative to other investors, hedge funds tend to be more price insensitive, place less value
on sell-side research, and place more value on order-flow information. Using trader-level data, we
find that investors are more likely to execute trades through intermediaries who are located physically
closer and are less likely to trade with those that have engaged in misconduct in the past. Lastly, we
use our empirical model to investigate soft-dollar arrangements and the unbundling of equity research
and execution services related to the MiFID II regulations. We find that the bundling of execution
and research potentially allows hedge funds and mutual funds to under-report management fees by
10%.


Marco Di Maggio                                      Francesco Franzoni
Harvard Business School                              Swiss Finance Institute
Baker Library 265                                    Via G. Buffi 13
Soldiers Field                                       6904, Lugano - Switzerland
Boston, MA 02163                                     and University of Lugano
and NBER                                             francesco.franzoni@usi.ch
mdimaggio@hbs.edu

Mark L. Egan
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 365
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
megan@hbs.edu
I       Introduction
Most institutional investors do not access equity markets directly. Rather, institutional investors
rely on "high-touch" (non-electronic) broker trading, where trading orders are often placed over
the phone. Even with the growth of algorithms, dark pools, and electronic trading platforms, insti-
tutional investors continue to execute the majority of their trades through "high-touch" brokers.1
Given the development of, in principle, cheaper trading alternatives, such as direct market access,
why do institutional investors continue to execute trades through brokers, and how exactly are
brokers creating value for investors? Brokers offer a variety of services to investors and potentially
create value by providing efficient execution, market research, and order flow information. Tradi-
tionally, brokers have bundled these services into one package, and investors have paid for these
services through one bundled-trading execution fee. The bundling of services makes it difficult
to disentangle how brokers create value for investors. Related transparency issues have attracted
the attention of the regulators and policymakers and have subsequently resulted in several recent
policy interventions, such as MiFID II, which aim to hold investment managers accountable to
best execution standards and offer greater transparency around the services offered by brokers to
investors.2
        Figure 1 displays the share of institutional equity trades executed through high-touch brokers
and the number of registered equity traders in the US over the period 2008-2017. Over the past
ten years, the share of equity trades executed through high-touch brokers has remained relatively
constant. The persistence of high-touch broker trades suggests that brokers continue to create value
for institutional investors, despite the perceived growth of alternative trading venues.3 Consistent
with this trend, the number of registered equity traders in the U.S. has remained relatively constant
since the financial crisis.
        Despite the role brokers play in the institutional markets, we still know little about how they
create value for institutional investors. Brokers provide investors with services ranging from trade
execution to research. The SEC mandates that investment managers should obtain Best Execution,
whose determinative factor is not just the lowest possible commission cost, but requires that "a
money manager should consider the full range and quality of a Broker's services in placing broker-
age including, among other things, the value of research provided as well as execution capability,
commission rate, financial responsibility, and responsiveness to the money manager."4 In this pa-
    1
      [https://www.greenwich.com/equities/voice-trading] accessed 5/9/2019
    2
      The Markets In Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID) II was rolled out on January 3, 2018. It applies to all
European asset managers, but it has repercussions on global brokerage firms selling services to European clients. Prior
to MiFID II, research costs were often `bundled' into opaque transaction fees borne by funds' clients. MiFID II unbundling
reform aimed to ensure that portfolio managers act in the best interests of their clients without undue influence by third
parties. Investment managers are now required to pay for research separately from execution services, and either charge
clients transparently or pay for research themselves.
    3
      Our analysis focuses on asset managers, such as mutual funds, hedge funds, and pension funds, that trade at rel-
atively low frequency. This in contrast to the recent work examining the growth and proliferation of high-frequency
trading and their impact on market structure (e.g. Ye, Yao, and Gai (2013), Budish, Cramton, and Shim (2015) and
Budish, Lee, and Shim (2019)).
    4
      https://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/34-23170.pdf



                                                            1
per, we examine how investors make their trading decisions in order to better understand the role
of brokers in equity markets and the value that they bring to investors. Specifically, the central
question is what are the key dimensions that investors trade off in making these decisions. For ex-
ample, why does an institutional investor decide to execute a particular trade with Goldman Sachs
rather than Morgan Stanley? Is it because Goldman Sachs is cheaper, provides better execution,
or because Goldman Sachs provides better services such as research or access to order-flow infor-
mation? Understanding the drivers of execution decisions provides insight into how brokers create
value for institutional investors and might be instrumental in guiding policy interventions.
   A key challenge in studying these issues is a lack of data, since understanding these issues
requires detailed information on brokerage firms and institutional trading patterns. Obtaining
this information is challenging due to investors' concerns about the confidentiality of their trades.
We overcome this challenge using a rich micro-data set covering hundreds of millions of equity
transactions with details on both the institutional investors and brokerage firms involved in the
transactions. Our primary data set comes from Abel Noser Solutions, formerly Ancerno Ltd. The
company performs transaction cost analysis for institutional investors and makes the data available
for academic research under the agreement of non-disclosure of institutional identity. Our sample
covers the period between 1999 and 2014 and includes trade-level data for institutional investors,
accounting for up to 20% of the institutional trading volume in the U.S. stock market (Puckett and
Yan (2011), Hu, Jo, Wang, and Xie (2018)). Importantly, we observe the identity of the investment
manager placing the trade and the broker executing the corresponding trade.
   We merge the Ancerno sample with rich brokerage firm-level data from several sources. To
measure each broker's capacities in a given market and time, we merge Ancerno data with sell-side
equity analyst data from Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S and Institutional Investor. We use the I/B/E/S
data to measure each brokerage firm's equity research coverage across various equity sectors over
time. We measure the quality of research using data from Institutional Investor; every year, Institu-
tional Investor publishes the "All-American Equity Research Team," which lists the top three equity
analysts in each sector.
   We supplement the Ancerno data with equity trader-level information from BrokerCheck. Bro-
kerCheck is a website operated by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), and the
website contains a wealth of details on the universe of individuals registered in the securities in-
dustry (See Egan, Matvos, and Seru (2019) for further details), including equity traders employed
by the brokerage firms in our data set. For each trader, we observe his/her complete employment
history, qualifications, and whether or not the trader has any disclosures on his/her record such
as a customer dispute or regulatory offense. In sum, our data set contains transaction-level data
accounting for a substantial fraction of institutional equity trading volume in the U.S. where we
also have detailed individual-level information.
   To understand how institutional investors make execution decisions, we develop an empirical
model of brokerage firm choice. We examine an investor's trading decision process with a particular
emphasis on where investors decide to execute their trades. We model an investor's execution


                                                   2
decision as a discrete choice problem. Investors choose the broker that maximizes their expected
trading profits, or put differently, the broker that minimizes their expected execution costs. When
deciding among brokers, investors trade off explicit trading costs (i.e. commissions/fees), implicit
trading costs (i.e. price impact), and the quality of other services provided by the broker such
as research and order flow information. In this sense, we estimate the intensive margin of the
investor-broker trading network. The model allows us to quantify the factors driving execution
decisions.
   We estimate our discrete choice framework following the workhorse models used in the indus-
trial organization literature (Berry (1994) and Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995)). Our setting
and data is ideal for such estimation for several reasons. First, we observe individual institutional
investors making tens of thousands of execution decisions. This rich data allows us to estimate
our discrete choice model at the investor-level, allowing us to flexibly estimate each individual in-
vestor's execution preferences without imposing any parametric assumptions over the distribution
of investor preferences. Second, a common problem in the demand estimation literature is the
endogeneity of prices, or in this case commission/broker fees. If brokerage firms are able to flexibly
adjust their fees in response to the actions and preferences of investors, fees will be endogenous.
We are able to address the endogeneity of fees through an instrumental variables approach that
exploits unique institutional features of the brokerage industry. Specifically, brokerage firms charge
fees in terms of cents per share traded, typically rounded to the nearest whole number. This rigid-
ity in the way fees are set provides exogenous variation in the effective transaction costs paid by
investors.
   We first examine the price sensitivity of investors. The average broker fee in our data is roughly
3 cents per share or roughly 13bps relative to the value of the transaction. Our broker choice
estimates suggest that the majority of institutional investors are relatively price insensitive. The
average demand elasticity in our data set is roughly 0.47. The estimates imply that if a broker
increases the fee it charges by 1%, its trading volumes will go down by an associated 0.47%. In
other words, the estimates suggest that investor-broker relationships are "sticky" and that there are
many other factors that influence broker choice.
   As pointed out by Anand, Irvine, Puckett, and Venkataraman (2012), an important factor driv-
ing institutional trading decisions is the quality of execution offered by a broker. Brokers may differ
in their ability to execute large trade orders without moving the market price of a stock. We mea-
sure these implicit trading costs at the trade-level as the price impact of the trade, i.e. the execution
price relative to the price of the stock at the placement of the investor's order. We find that a one
standard deviation decrease in price impact is worth 7bps, which is equal to roughly one-half of a
standard deviation in broker fees. This finding suggests that both explicit and implicit trading costs
play an important role in execution decisions.
   In addition to execution, brokers offer formal research to their clients, employing equity analysts
who provide forecasts, research reports, and general expertise in a given sector. We test whether
investors value this broker provided sell-side research when executing trades. Brokers have tra-


                                                   3
ditionally bundled these research services with their trade execution such that investors pay one
bundled broker fee for all of the services a broker offers. Our estimates indicate that investors
are willing to pay a 10-15% higher broker fee (1-2bps relative to the value of the transaction) to
have access to a research analyst and an additional 20-40% (3-5bps relative to the value of the
transaction) to have access to a top analyst in the sector (as per Institutional Investor).
       Brokers are also information hubs, because they are likely to have a more comprehensive view of
market trends and investors' strategies, and institutional investors likely value this information. We
measure order flow information in two ways. First, following Di Maggio, Franzoni, Kermani, and
Sommavilla (2019) we define a broker as being informed if he has traded with an informed investor.
We find that investors are willing to pay an additional 15-40% (2-6bps relative to the value of the
transaction) to execute a trade through a broker who has received privileged information about
informed order flow. Second, following Di Maggio, Franzoni, Kermani, and Sommavilla (2019) we
can capture the broker's access to information with its centrality in the network of relationships
between managers and brokers. Like these authors, we measure a broker's centrality within the
network based on its eigenvector centrality. Intuitively, a broker is more likely to be informed if
it trades with multiple institutional investors, who are themselves more central in the market. We
find that investors are willing to pay an additional 10-25% (1-3bps relative to the value of the
transaction) to execute a trade through a broker that is more centrally located within the broker
network by one standard deviation.
       The central role of information in equity markets has helped lead to the proliferation of alterna-
tive trading systems (ATS) and dark pools (see Zhu (2014)). These non-exchange trading venues
operated by brokerage firms help investors hide their order flow and provide access to alternative
sources of liquidity. Using data from the Securities and Exchange Commission, we track the devel-
opment of ATSs in our sample. As of 2000, essentially none of the brokerage firms in our sample
operated ATS; however, by 2014, roughly 50% of trades were executed through brokers who had
access to their own ATS and dark pools.5 Our demand estimates suggest that investors are willing
to pay an additional 15% (2bps higher relative to the value of the transaction) fee per trade in
order to trade through a brokerage firm that operates an ATS.
       A unique feature of our data set is that we not only observe the brokerage firm involved in
a transaction, but we also have data on the individual traders employed by the corresponding
brokerage firm. We find that investors are less likely to trade through a brokerage firm whose
equity traders are involved in more client disputes and regulatory offenses. Roughly 6.5% of the
traders in our sample have a past record of misconduct, which includes customer disputes resulting
in a settlement and regulatory offenses.6 Our results indicate that a one percentage point increase
in the number of traders engaging in misconduct (roughly one additional trader for the median
brokerage firm) is associated with a 2% decline in the brokerage firm's transaction volumes.7 The
   5
    As displayed in Figure 3.
   6
    Following Egan, Matvos, and Seru (2019) we define misconduct as any customer dispute that resulted in a settle-
ment, regulatory offenses, criminal offenses, and cases where the trader was fired for cause.
  7
    A one percentage point increase in misconduct corresponds -2.18 × (1 - s) percent decrease in the broker's transac-



                                                          4
results suggest that the malfeasance of one trader can have a big impact on a firm's reputation
and trading volumes. Investors also value those traders with more experience and are willing to
pay roughly an additional 10% (1bp relative to the value of the transaction) more per additional
year of trader experience. Lastly, we find evidence that investors prefer to trade through equity
traders located in the same city as the investor. Even though the equity orders are placed either
electronically or over the phone, physical proximity to the broker influences an investor's trading
decision. This is consistent with the idea that "trading is--and always has been--a relationship
business."8 Moreover, this finding extends the evidence of local bias in asset management (Coval
and Moskowitz (1999)) to the choice of trading intermediaries.
    This rich setting also allows us to explore how the execution decisions and preferences vary
across investors. In fact, we should not expect all institutional investors to weigh the different
dimensions equally. For example, while we find that the average investor values sell-side equity re-
search, we also find that roughly one-third of investors places no value on sell-side research. Hedge
funds, as opposed to mutual funds, are among those investors who place a lower value on sell-side
research. Conversely, hedge funds appear to place a premium on informed order flow. Similarly, we
find that, as expected, index funds do not choose their brokers based on research, which is also use-
ful in validating our empirical framework by making it less plausible for unobserved characteristics
of the brokers to be driving our results.
    Our estimates show that the ancillary services brokers provide create substantial value for in-
vestors. While brokerage firms have traditionally bundled their services, the industry has slowly
moved away from bundling over the last fifteen years. As part of recent changes in regulations
corresponding to MiFID II, European regulators mandate that brokers must unbundle their ser-
vices. The impetus behind unbundling and MiFID II is to limit the use of "soft-dollars" and improve
market transparency. With bundling, investors pay for research services with soft-dollars through
trading commission revenues, rather than paying for them directly (hard-dollars). The concern
with soft-dollar payments is that they are borne by the end-investor and are not disclosed by the
fund. Hence, paying for research with soft-dollars results in investment managers under-reporting
fund management fees; however, it is usually challenging to quantify this type of under-reporting.
One of the advantages of our paper is the possibility to exploit our framework to estimate the
value of the unobserved soft-dollars that brokers receive as payment for research. Specifically,
for each investment manager, we separately calculate the investment manager's shadow-value of
broker-produced sell-side research following the methodology used in Petrin (2002).910 Our esti-
tion volumes where s is the broker's current market share (Table 4). We calculate the marginal effect using the average
market share in our sample (s = 10%).
    8
      The quote is from Johnson, Vice President of Market Structure and Technology at Greenwich Associates.
[https://www.bloomberg.com/professional/blog/human-high-touch-trading-stay/] accessed 5/9/2019.
    9
      Soft-dollars broadly refers to two-related but distinct types different types of transactions: in-house and third-party.
The first and most common type involves in-house transactions. Specifically, the investment manager pays for research
and brokerage services obtained from a broker by directly compensating that broker with trading commissions. Second,
an investment manager could compensate a third party research provider by paying a particular brokerage firm with
trading commissions and having that brokerage firm direct a portion of those fees to the third party research provider.
   10
      In general, we study how MiFID II and unbundling impacts the use of soft-dollars, investment management fees,



                                                              5
mates suggest that if investment managers had to pay for research in terms of hard- rather than
soft-dollars, investment management fees would be up to 10% higher. There is also substantial
heterogeneity across managers; our estimates suggest that the use of soft-dollars potentially allows
some firms to under-report management fees by more than 20%.


I.A     Related Literature

The paper relates to different strands of the literature in finance and industrial organization. We
use standard tools from the industrial organization literature to understand how institutional in-
vestors trade and how brokers create value for investors. These same tools provide insight into the
structure of brokerage markets and allow us to quantitatively address counterfactuals related to
the unbundling of brokerage services.
      Methodologically, we develop and estimate a framework for understanding an investor's de-
mand for brokerage services using a standard demand model in the industrial organization liter-
ature (Berry (1994) and Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995)). This methodology has been used
in other financial applications such as demand for bank deposits (Dick (2008); Egan, Hortaçsu,
and Matvos (2017); Egan, Lewellen, and Sunderam (2017); Wang, Whited, Wu, and Xiao (2018);
and Xiao (2019)), bonds (Egan (2019)), annuities (Koijen and Yogo (2016)), and credit default
swaps (Du, Gadgil, Gordy, and Vega (2019)). An advantage in our setting is that we observe each
investor making thousands of trades, which allows us to estimate demand for brokerage services
at the individual investor-level. Furthermore, due to institutional features of the market, prices are
set in a quasi-exogenous manner in terms of cents per share traded. These two features make the
brokerage market an ideal application for these demand estimation tools.
      Our work draws inspiration from recent papers that highlight the role of financial intermediaries
in creating value through information production. In particular, Babus and Kondor (2018) model
the trading behavior of privately-informed dealers in OTC markets. We differ from this paper by
focusing on a centralized market, the stock market. The brokers that we study only convey their
client's trades to the market, and do not take positions using their inventory. However, we build on
the authors' intuition that intermediaries are able to achieve an informational advantage by finding
that the clients of these intermediaries stand to benefit from an information edge. Glode and Opp
(2016) explain that a rationale for intermediaries in financial markets is their ability to reduce
information asymmetry and improve trading efficiency. In the same vein, one of the functions
of brokers in our empirical setup is to intermediate information. Moreover, brokers in our setup
can reduce the trading costs of their clients. In this sense, our analysis incorporates the notion that
intermediaries emerge to reduce transaction costs (Townsend (1978)). More generally, our analysis
and market transparency. There is also recent research examining the preliminary impacts of MiFID II on the supply
of sell-side research (Fang, Hope, Huang, and Moldovan (2019); Guo and Mota (2019); Lang, Pinto, and Sul (2019)).
Evidence from Guo and Mota (2019) suggests that the implementation of MiFID II led to a 7.45% decline in research
coverage in Europe. While we study a different aspect of MiFID II, the finding that research coverage falls following the
implementation of MiFID II is consistent with our empircal finding that roughly 10%+ of investment managers place no
value on research (Section VI).



                                                           6
is also inspired by work studying information percolation in financial markets, such as Duffie and
Manso (2007) and Duffie, Malamud, and Manso (2015).
   The paper also builds on the empirical literature on brokerage services and institutional trading
patterns. Using an earlier version of our data, Goldstein, Irvine, Kandel, and Wiener (2009) provide
a useful description of the institutional brokerage industry. They show that institutions value long-
term relations with brokers and find evidence suggesting that broker-provided services play a key
role in these relationships. They find a bi-modal distribution of fees corresponding to premium and
discount brokerage services, where premium services include access to research. Moreover, they
document that the best institutional clients are compensated with the allocation of superior infor-
mation around changes of analyst recommendations. Other work shows that the best institutional
clients of brokers also receive privileged information about informed order flow (Di Maggio, Fran-
zoni, Kermani, and Sommavilla (2019)) and ongoing fire sales (Barbon, Di Maggio, Franzoni, and
Landier (2019)). Evidence that brokers pass valuable information to selected clients is also present
in Irvine, Lipson, and Puckett (2006) regarding future analyst recommendations, in McNally, Shk-
ilko, and Smith (2015) and Li, Mukherjee, and Sen (2017) regarding insiders' order flow, and in
Chung and Kang (2016) for hedge fund trading strategies. Our contribution is to develop and es-
timate a framework for understanding and quantifying how brokers create value for institutional
clients, using novel and detailed trade- and individual-level data.
   Our paper also relates to the work on the role of sell-side research analysts and the value they
create for investors. There is a broad literature documenting the value of trading on analyst recom-
mendations including but not limited to Womack (1996), Barber, Lehavy, McNichols, and Trueman
(2001), Barber, Lehavy, McNichols, and Trueman (2003), Jegadeesh, Kim, Krische, and Lee (2004),
Birru, Gokkaya, Liu, and Stulz (2019), and Bharath and Bonini (2019). Womack (1996) finds that
stock prices positively respond to buy recommendations and drop for sell recommendations, con-
cluding that analysts produce "valuable information for which a brokerage firm should be compen-
sated" (p139). Womack (1996) also documents increased trading volume in response to analyst
recommendations. Birru, Gokkaya, Liu, and Stulz (2019) focus particularly on analyst trade ideas
and show that analyst trade ideas earn significant abnormal returns. In contrast to much of the
previous literature, we examine the value of sell-side research using the revealed preferences of
institutional investors, the consumers of sell-side research. In line with the previous literature, we
find that analysts produce valuable information and using our structural model, quantify the pre-
mium that investors attach to that research. In particular, we uncover significant heterogeneity in
the premium that investors are willing to pay for information and highlight that the venue-routing
decision is a multidimensional one, where order flow information, misconduct, and market impact
all play a significant role. We also find evidence that investors place a premium on the top analysts
ranked in Institutional Investor, which is consistent with the finding that these top rated analysts
provide more accurate forecasts (Stickel (1992)).
   We use our empirical estimates to understand the effects of unbundling and quantify the shadow-
value of sell-side research consumed by each investor in order to assess the magnitude of soft-


                                                  7
dollars in the industry. There is a long theoretical literature on bundling dating back to Stigler
(1963) and Adams and Yellen (1976), but the empirical evidence is relatively limited. Previ-
ous work has documented the impact of bundling in television markets (Crawford and Yurukoglu
(2012)) and other media markets (Shiller and Waldfogel (2011) and Ho, Ho, and Mortimer (2012)).
In these settings, the motivation for bundling comes from the firm side as bundling is used as a
way of price discriminating across consumers. In sharp contrast, bundling in brokerage markets
is partially demand-driven. Investors may prefer to pay for brokerage services with soft-dollar
commissions rather than hard dollars for transparency reasons.
     Blume (1993) provides an overview of soft-dollars in the brokerage industry and survey ev-
idence on how soft-dollars impact the structure of the industry. Soft-dollars broadly refer to two
related but distinct types of transactions: in-house and third-party. In the most common transaction
type, in-house transactions (Blume (1993)), the investment manager directly compensates a bro-
kerage firm with trading commissions for research and other services the brokerage firm provides
to the investor or the investor's clients. This is a contrast to third-party transactions, in which the
broker providing execution redirects a portion of the trading commissions to a third-party research
provider.11 Our analysis focuses on the former and more common in-house related soft-dollar
payments. Using proprietary data, Conrad, Johnson, and Wahal (2001) identifies a set of third-
party soft-dollar brokers and examines how the transaction costs associated with those third-party
soft-dollar brokers compares with other brokerage firms. While we focus on in-house soft-dollars
instead of third party soft-dollar arrangements, we find similar costs/magnitudes as in their paper.


II     Framework: Institutional Demand for Brokerage Services

II.A    Institutional Demand for Brokerage Services

We develop an empirical model of broker choice. Specifically, we examine an institutional investor's
decision regarding where to execute her trade, conditional on the investor's initial decision to trade
a specific security. We model an investor's execution decision as a multinomial choice problem
where the investor has a trade order she needs to execute and can route her order through any of
the n available brokers denoted l = 1, ...n. Investors choose a broker based on the associated costs
and services. For convenience and consistent with the literature on demand estimation, we initially
write the investor's problem in terms of a utility maximization problem, but show below that the in-
vestor's utility maximization problem translates directly into the investor's profit maximization/cost
minimization problem.
     The expected indirect utility derived by investor i of executing trade j in industry sector k
   11
      For example, suppose an investment manager would like access to the research produced by a third-party firm XYZ
Research Inc. Rather than paying XYZ Research Inc. directly, the investment manager could arrange to compensate XYZ
Research Inc. by trading with a particular brokerage firm and having that brokerage firm pass a predetermined portion
of the fees to XZY Research Inc.




                                                         8
through brokerage firm l at time t is given by:12

                                 E [uijklt ] = -i fijklt + Xklt i + µilt + iklt +      ijklt .                         (1)

Investors pay an investor-trade-broker-sector specific commission/broker fee fijklt for executing a
trade through broker l, from which she derives dis-utility i fijklt . The parameter i > 0 measures
the investor's sensitivity to brokerage fees. Note that the parameter i varies across investors which
implies that investors have potentially different elasticities of demand.
       Investors also derive utility from other brokerage services captured in the term Xklt i + µilt +
iklt +     ijklt .   The vector Xklt is a vector of broker specific characteristics that reflect differences in
execution services, such as price impact, speed, access to dark pools, and/or information. For exam-
ple, some brokers may have more skilled traders than other firms and consequently provide better
trade execution resulting in a lower transaction price (i.e. lower price impact). Furthermore, trad-
ing ability may vary within a brokerage firm across different securities and over time. For example,
Goldman Sachs could provide better execution for stocks in the technology sector, while Morgan
Stanley provides better execution for stocks in the financial sector. Our framework allows for such
differences. The vector Xklt also captures the quality of research and other information provided
by the brokerage firms. Arguably, investors allocate trades to brokers taking into consideration the
research and other services that the investor can receive from the broker once a stable relation-
ship is established similar to the framework proposed and studied in Goldstein, Irvine, Kandel, and
Wiener (2009). For example, Goldman Sachs may offer better research coverage or be privy to
better information regarding stocks in the technology sector than Goldman Sach's competitors, and
an investor is likely to internalize these dimensions. The vector i reflects investor i's preferences
over the broker characteristics Xklt . We again allow preferences for the various brokerage services
captured in Xklt to vary across investors. Some investors may place a higher value on sell-side
research while others place a higher value on execution.
       Brokerage firms may differ in their quality of services along other dimensions beyond those
captured in Xklt . For example, some brokerage firms may have access to their own proprietary
algorithms and technology. The term µilt is an investor-by-broker-by-time fixed effect that captures
these broad differences in technology across brokerage firms. Note that this broker fixed effect
(µilt ) varies across time to capture broker-specific changes in technology (i.e. the addition of new
algorithm) and varies across investors to capture investor-specific preferences over these broker
differences.
       The term iklt is a time varying investor-by-broker-by-sector latent variable that measures a
brokerage firm's execution services in ways not captured by Xklt or µilt . For example, Goldman
Sach's ability to efficiently trade a stock may vary over time in a way that is not captured in the
vector Xklt or µilt . Lastly, the variable          ijklt   reflects an investor-by-trade-by-broker-by-sector-by-
  12
     We focus on an investor's expected utility of trading with a particular broker, as opposed to realized utility, because
the investor may not perfectly observe all of the relevant characteristics, such as realized price impact, prior to when the
trade is executed.



                                                              9
time, latent, demand/profit shock that is i.i.d. across investors, brokers, and time. The term                         ijklt
captures preference heterogeneity within an investor across different trade ideas. For example,
an investor may prefer to route a particular trade in the financial sector to Goldman Sachs while
routing other trades in the financial sector to Morgan Stanley. The term                           ijklt   also potentially
captures an investor's time-varying expectations about the quality of services a broker offers not
captured in the vector Xklt . The parameter        ijklt   introduces additional heterogeneity to help explain
why we see a given investor trade through multiple brokers at the same time in a given sector. We
can therefore write an investor i s expected indirect utility of executing trade idea j in sector k
with broker l at time t in terms of the trade-specific (          ijkt )   and non-trade-specific, average, utility
component (uiklt ) :
                                           E [uijklt ] = uiklt +     ijklt

where uiklt = -i fiklt + Xklt i + µilt + iklt .
    The units of eq. (1) are in terms of utils; however, by scaling eq. (1) we can interpret each
coefficient in the utility function in terms of expected profits:

                                                 1      1      1       1
                         E [ijklt ] = -filkt +     X i + µilt + iklt +                   ijklt .
                                                 i klt  i      i       i

The vector i /i captures how the various services offered by a brokerage firm translate into an
                                                                            Research / , tells us
investor's profits. For example, the coefficient corresponding to research, i         i
how investors value research services offered by brokerage firms in terms of the present value of
expected future profits.
    Investors choose the brokerage firm in the set L = {1, 2, ...n} that maximizes the investor's
expected utility
                                                  max E [uijklt ].                                                     (2)
                                                  lL

Under the assumption that the investor-by-trade-by-broker-by-sector-by-time specific profit shock,
ijklt ,   is distributed i.i.d. Type 1 Extreme Value, as is standard in the multinomial choice literature,
the probability that investor i executes her trade through firm l is given by

                                      exp (-i fiklt + Xklt i + µilt + iklt )
                         Pr(l) =                                             .                                         (3)
                                     mL exp -i fikmt + Xkmt i + µimt + ikmt

The above likelihood corresponds to the multinomial logit distribution and is the core of our esti-
mation strategy below. Estimation of this demand framework is straightforward, and it allows us
to measure how institutional investors trade-off broker-provided services. We describe estimation
in Section IV.
    Lastly, while we cast our framework in the context of an investor's decision regarding where
to execute her trade conditional on the initial decision to trade a specific security, the model and
corresponding estimates also generalize to the setting where brokers influence an investor's initial
decision of whether or not to trade. One might think that the services offered by a brokerage


                                                           10
firm and the expected profits of trading with a particular brokerage firm could induce an investor
to make additional trades. For example, broker research could motivate an investor to trade. In
our baseline framework, an investor needs to trade a security and chooses among n brokers to
execute the trade through. Without any loss in generality, one could recast our model to include,
in addition to choosing where to trade a security among n brokers, the outside option of not
trading the particular security (which can also be influenced by brokers). As discussed below in
our estimation section, adding the outside option of not trading produces numerically equivalent
estimation results.


III      Data

III.A      Ancerno Data

We use information about institutional transactions from Abel Noser Solutions, formerly Ancerno
Ltd. (the name `Ancerno' is commonly retained for this data set). The company performs transaction
cost analysis for institutional investors and makes the data available for academic research under
the agreement of non-disclosure of institutional identity.
       We have access to data covering the period from 1999 to 2014. The data set consists of over 300
million trades. For each trade we observe the names of the parties involved (broker and investment
manager), the security traded, execution price, and the fee. We restrict our attention to those
observations where we observe complete trade information (parties involved, security, date, and
broker fee) where the investor reported paying a fee to the broker.13 We also focus our attention to
those institutional investors that made at least 1,000 trades in the data set.The final data set covers
393 investment managers trading across 1,590 different brokers.
       Previous literature has established the merits of this data set (see Hu, Jo, Wang, and Xie (2018)
for a detailed description of the structure and coverage of the data). First, clients submit this
information to obtain objective evaluations of their trading costs rather than to advertise their per-
formance, suggesting that the data should not suffer from self-reporting bias. Second, Ancerno
collects trade-level information directly from hedge funds and mutual funds when these use An-
cerno for transaction cost analysis. It's worth noting that pension funds may instruct the managers
in whom they have invested to release their trading activities to Ancerno as part of their fiduciary
obligations under ERISA regulation. Third, Ancerno is free of survivorship biases as it includes
information about institutions that at some point terminated their relationship with Ancerno.
       Previous studies, such as Puckett and Yan (2011), Anand, Irvine, Puckett, and Venkataraman
(2012, 2013), have shown that the characteristics of stocks traded and held by Ancerno clients as
well as the respective returns are comparable to those reported in mandatory 13F filings. Estimates
  13
    We drop observations where the investor does not report paying a positive broker fee to the broker. We drop these
trades because we do not observe whether these zero fee trades are indeed zero fee trades or simply observations with
missing fee data. In untabulated results we re-estimate our baseline demand specifications where we include these trades
and find comparable estimates.



                                                          11
suggest that trades recorded in Ancerno account for 10% to 19% of all institutional trading volume
in the U.S. stock market (Puckett and Yan (2011), Hu, Jo, Wang, and Xie (2018)). The data is
organized at different levels; at the trade-level, we know: the transaction date and time at the
minute precision, the execution price; the number of shares that are traded, the side (buy or sell)
and the stock CUSIP.


III.B    Equity Research Data

To help examine the different factors driving an investor's execution choice, we match our trade-
level Ancerno data to sell-side equity research data from Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S and Institutional
Investor. Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S is a database that provides equity analyst recommendations.
We use the I/B/E/S data to determine each brokerage firm's analyst coverage for each sector over
time. We merge our trade-level data with the I/B/E/S equity analyst recommendations at the bro-
kerage firm, by year, by industry (GICS 6 Industry Code) level.14 Table 1 displays the corresponding
summary statistics. The key variable of interest is the number of analysts employed by a brokerage
firm in a given sector. The average brokerage firm employs 1.47 analysts in a given sector.
    We also merge our trade-level data with analyst data from Institutional Investor. Each year,
Institutional Investor publishes an "All-America Research Team" where it ranks the top three equity
analysts in a given sector for that year. We use the Institutional Investor data to determine the
number of top-rated analysts employed by each brokerage firm in each sector and year. We merge
our trade-level data with the All-American Research Team data at the year-by-sector-by-brokerage
firm-level. Table 1 displays the corresponding summary statistics. The average brokerage firm in
our sample employs 0.16 top analysts in a given sector and year. Previous work has shown that
these top analysts provide more accurate forecasts (Stickel (1992)). Evidence from the brokerage
industry indicates that these type of industry polls are critical for the evaluation and careers of
research analysts (Groysberg and Healy (2013)). The purported policy at Lehman Brothers was
for its research analysts to make "Institutional Investor or die" (Nanda, Groysberg, and Prusiner
(2008)). These variables help capture the quality of research services at the year-by-sector-by-
brokerage firm-level.


III.C    BrokerCheck Data

We also examine how execution varies with the quality of a firm's traders. We merge our trade-
level data with equity trader data from BrokerCheck. The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority
(FINRA) maintains the website BrokerCheck which contains employment, qualification, and dis-
closure history for the universe of registered securities representatives over the past ten years.
Our data covers the universe of registered securities representatives over the period 2005-2018 as
described further in Egan, Matvos, and Seru (2019).
  14
     We merge the I/B/E/S analyst data to the brokerage firm names using data from FINRA's BrokerCheck website
and a leading social networking website. As described below, FINRA's BrokerCheck data provides data, including the
employment history, on the universe of individuals registered in the securities industry, including equity research analysts.


                                                            12
       Equity traders must be registered with FINRA as securities representatives. The BrokerCheck
database contains details on many securities representatives in addition to equity traders such as
financial advisers, futures traders, etc. We determine which individuals in BrokerCheck are equity
traders based on whether or not the individual has a Series 55 license. The Series 55 license, known
as the Equity Trader Qualification License, entitles an individual to participate in equity trading.
There were roughly 18,000 actively registered individuals licensed to trade equities in the U.S. in
2017 (Figure 1).
       For each trader, we observe the trader's complete employment history. The average trader in
our sample has 12 years of experience in the industry. FINRA also requires that registered represen-
tatives report any customer disputes, regulatory offenses, and/or criminal offenses. We examine
whether the traders in our sample have engaged in misconduct, where misconduct is defined as
per Egan, Matvos, and Seru (2019) as any customer disputes that resulted in a settlement/award,
regulatory offenses, criminal offenses, and/or terminations for cause. Roughly 6.50% of the equity
traders in our sample have a past record of misconduct. Table 1 indicates that at the average bro-
kerage firm in our sample, roughly 0.20% of the traders received a misconduct-related disclosure
in a given year.
       Although we observe the identities of each trader, we do not observe the specific securities
they trade. Consequently, we merge the BrokerCheck equities trader data with our Ancerno trade-
level data at the brokerage firm-by-year level. In our analysis, we examine how much investment
managers value various characteristics of a brokerage firms, including:the number of traders at
the firm, average trader experience, and the percent of traders previously reported for misconduct.
Using BrokerCheck data, we are also able to determine the physical office locations of the brokerage
firm traders and many of the investors in our data set. We calculate the physical distance in miles
between each broker-investor pair, using the modal zip code of a broker's equity traders and the
modal zip code of the investor's employees that are registered with FINRA. While the average
distance between an investor and a broker in our sample is 668 miles, 33% of our broker-investor
trading pairs are within 100 miles of each other.


III.D      Alternative Trading Systems/Dark Pool Data

A number of brokerage firms in our data set operate their own proprietary alternative trading
systems (ATS) such as electronic communication networks (ECNs) and/or dark pools. These non-
exchange trading venues operated by brokerage firms provide investors with an alternative mean to
access liquidity in the market outside of traditional exchanges. We collect data on which brokerage
firms in our data set operate their own ATS to help understand the value of these non-exchange
venues. The SEC reports the names and initial filing dates of all active ATS at a semi-annual
frequency.15 Using these SEC filings, we construct a monthly panel of active ATS over the period
1999-2014. We manually match the ATS to the brokerage firms in the Ancerno data using firm
  15
    The SEC started reporting this information as of September 2008: https://www.sec.gov/foia/ats/atslist0908.pdf
[accessed September 19, 2019].


                                                       13
name. Many ATS are operated by full-service brokerage firms such as Goldman Sach's Sigma X
dark pool, but there are also stand-alone ATS in our Ancerno data such as Direct Edge ECN.
       As of 2014 there were 93 ATS registered with the SEC. One shortcoming of our data is that for
trades executed through full-service brokerage firms that operate ATS, we do not observe whether
the trade was executed through an ATS or on an exchange. We only observe whether the brokerage
firm had access to its own ATS. For example, we observe whether an investor executed a trade
through Goldman Sachs, but we do not directly observe whether the trade was executed through
Goldman Sach's Sigma X dark pool or some other venue. Figure 3 displays the share of trades in
our sample that were executed through a brokerage firm that has access to its own ATS over time.
While there were few ATS in 2000, by the end of our sample, over half of the trades were executed
through brokerage firms that had access to dark pools.


IV       Estimation
We use the Ancerno micro transaction-level data to estimate our broker choice/demand model
from Section II. The model is straightforward to take to the data and allows us to determine how
investors value the services that brokerage firms provide. Our estimation procedure most closely
follows that of Berry (1994) and Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995). However, the extensive and
detailed nature of the data allows for a rich flexible estimation procedure where we are able to
estimate the Berry (1994) model at the investor-level. We observe tens of thousands of choices
for each individual investor which allows us to flexibly recover the individual preferences of each
investor without imposing any assumptions over the distribution of investor preferences  and  .
To facilitate estimation, we aggregate the individual trades that an investor makes based on the
dollar value of the transaction (share price × quantity) at the month-by-sector-by-broker level. In
other words, we define the market at the investor-by-month-by-sector level.16


IV.A      Empirical Framework

Following our framework from Section II, the share of trades investor i executes with broker l in
market k at time t is can be written as

                                        exp (-i fiklt + Xklt i + µilt + iklt )
                           siklt =                                                                                   (4)
                                       mL exp -i fikmt + Xkmt i + µimt + ikmt
  16
     We define the market at the investor-by-month-by-sector level rather than at the investor-by-month-by-stock level to
match how brokerages are organized. For example, sell-side research teams are typically organized at the sector level.
Aggregation helps facilitate estimation and allows us to estimate the model using linear regression rather than maximum
likelihood or other non-linear estimation methods.




                                                          14
Following Berry (1994), we can rewrite the market share of broker l in a given market (month-by-
investor-by-sector) as


 ln siklt = -i fiklt + Xklt i + µilt + iklt - ln              exp -i fikmt + Xkmt i + µimt + ikmt                  (5)
                                                         mL


Notice that the non-linear term ln            mL exp (-i fikmt       + Xkmt i + µimt + ikmt ) is constant in
a given market. Therefore we can estimate eq. (5) using linear regression where we include an
investor-by-sector-by-time market fixed effect (µikt ) to absorb the non-linear term.17 We estimate
the linear specification

                               ln siklt = -i fiklt + Xklt i + µilt + µikt + iklt                                   (6)

where Xklt is our vector of broker-by-sector-by-time characteristics and µilt is an investor-by-broker-
by-time fixed effect. We describe the construction and details of each of our broker characteristics
Xklt in the proceeding section. In our baseline specifications (Section V), we restrict the preferences
of investors to be the same across investors such that i = , i = , and µilt = µlt . However, we
relax this assumption in Section VI where we allow preferences to vary flexibly across investors.
       In our main regression specifications, we include broker-by-time fixed effects (µlt ). These fixed
effects capture broad, potentially time-varying, differences across brokerage firms. For example,
some brokerage firms may have better algorithms. These differences in trading technologies across
firms will be captured in our broker fixed effect.
       One of the standard issues in demand estimation that we need to address is the endogeneity
of broker fees. Fees are potentially endogenous if brokers observe demand shocks, iklt , prior to
setting their prices. Conceptually, the idea is the following: if brokers know that their services
are in high demand and/or anticipate high order flow, they may adjust their fees accordingly. In
general, this potential endogeneity problem will bias the OLS estimates of - upwards such that
we would underestimate an investor's responsiveness to fees. We address the endogeneity of fees
using instrumental variables as described in the proceeding section.
       The reason why researchers in the demand estimation literature to date have specifically been
more concerned about the endogeneity of prices (broker fees f in our setting) rather than other
product characteristics (broker characteristics X in our setting), is because prices (fees) are likely to
be the margin of adjustment in response to time- and sector-varying demand shocks. Other product
characteristics are thought to be relatively fixed in the short run. For example, in our setting, it
  17
    Notice that we define market shares and the investor's choice set based on the trades investor i executes in sec-
tor k at time t. As shown in eq. (5) the market share of broker l in a given market (month-by-investor-by-sector)
depends on the utility that investor i derives from trading with broker l (-i fiklt + Xklt i + µilt + iklt ) as well
as the utility that the investor derives from trading with any other potential trading partner in his/her choice set
(ln     mL exp (-i fikmt + Xkmt i + µimt + ikmt ) ). When estimating eq. (5), we include an investor-by-sector-by-
time fixed effect that absorbs the nonlinear term ln    mL exp (-i fikmt + Xkmt i + µimt + ikmt ) . Because the term
ln     mL exp (-i fikmt + Xkmt i + µimt + ikmt ) is absorbed in the fixed effect, we do not need to observe or even
define an investor's full choice set. Consequently, if we were to re-estimate our model from Section II where investors
have the option of not trading, our estimates would be numerically equivalent to our baseline estimates.


                                                         15
is unlikely that firms adjust their research coverage in response to time-varying demand shocks
because the hiring process for research analysts is a lengthy and involved process that regularly
takes a year (Groysberg and Healy (2013)).
       We micro-found our demand system in Section II. Micro-founding the demand system provides
additional interpretation and allows us to investigate counterfactuals in Section VII. However, it is
worth noting that our estimates also have a reduced-form interpretation in addition to a structural
interpretation; we are essentially regressing broker trade volumes on a vector of broker character-
istics. Thus, our estimation results are more general than what our model in Section II entails.


IV.B      Broker Characteristics

We are interested in the factors that drive institutional investors' execution decisions across brokers.
Using our rich data set described in Section III we analyze how fees, research, quality of execution,
and information drive investor decisions. Here, we provide a description of each variable, its
measurement, and how we incorporate the variable in our estimation strategy. We measure each
variable on a trade-by-trade basis, and then aggregate each variable at the broker-investor-sector-
month level for estimation.


Explicit Trading Costs: Broker Fees            Brokers typically charge investors a fee for each share of
stock traded. We measure the broker fees paid on a per trade basis as the total fee paid relative to
the value of the transaction.

                                                 T otal F ee in U SDijklt
                                fijklt =
                                           V alue of T ransaction in U SDijklt
The average transaction fee is 13 basis points (bp). Figure 2a displays the distribution of broker fees
paid by investors. There is substantial variation in fees paid by investors. The standard deviation
of fees is 13bps and fees range from near zero to upwards of 20bps. The average mutual fund
turned over 54% of its portfolio in a given year over the period 2000-2014, which suggests that
the variation in trading fees could be costly on an annual basis. For the average mutual fund, a
one-standard deviation increase in broker fees translates to an annualized cost of 14bps ( 2 ×
54% × 13bp) relative to the fund's total assets.18 To put these numbers in perspective, the average
mutual fund over that same period charged an expense ratio of 0.87% (2018 Investment Company
Factbook).
       As discussed above, a standard problem in this type of choice/demand problem is the endo-
geneity of prices/fees. If brokerage firms observe the error term iklt prior to setting their broker
fees, fees would be correlated with the unobservable term iklt .
       We address the endogeneity problem using instrumental variables. A unique feature of the in-
stitutional setting is that most brokerage firms charge investors a fixed dollar amount per shares of
  18
    When calculating annual trading costs, we multiply turnover by two to account for the fact that turning over a
portfolio involves both a buy and a sell trade.



                                                       16
stock traded (see Goldstein, Irvine, Kandel, and Wiener (2009)).19 Figure 2b displays the distribu-
tion of broker fees charged on a per share basis. As illustrated in the figure, the fees are bunched
around the whole numbers in terms of cents per share ranging between 1 cent and 6 cents per share
(the mode is 5 cents per share). However, the relevant metric for a profit maximizing investor is
measuring fees in percentage terms relative to the value of a transaction. For instance, a one cent
increase in the fee per share is more costly when an investor is trading a stock priced at $1 per
share than when she is trading a stock priced at $1,000 per share.
       We exploit the institutional fee setting feature of the brokerage industry to construct an in-
strument for broker fees. We construct our instrument at the trade-level as the inverse of the
corresponding equity share price scaled by the average cents per share fee charged by brokerage
firm l:
                                                1
                               IVijklt =                  × F ee P er Share In U SDl
                                           Share P ricejt
The instrument is correlated with our measure of fees in percentage terms fijklt because, all else
equal, a decrease in the share price makes the fixed per-share fee more expensive on a relative
basis. As discussed in the proceeding section, our instruments yield Cragg-Donald F Statistics
well in excess of 100 in each specification (Cragg and Donald (1993)). The instrument satisfies
the exogeneity condition essentially as long as share price movements of a stock are orthogonal
to the investor-broker-market-time specific demand shocks iklt . While movement in stock prices
would certainly be correlated with an investor's decision to trade, what matters for our setting is
that movements in stock prices are not correlated with who an investor trades with at a particular
moment in time. Recall that our regression specifications include broker-time and investor-sector-
time fixed effects; thus the exogeneity condition requires that the share prices are uncorrelated
with time varying quality differences across brokers.


Research         We measure the level and quality of a brokerage firms research coverage in a particular
sector along two dimensions using our I/B/E/S and Institutional Investor data sets. First, we
include the number of analysts a brokerage firm employs in a given sector and year. Second, we
control for the number of top analysts as reported by Institutional Investor that the brokerage
firm employs in a given sector and year. We examine whether investors are more likely to trade
through brokers who have analyst coverage in the corresponding sector and measure the value that
investors place on those sell-side analysts.


Information          Recent evidence has highlighted the role played by financial intermediaries in creat-
ing value through information production (Babus and Kondor, 2018; Barbon et al. 2019). Brokers
may have access to additional information about market conditions, trends and specific stocks due
to the structure of the market and the counterparties that the brokers deal with on a daily basis.
We use two different measures to capture how informed a broker is. These measures of broker
  19
       Stock exchanges also typically charge a fixed dollar amount per shares of stock traded (Chao, Yao, and Ye (2018)).



                                                            17
information draw inspiration from Di Maggio, Franzoni, Kermani, and Sommavilla (2019). First,
we calculate the eigenvector centrality of the broker in the network where we define the network
at the sector-by-month level. The eigenvector centrality measure takes into account all direct and
indirect trading partners (i.e. investors and other brokers) and is computed by assigning scores to
all brokers in the network. What counts is not only the number of connections of a broker, but who
the broker is connected to. All else equal, being connected to a more central manager leads to a
higher centrality score for the broker. We construct eigenvector centrality at the sector-by-month-
level for each investor i and broker l pair, Eigenvector_Centralityiklt . To avoid clear endogeneity
concerns, we remove all of investor i s trades from the network when computing the centrality of
broker l in sector k at time t, Eigenvector_Centralityiklt .
       We also control for whether or not a broker is "informed" in a given market. Di Maggio, Fran-
zoni, Kermani, and Sommavilla (2019) study the role that brokers play in spreading order flow
information. The authors find evidence suggesting that after executing an "informed" trade, bro-
kers tend to share that information with other investors. Following these authors, we define an
"informed trade" as an abnormally large (75th percentile) profitable trade made by a hedge fund.
Roughly 1.7% of the trades in our sample are classified as informed. In our analysis we control for
whether or not the broker received an informed trade in a given month and sector, Inf ormedklt .
To avoid simultaneity issues, we include the variable Inf ormedklt lagged by one month in our
analysis (Inf ormedklt-1 ).20 This allows us to measure how informed order flow spills over to other
investors.


Alternative Trading Systems and Dark Pools We control for whether a brokerage firm in our
sample has access to its own alternative trading system (ATS) such as a dark pool. We construct the
indicator variable AT Slt which is equal to one if brokerage-firm l operates its own ATS at time t. An
important caveat with our alternative trading system/dark pool variable is that it is measured at the
broker-by-month level while our other brokerage firm characteristics are measured at the broker-
by-month-by-sector level. Consequently, the variable AT Slt is subsumed by our by broker-time
fixed effects in our full specification. One related concern, which we discuss further below when
interpreting our results, is that the variable AT Slt could be correlated with other time-varying
characteristics of a brokerage firm.


Implicit Trading Costs: Price Impact              Implicit trading costs may arguably be just as important as
explicit trading costs. Anand, Irvine, Puckett, and Venkataraman (2012) show that brokers differ in
their execution quality in a persistent way. We measure the implicit trading cost of a trade using the
implementation shortfall (Perold (1988), Wagner and Edwards (1993)). As described in Anand,
Irvine, Puckett, and Venkataraman (2012), the execution shortfall reflects the bid-ask spread, the
  20
     By construction, the variable Inf ormedklt indicates that one manager executed an informed trade through broker l
in sector k in month t. Thus Inf ormedklt will be, at least partially, mechanically related to the trades executed through
a broker. Consequently, we lag Inf ormed by one month, to measure how proxy how the execution of informed order
flow influences the proceeding execution decisions of other investors.



                                                           18
market impact, and the drift in price. With this in mind, we call this variable price impact and
define it as the stock price at which the trade was ultimately executed relative to the stock price at
the time the order was placed,

                                      Execution P riceijklt - Benchmark P riceijklt
         P rice Impactijklt =                                                         × Sideijklt .
                                                 P lacement P riceijklt

The variable Sideijkt is equal to 1 if the trade is a buy trade and equal to -1 if the trade is a sell
trade. All else equal, investors prefer a lower price impact, and a high price impact is indicative of
worse execution.
    To calculate the price impact in our data, we first calculate the weighted-average price impact
at the broker-by-month-by-stock-level to construct the variable P rice Impactlst , where l indexes
the broker, s indexes the stock, and t indexes the month. To account for time varying differences
in the liquidity of different stocks, we residualize the variable P rice Impactlst on a vector of stock-
by-month fixed effects to construct the variable P rice Impactlst . This is similar to the way Anand,
Irvine, Puckett, and Venkataraman (2012) measure trading desk performance, where they regress
price impact on a vector of stock-specific characteristics. Lastly, we calculate the weighted-average
of P rice Impact                                                           
                lst . at the broker-by-sector-by-month level (P rice Impactlkt ), which corresponds
to our definition of a market and is the primary observational unit of our analysis. The variable
P rice Impactlkt measures a broker's trading ability at the sector-by-month level.
    There are a handful of potential concerns with our price impact measure P rice Impactlkt that
merit further discussion. First, it is inevitably measured with noise. Our empirical measure of price
impact reflects both the true variation coming from price impact as well as variation from changes
in the underlying fundamentals from the stock. For example, even if markets were perfectly liquid,
we would expect the execution price to potentially differ from the placement price due to the
variation in fundamentals. This type of measurement error will potentially cause our estimates to
suffer from attenuation bias.
    Second, we are using contemporaneous price impact as a control variable which includes in-
formation unavailable to investors at time t. Ideally, we would like to be able to control for an
investor's expectations about the price impact at time t, given the investor's information set at time
t - 1, E [P rice Impactlkt |It-1 ].
    Lastly, and related to the previous point, P rice Impactlkt could suffer from reverse causality. If a
broker experiences a positive demand shock in a specific sector such that a large number of investors
choose to trade through the broker, this could lead to the broker providing either better or worse
execution due to increased trading volumes. To address these issues we use both contemporaneous
and lagged price impact as a proxies for an investor's price impact expectations:

                             P rice Impact                      
                                          lkt = E [P rice Impactlkt |It-1 ] + ijklt
                                                               
                         P rice Impactlkt-12 = E [P rice Impactlkt |It-1 ] + ijklt




                                                       19
where P rice Impactlkt-12 is the lagged twelve-month rolling weighted average of broker l s price
impact in sector k . We then use contemporaneous price impact as a proxy for investor price impact
expectations and use lagged price impact as an instrument. Previous work finds that there is strong
persistence in broker trading performance (Anand, Irvine, Puckett, and Venkataraman (2012))
which indicates that our instrument will be relevant (i.e. there are systematic differences across
brokers that determine their execution quality). To the extent that the measurement error ijklt is
orthogonal to ijklt , then using instrumental variables will help address the potential measurement
error issues with our proxies for price impact.


Traders Through FINRA's BrokerCheck database, we observe detailed information on the equity
traders employed by each brokerage firm. For each broker, we observe the number of traders that
the broker employs, the experience of those traders, and the percentage of traders receiving miscon-
duct related disclosures in a given year (i.e. customer disputes resulting in a settlement, regulatory
offenses, etc). We examine how these trader characteristics influence an investor's trading decision.


V      Results
Table 2 presents our main sets of estimation results corresponding to eq. (6). The columns differ
with respect to the set of fixed effects and whether or not we estimate the model using ordinary
least squares or instrumental variables. In column (1) we report our baseline set of results where
we estimate the model using ordinary least squares and include market fixed effects. In column (2)
we re-estimate our baseline model instrumenting both fees and expected price impact as described
in Section IV. Lastly, in columns (3) and (4) we include broker and broker×time fixed effects to
capture differences in trading service quality across brokerage firms. In the proceeding subsections,
we discuss and interpret how investors respond and value each of the brokerage firm characteristics.


V.A    Fee Sensitivity

One of the primary coefficients of interest is how sensitive institutional investors are with respect to
fees. In each column, we estimate a negative and significant relationship between trading volumes
and brokerage fees. As expected, the estimated effect becomes more negative once we employ
instrumental variables. We would expect the OLS estimated fee coefficient to be biased upwards
due to the endogeneity of fees. If brokers anticipate a positive demand shock (iklt ), they will
find it optimal to charge a higher fee. Thus, - will be biased downwards. The first-stage of our
instrumental variables is quite strong. We report the corresponding Cragg-Donald F Statistic at the
bottom of Table 2 (Cragg and Donald (1993)). The corresponding F-statistics are in excess of 1,000
which is substantially greater than the typical rule of thumb (10) and the critical values for a weak
instrument set reported in Stock and Yogo (2005).21
  21
     Stock and Yogo (2005) provide the critical values a weak instrument test for the maximal size (10%) of a 5% Wald
test of  = 0 . The corresponding critical value with two endogenous regressors and two instruments is 7.03.


                                                        20
      In the bottom panel of Table 2, we interpret the estimated coefficients in terms of elastici-
ties. In our demand framework, the investor's elasticity of demand in a given market is given by
(1 - siklt )fiklt .22 Consistently across our main specifications, we find evidence suggesting that
demand for brokerage services is relatively inelastic, with an elasticity of roughly 0.47. The esti-
mates imply that if a broker increases the fee it charges by 1%, its market share will decrease by an
associated 0.47%. This suggests that investor-broker relationships are relatively sticky in the sense
that demand is relatively insensitive to trading fees.


V.B      Value of Research

Most "high-touch" brokers try to attract clients' order flow by providing services separate from
trade execution. One of the most visible services offered by brokers is access to research analysts.
In addition to providing recommendations based on the valuation of firms' fundamentals, offering
these services also ultimately translates into potentially profitable trading tips (Womack (1996);
Barber, Lehavy, McNichols, and Trueman (2001); Barber, Lehavy, McNichols, and Trueman (2003);
Jegadeesh, Kim, Krische, and Lee (2004); and Birru, Gokkaya, Liu, and Stulz (2019)).
      Our framework allows us to test whether investors value sell-side research and whether sell-side
research impacts order flow. In our demand specifications, our main research-related explanatory
variables include the number of research analysts and the number of top-rated analysts as ranked
by Institutional Investor. The average brokerage firm in our sample employs roughly 1.5 research
analysts and 0.16 top research analysts in a given sector.
      We report the coefficient point estimates corresponding to the number of research analysts and
top research analysts in the top panel of Table 2 and interpret the corresponding magnitudes in
the bottom panel of Table 2. The results in column (2) indicate that the average investor is willing
to pay an additional 5.35bps per trade in order to have access to a top equity research analyst,
while having access to an additional non-top analyst is worth 1.72bps. To put these numbers in
perspective, the mean and standard deviation of brokerage fees is 13bps. Thus, the results in
column (2) indicate that investors behave as if they are willing to pay a 40% (=5.35/13) higher
fee, relative to the mean fee, to access a top equity research analyst.
      One potential concern is that the number of analysts and top analysts could be proxying for
some other brokerage firm characteristic. While this is indeed possible, we believe it is unlikely
that are our results are completely driven by unobservable characteristics for two reasons. First, we
include broker-by-month fixed effects in our most stringent specifications, so it would have to be the
case that research analyst coverage is proxying for some other brokerage firm characteristic at the
broker-by-sector level over time. Second, in the next section (Section VI ) we show that investors
have heterogeneous preferences over research. Our estimates indicate that those investors that we
would expect to place no value on sell-side research, such as index fund managers and hedge funds,
indeed place no value on sell-side research. Thus, if our results are driven by some unobserved
 22                                          siklt       fiklt
      The elasticity of demand is given by   fiklt
                                                     ×   siklt
                                                               .   Given the empirical framework, it is straightforward to show that
siklt
fiklt
        = siklt (1 - siklt ) following eq. (4).


                                                                      21
broker-by-sector-by-investor characteristic, it would have to be that index fund managers and hedge
funds also place little value on that characteristic.
       Overall, our estimates suggest that sell-side research, especially top-ranked research, helps drive
institutional investor trading decisions and that investors appear to value sell-side research.


V.C       Value of Information

Recent studies by Barbon, Di Maggio, Franzoni, and Landier (2019) and Di Maggio, Franzoni,
Kermani, and Sommavilla (2019) have shown that brokers are an important hub for order flow
information, which can be strategically released to some investors in order to attract their business.
We enrich our analysis by investigating how investors value order flow information.
       First, we measure order flow information using the broker's centrality in the network of re-
lationships between investment managers and brokers. In theory, we would expect more central
brokers to trade through better performing investors who are themselves more likely to submit
informed trades. Second, we identify instances in which the broker has received an informed order
for a particular stock and create a dummy variables for those events. Intuitively, those are instances
in which it is more likely that the broker will be able to provide order flow information to other
investors.
       We present the point estimates in the top half of Table 2 and interpret the corresponding magni-
tudes in the bottom panel of Table 2. In each specification, we find that investors are more likely to
trade through central brokers. The results in column (2) indicate that investors are willing to pay an
additional 2.77bps per trade in order to trade through a broker who has a one standard-deviation
higher centrality measure. The results are even more economically significant when we consider
the informed broker measure. We find that the investors are willing to pay an additional 2-6bps
in order to trade through an informed broker, which is similar to and actually slightly higher than
the value that investors place on sell-side research. Intuitively, the color that brokers provide about
current order flow is potentially as important/valuable, if not more important, than the sell-side
research analyst reports that are publicly released.


V.D       Access to Alternative Trading Systems/Dark Pools

In recent years, alternative trading systems account for almost half of all trading volumes in the
US.23 Revealed preference suggests that investors value these alternative non-exchange trading
venues. We quantify this benefit in our analysis by including the dummy variable AT Slt which
indicates whether the brokerage firm operates an ATS, such as a dark pool, at time t. Table 2
presents the corresponding estimates. Note that because the variable AT Slt naturally varies at the
investor-by-month level, the variable is subsumed by the broker-by-month fixed effect in column
(4). We estimate a positive and significant relationship between a brokerage firm's market share
and whether it operates an ATS. The results in bottom half of Table 2 indicate that an investor
  23
       https://www.cfainstitute.org/en/advocacy/issues/dark-pools [ accessed 10/9/2019].



                                                          22
behaves as if she is willing to pay an additional 2-6bps in order to execute a trade through a
brokerage firm that has had access to an alternative trading system/dark pool. One important
caveat is that the variable AT Slt varies at the broker-by-month level rather than the broker-by-
sector-by-month level. Thus, one concern is that our variable AT Slt captures other time-varying
broker characteristics that are correlated with when a brokerage firm established an alternative
trading system. In Section VI we explore how different investors value ATS to provide additional
insight into this potential endogeneity concern.


V.E   Implicit Trading Costs: Price Impact

Given the time and resources devoted by investors to making sure that trading is optimized, quality
of execution is likely to be a key consideration for investors. Importantly, Anand, Irvine, Puckett,
and Venkataraman (2012) show that institutional trading desks display persistent skill. Part of this
skill may result from the choice of the most efficient brokers. Since brokers will have access to
different networks of clients and different infrastructures to match opposite-sign orders from their
clients, execution will likely be heterogeneous across brokerage firms. Furthermore, there might
be specialization across brokers such that some brokers are more adept at trading some stocks than
others.
   We investigate how investors factor in execution quality when deciding where to route their or-
ders. Table 2 presents the corresponding estimates. In columns (2)-(4) we instrument for expected
price impact using lagged price impact, as described in Section IV to account for measurement er-
ror and potential endogeneity issues. In each specification, we estimate a negative and statistically
significant relationship between a broker's trading price impact and the broker's market share. We
interpret the magnitudes in the bottom panel of Table 2. The results in column (2) indicate that
investors are willing to pay an additional 7bps in order to trade through a broker whose expected
price impact is one standard-deviation (0.67%) lower. In terms of the variation in price impact,
our estimates indicate that a one standard deviation increase in price impact corresponds roughly
to half a standard deviation increase in brokerage fees (0.13%). Thus, in terms of the variation of
the data, expected price impact has first-order impact on order flows.
   To the extent that expected price impact directly translates into higher execution costs, one
might expect investors to trade off price impact and broker fees one-for-one. Recall that our es-
timate of investor's preference with respect to price impact likely suffers from attenuation bias
because our measure of price impact reflects both variation in fundamentals and true price impact.
Also, to extent that price impact is not perfectly observed and forecastable by investors, a Bayesian
investor would find it optimal to place less weight on implicit trading costs relative to explicit costs.
   To help address these potential measurement error and saliency issues, we examine an investors'
sensitivity to large trading costs. Specifically, we re-estimate our baseline specification where we
control implicit trading costs with the variable LargeP riceImpactlkt , which measures whether the
price impact was greater than 0.25% (roughly the 50th percentile). We report the estimates in Table
3. The results in column (2) suggest that investors behave as though they are willing to pay an


                                                   23
additional 34bps (=1.37/398) higher broker fee, relative to the value of the transaction, in order
to avoid a large price impact of at least 0.25%. Given that the median (mean) large price impact
is 0.46% (0.66%), this implies that investors trade off implicit and explicit trading costs almost
one-for-one. The results suggest that investors avoid brokers with a track record of particularly
poor execution, which may be more salient and predictable than average execution.


V.F      Trader Characteristics

A unique feature of our data set is that we also observe characteristics of the individual equity
traders working for the brokerage firms in our Ancerno data. We are able to match the investor
trading data from Ancerno with the trader-level data for about half of our sample.24 We re-estimate
our baseline demand specification where we control for the characteristics of each broker's traders.
Specifically, we control for the number of traders a firm employs, the average experience of those
traders, and whether or not those traders engage in financial misconduct.
       Table 4 presents the corresponding estimates. In each specification, we estimate a negative and
statistically significant relationship between trader misconduct and a broker's market share. The
results in column (1) indicate that investors are indifferent between a 1pp increase in misconduct
and a 0.45bps decrease in fees. Financial misconduct includes customer disputes, regulatory, and
criminal offenses. These results suggest that financial misconduct costs brokerage firms money in
the form of lower trading volumes.
       We also find that investors prefer to trade through firms that employ more experienced traders.
The results in column (2) indicate that, on average, investors are willing to pay an additional
0.82bps to trade through a firm whose traders have an additional year of experience. However,
we find evidence of a non-linear relationship. Investors prefer to trade through more experienced
traders up until the trader has accumulated 14 years of experience. Beyond 14 years, investors
actually prefer to trade with less-experienced traders. This suggests that traders may learn on the
job over the first decade of their career, but their skills diminish over time. While investors appear
to value the experience of the traders, we find little evidence suggesting that investors have strong
preferences over the size of trading desks.
       Using our trader-level data set, we can also determine the distance between investors and a
brokerage firms' traders for roughly 30% of the trades in our sample. We re-estimate our demand
specification controlling for distance and present the corresponding estimates in Table 5. The
results indicate that investors prefer to trade through brokers who are located in the same city as
the investor (within 100 miles). The economic magnitude of the estimated effect is substantial. The
estimates in column (2) indicate that investors are willing to pay 10bps more per trade in order to
trade through a broker who is located in the same city as the investor. The effect of being in the
same city translates to a roughly one standard deviation decrease in brokerage fees. The effect is
also somewhat surprising given that equity trades occur over the phone or electronically and not in
  24
    We are able to match only half of the Ancerno data set with the BrokerCheck trader-level data because BrokerCheck
covers t6he period 2005-2018 whereas Ancerno covers the period 1999-2014.


                                                        24
person. These results also suggest that investors strongly prefer to trade through parties that they
potentially know on a more intimate level and that relationships remain important in the industry.
This is consistent with the idea that "trading is--and always has been--a relationship business."25
Finally, we note that location in close proximity is not capturing investor or broker location in big
cities (e.g. NYC) because our specifications include broker and investor fixed effects.


VI     Investor Heterogeneity
In our baseline empirical analysis we implicitly assumed that investors have the same preferences.
However, in practice, different investors are likely to value different dimensions differently. For
example, an S&P 500 index fund manager may be extremely price sensitive relative to a hedge
fund or active mutual fund manager. Similarly, an S&P Index fund manager would likely place no
value on sell-side research while other investors may place a premium on high quality research. An
advantage of our rich empirical stetting is that we are able to estimate demand for these difference
services at the investor-level.


VI.A    Estimation

We re-estimate our baseline specification (eq. 6) where we allow an investor's preferences over
fees (i ) and other broker characteristics (i ) to vary across investors. Recall from our earlier
framework, that an investor's indirect utility function from trading is:

                                  uijklt = -i fiklt + Xklt i + iklt +   ijklt


In our baseline specification we assume that preferences are constant across investors such that
 i         
 i     =       . To implement our specification with heterogeneous preferences we estimate the
following regression at the investor-level:


                            ln siklt = -i ciklt + Xklt i + µil + µikt + iklt .                        (7)
                                                                i
This allows us to recover the distribution of coefficients      i   without placing any parametric re-
strictions on the distribution of coefficients. Again, observations are at the investor-by-sector-by-
month-by-broker level.
     To recover the distribution of investor coefficients, we separately estimate eq. (7) at the
investor-level such that we can recover each investor's preferences i and i . In other words, we
are able to estimate our random-coefficients demand model using simple linear regression at the
investor-level. This is in sharp contrast to the way one typically has to estimate a Berry, Levinsohn,
and Pakes (1995) (BLP) type demand system. In the standard Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995)
set-up, the econometrician only observes aggregate demand data, rather than individual demand
  25
     The quote is from Johnson, Vice President of Market Structure and Technology at Greenwich Associates.
[https://www.bloomberg.com/professional/blog/human-high-touch-trading-stay/] accessed 5/9/2019.


                                                    25
data. Consequently, with aggregate data, one typically has to make parametric assumptions over
the distribution of preferences (i , i ), and estimates the model via GMM. Estimating the model via
GMM with aggregate data involves solving a non-trivial contraction mapping for each set of param-
eters that the econometrician searches over (Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995); Nevo (2000)).
Because of our unique, detailed, micro data, where we observe each individual investor making
thousands of decisions, we can estimate our demand model using simple regression at the investor-
level. Furthermore, we do not need to make any parametric assumptions over the distribution of
investor preferences (i , i ). In most data sets, the researcher does not have enough observations
at the individual-level to estimate individual-specific demand functions. For power considerations,
we estimate eq. (7) at the investor-level where we restrict our sample to those 247 out of 393
investors that have at least 1,000 observations (sector-by-month-by-broker level).


VI.B      Results

We estimate the preferences for each investor and report the distribution of estimated preferences
across investors in Table 6. The mean preference parameters from our heterogeneous preferences
specification are similar to the baseline estimates reported in Table 2. Consistent with our previous
results, we find that the average investor values competitive implicit and explicit trading costs,
research, information (eigenvector centrality and order flow information), and access to dark pools.
       We also find persistent heterogeneity in preferences across investors, and we are able to reject
the null hypothesis that investors have homogeneous preferences for each broker characteristic. We
display the corresponding distribution of preferences in Figure 4 panels (a)-(g). The results suggest
that there is substantial heterogeneity across investors. For example, while the average elasticity of
demand in our sample is 0.54, Figure 4a indicates that some investors have demand elasticities of
less than 0.2 while others have demand elasticities near one. We also find that there is substantial
heterogeneity in how investors value sell-side research (Figures 4b and 4c). While the average
investor values sell-side research, Figure 4c indicates that many (10%+) investors place no value
on top analysts.
       One important caveat is that for some broker characteristics, such as implicit trading costs, we
have limited power to precisely estimate investor-specific preferences. While we are able reject the
null hypothesis that investors have the same preferences with respect to expected price impact, the
corresponding F-test indicates that measurement error accounts for roughly half of the estimated
variation in the investor-specific coefficients corresponding to expected price impact (Figure 4g ).26
       To help understand how preferences vary across investors, we examine how preferences vary
with observable investor characteristics. Specifically, we project our investor-specific preference
  26                                                                                                    F -1- 2k-1
     Under the assumption that the variance of the estimation error is homoskedastic, the term  =            F
                                                                                                                    , where F
is the F -test statistic corresponding to the joint test that investors preferences with respect to expected price impact are
homogeneous and k is the number of investors, measures how much of the variation in the distribution estimated coeffi-
cients with respect to expected price impact is driven by true underlying differences across investors versus measurement
error (Casella (1992)).




                                                            26
parameters (i , i ) on a vector of investor-specific characteristics Di

                                                   i = Di + .                                                      (8)

The vector Di captures the observable investor characteristics including whether the investor is a
hedge fund, index fund, high churn/volume fund (above average number of trades), high perform-
ing fund (above average returns), or a large fund (above average size).27 ,28
       We report the corresponding estimates in Table 7. The estimates help provide insight into
how preferences vary across investors. For example, the preferences of hedge funds managers
appear to be distinct from other institutional investors. Hedge fund managers do not appear to
value sell-side research, placing little weight on the total number and the number of top research
analysts a brokerage firm employs (columns 2 and 3). This result is intuitive, as hedge funds create
value by conducting their own investment research and producing information in financial markets.
Conversely, hedge funds appear to place greater value on informal information regarding order flow
(column 5). While our previous results indicate that investors, on average, value brokers that are
more central in the trading network, we find that hedge funds actually prefer to trade through less
central brokers (column 4). One potential explanation for this finding is that hedge fund managers
may be more concerned about concealing order flow and about brokers leaking a hedge fund's
trades (Barbon, Di Maggio, Franzoni, and Landier (2019); and Di Maggio, Franzoni, Kermani, and
Sommavilla (2019)). Thus, a hedge fund manager may prefer to trade through more peripheral
brokers, conditioning on the broker possessing order flow information.
       Index fund managers also have distinct preferences relative to other investors. Similar to hedge
fund managers, index fund managers appear to place no value on sell-side research which is intu-
itive given that index fund managers have no use for research. We also find some evidence that
index fund managers are among the most price sensitive investors with respect to both explicit and
implicit trading costs (columns 1 and 7), although the point estimates are marginally insignificant
at the 10% level.
       Overall, the results suggest that accounting for investor heterogeneity in brokerage markets is of
first-order importance, especially when examining how investors value the ancillary services, such
as sell-side research that brokerage firms offer. Accounting for this heterogeneity has important
implications for how the proposed MiFID II regulations will impact investors.
  27
      To identify index funds, we manually search the fund names in Ancerno for the word 'index' and flag the results
with an indicator variable. Then, we aggregate this variable at the investment company-level by taking the average.
Similarly, we identify hedge fund management companies in Ancerno using the procedure in Cotelioglu, Franzoni, and
Plazzi (2019). With the understanding that the identification is made at the management company-level, we label these
firms "hedge funds" for short.
   28
      We compute investors' six-month trading performance at the end of month t as the value-weighted return of all
the trades executed over the prior six-month period evaluated at the end of the month in question. In particular, the
percentage performance of all trades started by a manager over the prior six months is computed using closing prices at
the end of month t, with sell trades' performance computed as the negative of a buy trade performance. We value-weight
the performance of all the trades in the same six-month horizon ending in month t.




                                                         27
VII       Soft-dollars and Management Fees
Brokers traditionally provide bundled services to institutional investors, combining execution, re-
search and other brokerage services. Over the past 20 years, there has been a push among institu-
tional investors and in policy circles to unbundle brokerage services to improve market competitive-
ness and transparency. Most recently, as part of MiFID II, European regulators are forcing brokers
to unbundle their services. Bundling allows institutional investment managers to pay for research
and other brokerage services with soft-dollars through execution fees rather than to directly pay for
these services with hard-dollars. Soft-dollar transaction fees are not reported in the fund's expense
ratio but are subtracted from the fund's returns.29 The potential concern with soft-dollars payments
is that they are borne by the end-investor and not disclosed by the fund. Hence, paying for research
with soft-dollars results in investment managers under-reporting fund management fees.
      The term soft-dollar payments does not necessarily have a uniform definition in the industry and
broadly incorporates two different types of research-related transactions (Blume (1993)). The first,
and most common type of transaction, is when an investment manager uses broker commissions
to pay a broker for research and other services that the broker produced in-house. In the second
type of transaction, the investment manager uses broker commissions to pay for research and
other services obtained from a third party. The broker then pays a portion of the corresponding
commissions to the relevant third party. We use our framework to focus on soft-dollar payments for
in-house research. We focus on these types of soft-dollar payments because they are more common
(Blume (1993)) and can be more directly measured using our estimates.
      Our framework from Section II and the heterogeneous coefficient estimates from Section VI
(eq. 7) allow us to quantify soft-dollar in-house research related payments in the brokerage indus-
try. Our empirical estimates measure how each investment manager precisely values the in-house
research produced by brokers, and how much more an investment manager is willing to pay on
a per-transaction basis to have access to research. We then use these estimates to calculate how
much larger fund reported management fees would potentially be if investment managers were to
include the value of soft-dollar in-house research related payments in their management fees. Such
analysis would not be possible without our empirical model. For example, simply looking at the
heterogeneity in fees (Figure 2) would be insufficient because we do not know if an investment
manager pays a higher execution cost because the manager places a high value on research or be-
cause the manager is worse at execution. Our analysis allows us to precisely quantify soft-dollar
research payments in terms of hard-dollars.


VII.A      Quantifying the Soft-Dollars

We use our empirical estimates to quantify the total value investment manager obtain from hav-
ing access to sell-side research. To calculate the total value of sell-side research we compute the
compensating variation required if we were to remove sell-side research from the market place.
 29
      http://www.finra.org/investors/funds-and-fees


                                                      28
The compensating variation tells us how much institutional investors would be willing to pay in
hard-dollars to have access to sell-side research. In this sense, compensating variation represents
an upper-bound on how much management fees are currently under-reported due to soft-dollar
transactions. We can then use the estimate of compensating variation to determine how much
higher reported management fees would be if investors paid for research with hard-dollars.
       Importantly, the compensating variation calculation is inherently a partial equilibrium calcula-
tion where the characteristics of brokers are held fixed. If regulators forced investors to pay for
research with hard-, rather than soft-, dollars, the price of research in hard-dollars in equilibrium
would depend on competition among brokers and bargaining between investors and brokers, nei-
ther of which we have explicitly modeled. The advantage of focusing on compensating variation
is that it can be directly calculated from our investor demand estimates without having to take
a stance on the supply-side of the model or the nature of competition. To this end, compensat-
ing variation is informative of an investment manager's subjective value of research and provides
an upper bound on how much management fees are currently under-reported due to soft-dollar
transactions.
       We calculate the compensating variation at the investor by market-level using our demand
estimates. We calculate the compensating variation of investment manager i in sector k at time
t as the expected profits of trading when the investment manager has access to sell-side research
(E ]ikt ]), relative to the expected profits of trading when the investor does not have access to
                       N o Research ]) :
sell-side research (E ]ikt

                                         Research                 N o Research
                                      CVikt       = E [ikt ] - E [ikt          ]

Following Petrin (2002), compensating variation in our discrete choice framework is given by

                                     ln     lLikt   exp(uiklt )       ln     lLikt   exp(uN o Resarch )
                                                                                          iklt
                     Research
                  CVikt          =                                -                                                      (9)
                                                 i                                     i

where uiklt = -i fiklt + Xklt i + µilt + iklt is the average utility derived by investment manager
i from trading in sector k with broker l at time t and uN o Resarch = u
                                                        iklt
                                                                               Research  Research =
                                                                       iklt - Xklt      i
                                   Research  Research is the average utility derived by investment
-i fiklt + Xklt i + µilt + iklt - Xklt      i
manager i from trading in sector k with broker l at time t excluding the utility from research
  Research  Research ). Intuitively, the compensating variation is an increasing function of the utility
(Xjkt      i
              Research  Research ) aggregated across all brokers available to an investor in a given
of research (Xjkt      i
sector, Likt . All else equal, the more utility an investment manager derives from research, the
                                                                                1
greater the required compensating variation. The scaling term                   i   converts the required compensat-
ing utility in terms of profits/fees. Using our demand estimates (eq. 7) we calculate compensating
variation at the investor-by-market level.30
  30
     Notice that in our demand specification we can write an investor's indirect utility as uiklt = ln(siklt )+ikt , where ikt
is some market (investor-sector-time) specific constant. Thus we can compute the compensating variation empirically at



                                                             29
VII.B     Results

Figure 5 plots the distribution of compensating variation at the investor-by-market-level. For pur-
poses of making an apples-to-apples comparison, we report the compensating variation for those
markets where we observe at least one active research analyst. The average compensating variation
is 3bps, which implies that the investment manager would be willing to pay an additional 3bps per
trade in order to have access to sell-side research. Again, the value of research varies dramatically
across the population of investment manager, with 25% of investors placing essentially no value
(less than 0.5bps) on sell-side research. At the other extreme, 10% of investors would be willing to
pay more than 7bps per trade to have access to outside research (Figure 5, Table 8).
    We can use the compensating variation estimates to provide an estimate of the upper bound
on how much higher reported management fees would be if investment managers had to pay
for research with hard-dollars. Compensating variation tells us the investment manager's perceived
value of the research that they consume through soft-dollar payments on a per-trade basis. Because
our estimates of the value of research are on a per-trade basis, we annualize these implied research
costs by multiplying them by the fraction of an investment manager's portfolio that is traded in a
given year (the investment manager's portfolio turnover times two).31 ,32 Lastly, we compare the
annualized implied research costs relative to the fund's annual management fees to determine how
much investment managers under-report management fees relative to the value they extract from
soft-dollar research payments:

                    Annual Sof t Dollarslt    ¯ Research × P ortf olio T urnoverit × 2
                                             CV it
                                           =                                           .                              (10)
                     M anagement F eeslt               M anagement F eest

    Figure 6 and Table 8 display our estimates of how much higher reported management fees
would potentially be if investment managers had to explicitly pay research payments in hard dollars
rather than paying for them through soft dollars. Specifically, Figure 6 reflects the annual value of
research obtained through soft-dollar payments relative to management fees at the investor-by-year
level. The estimates indicate that reported management fees would be 4% higher if investment
the investor by market-level as
                                                                                                            
                                                                                        Research Research
                                     ln   lLikt   sijkt - ln        lLikt   siklt exp(-Xklt     i
                    Research
                 CVikt         =                                                                            
                                                                       i

          Research Research
where Xklt        i         is the utility investor i derives from research.
  31
     We calculate fund turnover and management fees for mutual funds as reported by CRSP Mutual Fund data. Because
the Ancerno data is at the management company-level, but the mutual fund data is at the fund-level, management
companies in Ancerno (which we label investor) are matched to multiple mutual funds. We calculate the average
turnover rate and manager expenses at the investor-by-year level where we take the equal weighted average across all
of an investor's corresponding mutual funds. We calculate management fees for hedge funds as reported by TASS. We
calculate portfolio turnover for hedge funds based on the average trading volume in our Ancerno sample.
  32
     Fund turnover is calculated as the value of all transactions (buying, selling) divided by two, then divided by a fund's
total holdings. Because we are interested in the number of trades that an investor makes in a given year, we multiply the
investor's portfolio turnover by two to account for both sell (stocks removed from the portfolio) and buy trades (stocks
added to the portfolio).



                                                               30
managers had to pay for the value of research they consume with hard dollars. Again, there is
substantial heterogeneity across investors. While management fees are not under-reported for 25%
of our sample ( Annual Sof t Dollarslt
                 M anagement F eeslt < 0.25%), they are under-reported by more than 20% by some
investment managers. For the investment managers in the top quartile, reported management fees
would be 15% higher if the funds had to pay for the research in hard-dollars.
   Because larger funds tend to place a higher value on research (Table 7), the results are even
more stark when we calculate the amount of under-reporting weighted by assets under manage-
ment (AUM), which may be the more relevant metric from an end-investor's or policymaker's per-
spective. The third row of Table 8 displays the distribution of the value of soft-dollars relative
to management fees weighted by AUM. Overall, the results suggest that management fees would
be 10% higher if investment managers had to pay for the value of research they consume with
hard-dollars.
   The evidence suggests that for many firms in our sample, the value of soft-dollar research
related payments is substantial. Since the impetus behind MiFID II and its requirement for the
unbundling of the services provided by brokers is to limit the use of soft-dollars and improve market
transparency, our results suggest that its effect might be significant in terms of how the overall cost
of delegated asset management will change . Furthermore, one aspect emerging from our analysis
that is often overlooked is that the effect of this regulation is likely to be uneven, as some funds are
likely to be significantly more affected than others due to their tendency to compensate brokers for
their research with trading commissions.


VIII    Conclusion
Institutional investors continue to rely on high-touch brokerage transactions in equity markets even
with the growth of alternative trading platforms. Given the sophistication of institutional investors
and how well-developed equity markets are, why do institutional investors trade through brokers?
This paper is a first step towards better understanding this issue and estimating the value that
brokers create.
   Our results indicate that brokers create value for investors by providing efficient execution, sell-
side research, and order flow information. While the average investor values these broker services,
there is substantial heterogeneity across investors. Hedge funds place almost no value on sell-side
research, but place a large premium on order flow information. Conversely, large institutional
investors are willing to pay up to 50% more per trade in order to access sell-side research analysts.
   Investors traditionally have paid for these research services with bundled-fee commissions, or
soft-dollars, which potentially allows them to under-report their management fees. Our estimates
suggest that investment management fees would be 10% higher if investment managers are forced
to pay for the value of research that they consume in hard- rather than soft-dollars. Overall,
our results help explain why high-touch broker trading remains prominent in institutional equity
markets.


                                                  31
References
A DAMS , W. J.,   AND   J. L. Y ELLEN (1976): "Commodity bundling and the burden of monopoly," The
  quarterly journal of economics, pp. 475­498.

A NAND , A., P. I RVINE , A. P UCKETT,     AND   K. V ENKATARAMAN (2012): "Performance of Institutional
  Trading Desks: An Analysis of Persistence in Trading Costs," The Review of Financial Studies,
  25(2), 557­598.

          (2013): "Institutional trading and stock resiliency: Evidence from the 2007­2009 financial
  crisis," Journal of Financial Economics, 108(3), 773­797.

B ABUS , A.,   AND   P. KONDOR (2018): "Trading and information diffusion in over-the-counter mar-
  kets," Econometrica, 86(5), 1727­1769.

B ARBER , B., R. L EHAVY, M. M C N ICHOLS ,      AND   B. T RUEMAN (2001): "Can investors profit from the
  prophets? Security analyst recommendations and stock returns," The Journal of finance, 56(2),
  531­563.

          (2003): "Reassessing the returns to analysts' stock recommendations," Financial Analysts
  Journal, 59(2), 88­96.

B ARBON , A., M. D I M AGGIO, F. F RANZONI ,           AND   A. L ANDIER (2019): "Brokers and order flow
  leakage: Evidence from fire sales," Journal of Finance, 74(6), 2707­2749.

B ERRY, S., J. L EVINSOHN ,    AND    A. PAKES (1995): "Automobile prices in market equilibrium," Econo-
  metrica, pp. 841­890.

B ERRY, S. T. (1994): "Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation," The RAND
  Journal of Economics, pp. 242­262.

B HARATH , S. T.,     AND   S. B ONINI (2019): "What Is the Value of Analyst Research?," University of
  Arizona Working Paper.

B IRRU, J., S. G OKKAYA , X. L IU,      AND   R. M. S TULZ (2019): "Are Analyst Trade Ideas Valuable?,"
  Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

B LUME , M. E. (1993): "Soft dollars and the brokerage industry," Financial Analysts Journal, 49(2),
  36­44.

B UDISH , E., P. C RAMTON ,     AND   J. S HIM (2015): "The high-frequency trading arms race: Frequent
  batch auctions as a market design response," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4), 1547­
  1621.

B UDISH , E., R. S. L EE ,   AND   J. J. S HIM (2019): "Will the market fix the market? a theory of stock
  exchange competition and innovation," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                                        32
C ASELLA , G. (1992): "Illustrating empirical Bayes methods," Chemometrics and intelligent labora-
  tory systems, 16(2), 107­125.

C HAO, Y., C. YAO,          AND   M. Y E (2018): "Why Discrete Price Fragments U.S. Stock Exchanges and
  Disperses Their Fee Structures," The Review of Financial Studies, 32(3), 1068­1101.

C HUNG, J.-W.,        AND   B. U. KANG (2016): "Prime broker-level comovement in hedge fund returns:
  information or contagion?," Review of Financial Studies, 29(12), 3321­3353.

C ONRAD , J. S., K. M. J OHNSON ,            AND   S. WAHAL (2001): "Institutional trading and soft dollars,"
  The Journal of Finance, 56(1), 397­416.

C OTELIOGLU, E., F. F RANZONI ,            AND   A. P LAZZI (2019): "What Constrains Liquidity Provision? Evi-
  dence From Hedge Fund Trades," CEPR DP 13645.

C OVAL , J. D.,   AND       T. J. M OSKOWITZ (1999): "Home bias at home: Local equity preference in
  domestic portfolios," The Journal of Finance, 54(6), 2045­2073.

C RAGG, J. G.,    AND   S. G. D ONALD (1993): "Testing identifiability and specification in instrumental
  variable models," Econometric Theory, 9(2), 222­240.

C RAWFORD , G. S.,          AND   A. Y URUKOGLU (2012): "The welfare effects of bundling in multichannel
  television markets," American Economic Review, 102(2), 643­85.

D I M AGGIO, M., F. F RANZONI , A. K ERMANI ,            AND   C. S OMMAVILLA (2019): "The relevance of broker
  networks for information diffusion in the stock market," Journal of Financial Economics, 134(2),
  419­446.

D ICK , A. A. (2008): "Demand estimation and consumer welfare in the banking industry," Journal
  of Banking & Finance, 32(8), 1661­1676.

D U, W., S. G ADGIL , M. B. G ORDY,               AND   C. V EGA (2019): "Counterparty risk and counterparty
  choice in the credit default swap market," Available at SSRN 2845567.

D UFFIE , D., S. M ALAMUD , AND G. M ANSO (2015): "Information percolation in segmented markets,"
  Journal of Economic Theory, 158, 838­869.

D UFFIE , D.,   AND   G. M ANSO (2007): "Information percolation in large markets," American Economic
  Review, 97(2), 203­209.

E GAN , M. (2019): "Brokers vs. retail investors: Conflicting interests and dominated products,"
  Journal of Finance, 74(3), 1217­1260.

E GAN , M., A. H ORTAÇSU ,           AND   G. M ATVOS (2017): "Deposit competition and financial fragility:
  Evidence from the us banking sector," American Economic Review, 107(1), 169­216.

E GAN , M., S. L EWELLEN ,         AND   A. S UNDERAM (2017): "The cross section of bank value," .

                                                             33
E GAN , M., G. M ATVOS , AND A. S ERU (2019): "The market for financial adviser misconduct," Journal
  of Political Economy, 127(1), 000­000.

FANG , B., O.-K. H OPE , Z. H UANG,         AND   R. M OLDOVAN (2019): "The Effects of MiFID II on Sell-Side
  Analysts, Buy-Side Analysts, and Firms," Buy-Side Analysts, and Firms (May 20, 2019).

G LODE , V.,   AND   C. O PP (2016): "Asymmetric information and intermediation chains," American
  Economic Review, 106(9), 2699­2721.

G OLDSTEIN , M. A., P. I RVINE , E. KANDEL ,          AND   Z. W IENER (2009): "Brokerage commissions and
  institutional trading patterns," Review of Financial Studies, 22(12), 5175­5212.

G ROYSBERG, B.,      AND   P. M. H EALY (2013): Wall Street research: Past, present, and future. Stanford
  University Press.

G UO, Y.,   AND   L. M OTA (2019): "Should Information be Sold Separately? Evidence from MiFID II,"
  Evidence from MiFID II (January 30, 2019).

H O, K., J. H O,     AND   J. H. M ORTIMER (2012): "The use of full-line forcing contracts in the video
  rental industry," American Economic Review, 102(2), 686­719.

H U, G., K. M. J O, Y. A. WANG ,          AND   J. X IE (2018): "Institutional trading and Abel Noser data,"
  Journal of Corporate Finance, 52, 143­167.

I RVINE , P., M. L IPSON ,   AND   A. P UCKETT (2006): "Tipping," The Review of Financial Studies, 20(3),
  741­768.

J EGADEESH , N., J. K IM , S. D. K RISCHE ,        AND   C. M. L EE (2004): "Analyzing the analysts: When do
  recommendations add value?," The journal of finance, 59(3), 1083­1124.

KOIJEN , R. S.,    AND   M. Y OGO (2016): "Shadow insurance," Econometrica, 84(3), 1265­1287.

L ANG , M. H., J. P INTO,     AND   E. S UL (2019): "MiFID II unbundling and sell side analyst research,"
  Available at SSRN 3408198.

L I , F. W., A. M UKHERJEE ,    AND   R. S EN (2017): "Inside brokers," HKUST Working Paper.

M C N ALLY, W. J., A. S HKILKO,       AND   B. F. S MITH (2015): "Do brokers of insiders tip other clients?,"
  Management Science, 63(2), 317­332.

N ANDA , A., B. G ROYSBERG,         AND   L. P RUSINER (2008): Lehman Brothers: Rise of the Equity Research
  Department, no. 9-906-034. HBS.

N EVO, A. (2000): "A practitioner's guide to estimation of random-coefficients logit models of de-
  mand," Journal of economics & management strategy, 9(4), 513­548.




                                                            34
P EROLD , A. F. (1988): "The implementation shortfall: Paper versus reality," Journal of Portfolio
  Management, 14(3), 4.

P ETRIN , A. (2002): "Quantifying the benefits of new products: The case of the minivan," Journal
  of political Economy, 110(4), 705­729.

P UCKETT, A.,    AND   X. YAN (2011): "The interim trading skills of institutional investors," The Journal
  of Finance, 66(2), 601­633.

S HILLER , B.,   AND   J. WALDFOGEL (2011): "Music for a song: an empirical look at uniform pricing
  and its alternatives," The Journal of Industrial Economics, 59(4), 630­660.

S TICKEL , S. E. (1992): "Reputation and performance among security analysts," The Journal of
  Finance, 47(5), 1811­1836.

S TIGLER , G. J. (1963): "United States v. Loew's Inc.: A note on block-booking," The Supreme Court
  Review, 1963, 152­157.

S TOCK , J. H.,   AND    M. Y OGO (2005): "Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression,"
  Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, p. 80.

T OWNSEND , R. M. (1978): "Intermediation with Costly Bilateral Exchange," The Review of Economic
  Studies, 45(3), 417­425.

WAGNER , W. H.,        AND   M. E DWARDS (1993): "Best execution," Financial Analysts Journal, 49(1),
  65­71.

WANG , Y., T. M. W HITED , Y. W U,      AND   K. X IAO (2018): "Bank market power and monetary policy
  transmission: Evidence from a structural estimation," Working Paper.

W OMACK , K. L. (1996): "Do brokerage analysts' recommendations have investment value?," The
  journal of finance, 51(1), 137­167.

X IAO, K. (2019): "Monetary transmission through shadow banks," Available at SSRN 3348424.

Y E , M., C. YAO, AND J. G AI (2013): "The externalities of high frequency trading," Available at SSRN
  2066839.

Z HU, H. (2014): "Do dark pools harm price discovery?," The Review of Financial Studies, 27(3),
  747­789.




                                                      35
   Figure 1: Share of High-Touch Broker Trades and the Number of Equity Traders in the U.S.




Note: The solid blue line displays the share of single-stock trades executed with high-touch broker
sales traders. Data on trade execution comes from survey data conducted and reported by Green-
wich Associates in the Greenwich Associates US Equity Investors Survey (2015-2017). The dashed
black line displays the number of equity traders registered in the U.S. by year. We calculate the
number of equity traders as the number of individuals who are licensed with the Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority as equity traders (i.e. the number of individuals who hold a Series 55 "Equity
Trader Examination" license).




                                                36
                                        Figure 2: Brokerage Fees
                                       (a) Fees (% of Transaction Value)




                                            (b) Fees ($ per Share)




Note: Figures 2 displays the distribution of fees charged by brokerage firms in terms of the cost relative to
the value of the transaction and the cost in terms of dollars per share. Observations are averaged at the
investor-by-broker-by-sector-by-month level which is the unit of observation in our main analysis.


                                                     37
                 Figure 3: Share of Brokers that Operate Dark Pools Over Time




Note: The figure displays a binned scatter plot of the share of brokers that operate alternative
trading systems/dark pools over time. Observations are at the investor-by-broker-by-sector-by-
month level which is the unit of observation in our main analysis.




                                              38
                                   Figure 4: Preference Heterogeneity
                                           (a) Elasticity of Demand




Note: Figure 4 panels (a)-(g) display the estimated distributions of demand elasticities, value placed on
an additional Research Analyst, value placed on an additional Top Research Analyst, value of a 1 standard
deviation increase in broker Eigenvector Centrality, the value of trading with an "informed" broker, the value
of trading with a brokerage firm that operates an alternative trading system/dark pool (ATS), and the value
of a 1pp decrease in Price Impact. Observations are at the investor level, and are weighted by investor
trading activity. The distributions correspond to the estimates reported in Table 6. We compute the average
elasticity of demand for each investor type as the average of -  (1 - s)  f ee. We compute the value of
research, information, ATS access, and price impact for each investor type as the average of the ratio of the
coefficient of interest divided by an investor's sensitivity with respect to fees (-).




                                                     39
                    Figure 4: Preference Heterogeneity (Continued)
    (b) Value of an Additional Analyst (bp)             (c) Value of an Additional Top Analyst (bp)




(d) Value of 1 SD Inc. in Broker Centrality (bp)              (e) Value of Information (bp)




   (f) Value of Access to an ATS/Dark Pool                           (g) Price Impact




                                                   40
                                    Figure 5: Total Value of Research




Note: The figure presents the distribution of compensating variation if we were to remove sell-side research
from the market. The compensating variation indicates how much each investor would need to be compen-
sated on a per-trade basis to make them indifferent between a regime with and without sell-side research.
We compute the compensating required for each investor at the market level according to eq. (9). Obser-
vations are at the investor-by-month-by-sector level. The above figure displays the distribution truncated at
the 1% and 99% level.




                                                     41
                Figure 6: Research Related Soft-Dollars Relative to Management Fees




Note: The figure presents the distribution of the annual value of soft-dollar research payments relative to
the investor's management fees. Observations are at the investor-by-year level. We calculate the annual
value of soft-dollar research payments based on the compensating variation required if we were to remove
sell-side research from the market (eq. 9; Table 5). Specifically, we calculate the annual value of soft-dollar
research related payments as the average compensating variation at the investor-by-year level multiplied by
how often the institutional investor turns over his/her portfolio. The above figure displays the distribution
truncated at the 2.5% and 97.5% level.




                                                      42
                                     Table 1: Summary Statistics


       Variable                                                    Obs        Mean      Std. Dev.
       Fees($ per share)                                        7,224,298     0.031       0.016
       Fees (%)                                                 7,224,298    0.13%       0.13%
       Price Impact                                             7,224,298    0.19%       0.67%
       Access to an ATS/Dark Pool                               7,224,298    25.59%      43.63%
       Research Analysts:
         Number of Analysts                                     7,224,298      1.47        2.40
         Number of Top Analysts                                 7,224,298      0.16        0.47
       Broker Information:
         Eigenvector Centrality                                 6,580,372     0.052        0.10
         Informed Broker (Di Maggio et al. 2018)                7,224,298     27%          44%
       Equity Traders:
         Number of Traders                                      3,397,871      255         238
         Pct of Traders Receiving Misconduct Disclosures        3,397,871     0.20%       0.61%
         Average Trader Experience                              3,377,309     11.65        2.66
         Distance (miles)                                       2,048,359      668         806
         Close Distance (Dist.<100 miles)                       2,048,359      33%         47%
       Institutional Investors:
         Hedge Fund                                             7,224,298      0.21        0.41
         Index Fund                                             7,224,298     0.029        0.10
         Number of Trading Partners (Per Market)                7,224,298     16.98       11.87


Note: Table 1 displays the summary statistics corresponding to our data set. Each variable is described in
detail in Section IV.B. Observations are at the investor-by-month-by-sector-by-broker level.




                                                   43
                                          Table 2: Broker Choice

                                                                (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)

    Fees                                                      -151***    -411***     -401***     -402***
                                                               (4.32)      (7.85)     (7.02)      (6.94)
    Access to an ATS/Dark Pool                                0.10***    0.082***    0.10***
                                                              (0.029)     (0.029)    (0.026)
    Price Impact:                                             3.26***     -44.3**     -21.7*      -26.0**
                                                               (0.35)      (19.3)     (12.6)       (12.7)
    Research:
     Number of Analysts                                      0.067***    0.070***    0.032***    0.035***
                                                             (0.0036)    (0.0037)    (0.0024)    (0.0017)
      Number of Top Rated Analysts                            0.15***     0.15***    0.068***    0.065***
                                                              (0.010)     (0.011)    (0.0061)    (0.0043)
    Information:
      Eigenvector Centrality                                  1.27***     1.14***     0.51***     0.31***
                                                              (0.064)     (0.066)     (0.039)     (0.045)
      Informed Broker                                         0.30***     0.25***     0.12***     0.10***
                                                              (0.016)     (0.016)    (0.0070)    (0.0042)

    Sector×Investor×Time Fixed Effects                           X           X           X           X
    Broker Fixed Effects                                                                 X
    Broker×Time Fixed Effects                                                                 X
    IV (Commissons & Price Impact)                                        X         X         X
    Cragg Donald F-Statistic for IV                                     6,300     2,900     1,300
    Observations                                            6,484,127 5,756,568 5,756,564 5,755,998
    R-squared                                                 0.304     0.268     0.298     0.315


    Mean Elasticity with Respect to Fees                       0.18        0.49        0.47        0.47
    Value of Research:
      Value of an Additional Analyst (bp)                       4.44       1.70        0.80        0.87
      Value of an Additional Top Analyst (bp)                  14.37       5.35        2.49        2.49
    Value of Information:
      Value of 1 Increase in Eigenvector Centrality (bp)        8.41       2.77        1.27        0.77
      Value of an Informed Broker (bp)                         19.87       6.08        2.99        2.49
    Value of Access to a ATS/Dark Pool (bp)                    6.62        2.00        2.49
    Value of 1 Decrease in Price Impact (bp)                   -1.45       7.22        4.63        4.33


Note: The table displays the estimation results corresponding to our discrete choice broker model (eq. 6).
The unit of observation is at the investment manager-by-broker-by-month-by-sector (6-digit GICS) level over
the period 1999-2014. Each independent variable is described in detail in Section IV.B. We measure fees in
percentage terms relative to the value of the transaction. As described in the text, we instrument for fees
using the average historical fee charged by the broker in terms of cents per share divided by the share price
of the stock being traded. The logic behind this instrument is that while brokerage firms charge investment
managers on per-share basis which is relatively sticky, investment managers are more concerned about cost
of the trade relative to the value of the transaction. We instrument for price impact using the lagged price
impact to account for measurement error. Standard errors are clustered at the broker-by-year level and are
reported in parentheses. The symbols *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.
In the bottom half of the table, we interpret the coefficient estimates. Elasticity of demand is calculated as
the average of -  (1 - s)  f ee. We compute the value of each independent variable as the ratio of the
coefficient of interest divided by an investor's sensitivity with respect to fees (-). For example, we calculate
the value of an analyst in column (1) as 10,000 × 0.067/151 = 4.44bps.
                                                      44
            Table 3: Broker Choice and Large Implicit Trading Costs (Large Price Impact)

                                                         (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)

             Fees                                     -151***     -398***      -400***     -402***
                                                       (4.31)      (7.92)       (7.05)      (6.98)
             Large Price Impact                       0.028***    -1.37***     -0.70***    -0.67***
                                                      (0.0063)     (0.20)       (0.15)      (0.17)

             Sector×Investor×Time Fixed Effects     X         X         X         X
             Broker Fixed Effects                                       X
             Broker×Time Fixed Effects                                            X
             IV (Commissons & Price Impact)                   X         X         X
             Cragg Donald F-Statistic for IV                5,100     2,000      740
             Observations                       6,484,127 5,756,568 5,756,564 5,755,998
             R-squared                            0.304     0.186     0.276     0.297


             Mean Elasticity with Respect to Fees       0.18         0.47        0.47        0.47
             Value of a Large Price Impact (bp)         1.85        -34.42      -17.50      -16.67


Note: The table displays the estimation results corresponding to our discrete choice broker model (eq. 6).
The unit of observation is at the investment manager-by-broker-by-month-by-sector (6-digit GICS) level over
the period 1999-2014. Each independent variable is described in detail in Section IV.B. We measure fees in
percentage terms relative to the value of the transaction. As described in the text, we instrument for fees
using the average historical fee charged by the broker in terms of cents per share divided by the share price
of the stock being traded. The logic behind this instrument is that while brokerage firms charge investment
managers on per-share basis which is relatively sticky, investment managers are more concerned about the
cost of the trade relative to the value of the transaction. Large Price Impact measures whether the price
impact was greater than 0.25% across all trades in the sample. The median and average price impact of a
Large Price Impact trade is 0.46In the bottom half of the table we interpret the coefficient estimates. Elasticity
of demand is calculated as the average of -  (1 - s)  f ee. We compute the value of each independent
variable as the ratio of the coefficient of interest divided by an investor's sensitivity with respect to fees (-).
For example, we calculate the value of avoiding a large price impact in column (2) -1.37/398 = 34bps.




                                                        45
                             Table 4: Broker Choice and Trader Characteristics

                                                            (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)

           Fees                                           -481***      -482***      -482***       -482***
                                                           (10.3)       (10.4)       (10.3)        (10.4)
           Trader Characteristics:
             Misconduct                                   -2.17**                           -1.80*
                                                           (1.01)                           (1.03)
             Trader Experience                                         0.24***             0.23***
                                                                       (0.040)             (0.041)
             Trader Experience2                                      -0.0086***          -0.0083***
                                                                      (0.0014)            (0.0015)
             Number of Traders (100s)                                             -0.026    0.038
                                                                                 (0.045)   (0.051)
             Number of Traders2 (100s)                                           -0.0016   -0.0059
                                                                                (0.0037) (0.0042)

           Sector×Investor×Time Fixed Effects               X         X         X         X
           Other Controls                                   X         X         X         X
           Broker Fixed Effects                             X         X         X         X
           IV (Commissons & Price Impact)                   X         X         X         X
           Cragg Donald F-Statistic for IV                1,100     1,000     1,100     1,000
           Observations                                 3,134,050 3,120,165 3,134,050 3,120,165
           R-squared                                      0.294     0.294     0.295     0.293


           Mean Elasticity                                  0.57         0.57         0.57          0.57
           Value of Trader Characteristics:
             1pp Inc. in Misc. (bp).                       -0.45                                   -0.37
             1 Year Inc. in Trader Experience (bp):                      0.82                      0.76
             100 Inc. in Number of Traders                                            -0.61        0.54


Note: The table displays the estimation results corresponding to our discrete choice broker model (eq. 6). The unit of
observation is at the investment manager-by-broker-by-month-by-sector (6-digit GICS) level over the period 1999-2014.
Each independent variable is described in detail in Section IV.B. The independent variable Misconduct measures the
share of equity traders working for the brokerage firm in a given year that receive misconduct disclosures, where
misconduct is defined as per Egan, Matvos and Seru (2019). Trader Experience measures the average trader experience
in years of a the equity traders working at a brokerage. Number of Traders measures the number of traders working at
a brokerage firm and is measured in 100s of traders. We measure fees in percentage terms relative to the value of the
transaction. As described in the text, we instrument for fees using the average historical fees charged by the broker in
terms of cents per share divided by the share price of the stock being traded. The logic behind this instrument is that
while brokerage firms charge investment managers on a per-share basis, which is relatively sticky, investment managers
are more concerned about the cost of the trade relative to the value of the transaction. Other controls include: Price
Impact, Number of Research Analysts, Number of Top Research Analysts, Number of Buy Recommendations, Broker
Eigenvector Centrality, Informed, and ATS. We instrument for price impact using the lagged price impact to account
for measurement error. Standard errors are clustered at the broker-by-year level and are reported in parentheses. The
symbols *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

In the bottom half of the table, we interpret the coefficient estimates. Elasticity of demand is calculated as the
average of -  (1 - s)  f ee. We compute the value of each independent variable as the ratio of the coefficient of
interest divided by an investor's sensitivity with respect to fees (-). For example, we calculate the value of a 1pp
increase in misconduct in column (1) as 10,000 × 2.17/481×-1.00% = -0.45bps. We calculate the marginal value of a
year of Trader Experience at the average value of Trader Experience (11.65 years). Similarly, we calculate the marginal
value of an additional 100 traders at the average value of Number of Traders. The average firm in our sample employs
250 equity traders.

                                                          46
                               Table 5: Broker Choice and Distance

                                                  (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)

       Fee                                      -146***    -401***     -400***    -397***
                                                 (7.59)     (11.5)      (9.85)     (9.59)
       Close Distance (Less than 100 miles)     0.40***    0.41***     0.33***    0.35***
                                                (0.047)    (0.051)     (0.052)    (0.054)
       Sector×Investor×Time Fixed Effects          X          X           X          X
       Other Controls                              X          X           X          X
       Broker Fixed Effects                                               X
       Broker ×Time Fixed Effects                                           X
       IV (Commissons & Price Impact)                   X         X         X
       Cragg Donald F-Statistic for IV                1,500      780       310
       Observations                       1,943,740 1,835,253 1,835,252 1,834,932
       R-squared                            0.300     0.282     0.308     0.341


       Mean Elasticity                            0.18      0.47         0.47       0.47
       Value Being Less than 100 miles (bp)      27.40      10.22        8.25       8.82


Note: The table displays the estimation results corresponding to our discrete choice broker model
(eq. 6). The unit of observation is at the investment manager-by-broker-by-month-by-sector
(6-digit GICS) level over the period 1999-2014. Each independent variable is described in detail
in Section IV.B. Close Distance is a dummy variable indicating that the broker and investor are
located within 100 miles of each other. We measure fees in percentage terms relative to the value
of the transaction. As described in the text, we instrument for fees using the average historical
fees charged by the broker in terms of cents per share divided by the share price of the stock
being traded. The logic behind this instrument is that while brokerage firms charge investment
managers on per-share basis, which is relatively sticky, investment managers are more concerned
about the cost of the trade relative to the value of the transaction. Other controls include:
Price Impact, Number of Research Analysts, Number of Top Research Analysts, Number of Buy
Recommendations, Broker Eigenvector Centrality, Informed, and Dark Pool. We instrument for
price impact using the lagged price impact to account for measurement error. Standard errors are
clustered at the broker-by-year level and are reported in parentheses. The symbols *,**, and ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

In the bottom half of the table, we interpret the coefficient estimates. Elasticity of demand
is calculated as the average of -  (1 - s)  f ee. We compute the value of Distance as the ratio of
the Distance coefficient divided by an investor's sensitivity with respect to fees (-). For example,
we calculate the value of being less than 100 miles apart in column (1) as 10,000 × 0.41/146× =
27.4bps.




                                                47
                        Table 6: Broker Choice - Heterogeneous Coefficients

                                                                  Mean       Std. Dev. F Stat.

       Fees                                                     -463.73** 475.43*** 71.4
       Access to ATS/Dark Pool                                  0.0625*** 0.40***   23.9
       Price Impact:                                            -10.70*** 216.68*** 2.08
        Research
         Number of Analysts                                     0.028***     0.033***    12.8
         Number of Top Rated Analysts                           0.079***     0.080***    11.6
       Information:
         Eigenvector Centrality                                  0.59***     0.59***     12.8
         Informed Broker                                         0.12***     0.10***     7.31

       Sector×Investor×Time Fixed Effects                           X
       Broker×Investor Fixed Effects                                X
       IV (Commissons)                                              X
       Observations                                             6,668,464


       Elasticity                                                  0.54        0.56
       Value of Research:
         Value of an Additional Analyst (bp)                       0.81        1.81
         Value of an Additional Top Analyst (bp)                   2.78        7.13
       Value of Information:
         Value of 1 Increase in Eigenvector Centrality (bp)        1.52        5.47
         Value of an Informed Broker (bp)                          3.57        9.96
       Value of Access to a ATS/Dark Pool (bp)                     3.11        27.99
       Value of 1 Decrease in Expected Price Impact (bp)           3.58       160.84


Note: Table 6 displays the estimation results corresponding to our heterogeneous coefficient dis-
crete choice broker model (eq. 7). The unit of observation is at the investor-by-broker-by-month-
by-sector (6-digit GICS) level over the period 1999-2014. We restrict our analysis to 247 investors
where we observe at least 1,000 observations. Here, we allow preferences to vary across investors.
Consequently, we report the mean and standard deviation of preferences across the investors in
our sample. To control for outliers, we report the estimated coefficients winsorized at the 1% level.
Each independent variable is described in detail in Section IV.B. We measure fees in percentage
terms relative to the value of the transaction. For each broker characteristic, we report the F Statis-
tic corresponding to the null hypothesis that all investors have the same preferences over the given
broker characteristics. The symbols *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.
In the bottom half of the table, we interpret the coefficient estimates. Elasticity of demand is calcu-
lated as -  (1 - s)  f ee. We compute the value of each independent variable as the ratio of the
coefficient of interest divided by an investor's sensitivity with respect to fees (-).




                                                  48
                         Table 7: Investor Preferences by Type of Investor

                      Fees     Analyst Top Analyst Centrality Informed Dark Pool Price Impact
                      (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)      (6)         (7)

Hedge Fund         135         -0.0075    -0.034**    -0.41*** 0.085*** 0.0040              75.3
                 (97.7)       (0.0059)     (0.014)      (0.11)  (0.027) (0.075)           (46.1)
Index Fund        -229         0.0013       -0.056       0.50    -0.049  -0.028            -199
                 (259)         (0.022)     (0.040)      (0.67)  (0.064)  (0.15)           (155)
Large Investor    -92.4       0.033***    0.067***    0.34*** 0.057*** 0.056               -54.8
                 (104)        (0.0060)     (0.013)     (0.084) (0.015) (0.067)            (40.4)
High Performance 61.5          0.0046      0.0015     0.30*** 0.0027      0.12*            -27.8
                 (79.4)       (0.0070)     (0.016)      (0.12)  (0.016) (0.066)           (35.9)
High Churn         130         -0.0015     0.031*       0.057  0.038** -0.023               43.6
                 (199)        (0.0087)     (0.017)     (0.076) (0.017) (0.073)            (41.3)
Constant        -533***        0.0022      0.0080       0.21*    0.023   -0.019             4.09
                 (166)        (0.0078)     (0.015)      (0.11)  (0.016) (0.068)           (45.3)

Observations          247       247         247          247        247        247         247
R-squared            0.033     0.146       0.187        0.207      0.194      0.025       0.044


The table presents the results corresponding to a linear regression (eq. 8) where we examine how
investor preferences vary with observable investor characteristics. Observations are at the investor
level and the dependent variable in each column corresponds to the investors' preferences i for a
given broker characteristic. The estimates of investor preferences correspond to the results reported
in Table 6. Because the dependent variable is estimated from the data, we weight observation based
on the number of observations we have for each investor. To account for outliers, we winsorize
the estimated parameters at the 1% level. The independent variables Hedge Fund, High Churn
(above average number of trades), High Performance (above average returns), and Large Investor
(above average size) are all dummy variables. The variable Index Fund is between zero and one
and indicates whether the investor operates one or more index funds. Specifically, we calculate
index manually by searching the fund names in Ancerno for the word 'index' and flag the results
with an indicator variable. Then, we aggregate this variable at the investment company-level by
taking the average. The symbols *,**, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.




                                                 49
               Table 8: Research Related Soft-Dollars Relative to Management Fees

                                                        Mean SD               Percentile
                                                                     10th 25th 50th 75th       90th

Soft-Dollars:
 Per Trade (bp)                                2.82 4.21 0.09 0.67 1.99 4.15 7.14
 Annual (% of Management Fees)                 4.23 7.54 -2.17 0.15 2.27 7.36 13.83
 Annual (% of Management Fees) Weighted by AUM 9.87 9.01 0.08 2.28 7.80 14.98 26.64


Table 8 presents the distribution of the value of soft-dollar research payments on a per-trade ba-
sis (in bp) and annualized (% of management fees) for the investment managers in our sample.
Observations for soft-dollars per trade are at the investor-by-month-by-sector level, matching the
unit of observation corresponding to our estimates reported in Tables 2-6. We calculate the value
of soft-dollar research payments on a per-trade basis based on the compensating variation required
if we were remove sell-side research from the market (eq. 9; Table 5). Observations for annual
soft-dollars are at the investor-by-year level. We calculate the annual value of soft-dollar research
related payments as the average compensating variation at the investor-by-year level multiplied by
how often the institutional investor turns over his/her portfolio. We express the annual value of
soft-dollar research payments relative to annual management expenses. To account for outliers,
we winsorize annual soft-dollars at the 2.5% level. In the final row, we calculate the distribution
of the annual value of soft-dollar payments weighted by the investment manager's assets under
management.




                                                 50
