                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          EFFECTS OF DIRECT CARE PROVISION TO THE UNINSURED:
     EVIDENCE FROM FEDERAL BREAST AND CERVICAL CANCER PROGRAMS

                                       Marianne Bitler
                                     Christopher Carpenter

                                      Working Paper 26140
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26140


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




We are grateful to Janet Royalty and David Howard for sharing data and to David Bradford,
Meltem Daysal, Alex Hollingsworth, Mireille Jacobson, Sayeh Nikpay, Raeshell Sweeting,
Mircea Trandafir, Wendy Xu, and seminar and conference participants at Vanderbilt, Southern
Denmark University, the 2014 and 2019 ASHEcon Conferences, the 2014 Southeastern Health
Economics Study Group meeting, the 2015 international Health Economics Association
meetings, and the 2015 Southern Economic Association meetings for many helpful comments.
We are grateful to the American Cancer Society (Grant #RSGI-11-003-01-CPHPS) for grant
funding. We thank Brian Asquith, Danea Horn, Jessica Monnet, and Peter Shirley for excellent
research assistance. The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and
should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the American Cancer Society, the National
Bureau of Economic Research, or any other organization. All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Marianne Bitler and Christopher Carpenter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured: Evidence from Federal Breast and Cervical
Cancer Programs
Marianne Bitler and Christopher Carpenter
NBER Working Paper No. 26140
August 2019
JEL No. I1

                                         ABSTRACT

Much research has studied the health effects of expanding insurance coverage to low-income
people, but there is less work on the direct provision of care to the uninsured. We study the two
largest federal programs aimed at reducing breast and cervical cancer among uninsured women in
the US: one that paid for cancer screenings with federal funds and one that paid for cancer
treatments under state Medicaid programs. Using variation in rollout of each program across
states from 1991-2005, we find that funding for cancer treatment did not significantly increase
most types of cancer screenings for uninsured women. In contrast, funding for cancer detection
significantly increased breast and cervical cancer screenings among 40-64 year old uninsured
women, with much smaller effects for insured women (who were not directly eligible).
Moreover, we find that these program-induced screenings significantly increased detection of
early stage pre-cancers and cancers of the breast but had no significant effect on early stage or
other cancers of the cervix. Our results suggest that direct provision can significantly increase
healthcare utilization among vulnerable populations.


Marianne Bitler
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
bitler@ucdavis.edu

Christopher Carpenter
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B, Box #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER
christopher.s.carpenter@vanderbilt.edu
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




1. Introduction

A large literature in economics demonstrates that exogenous increases in

insurance coverage and generosity are associated with increases in health care

utilization (Manning et al. 1987, Card et al. 2008, and others). This has been

shown to be especially true in low-income populations: for example, multiple

studies in the literature have demonstrated significant positive utilization effects

of the Affordable Care Act (Courtemanche et al. 2019), positive effects from

expanding Medicaid eligibility criteria (Currie and Gruber 1996a, 1996b, 2001;

Busch and Duchovny 2005; Dubay et al. 2001; and the review in Buchmueller,

Ham and Shore-Sheppard 2016), negative effects of terminating Medicaid (Lurie

et al., 1984), and positive effects of expanding SCHIP and broadening the sets of

services covered by Medicaid (Buchmueller, Orzol, and Shore-Sheppard 2015).

Similarly, the Oregon Medicaid experiment found that lottery-based assignment

to public insurance in the state significantly boosted preventive care utilization

(Baicker et al. 2014). Thus, there is a great deal of work showing that more

generous health insurance for low-income people increases their health care

utilization.

        There is far less work, however, on the effects of what might be termed

`direct provision' of health care to the poor.1 In this study we provide new


1
  For a notable exception, see Bailey and Goodman-Bacon (2015) who study the effects of the
rollout of federally qualified health centers (FQHCs) on mortality and find that health centers
significantly reduce mortality.




                                                1
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




evidence on the question of how relatively direct care provision affects health care

utilization and health by studying the two largest federal programs for breast and

cervical cancer in the United States: the National Breast and Cervical Cancer

Early Detection Program (NBCCEDP) and the Breast and Cervical Cancer

Treatment Program (BCCTP).                  These programs provide fertile ground for

studying the effects of direct provision for several reasons. First, the health

conditions targeted by the program are important: breast cancer is by far the most

commonly diagnosed cancer among women in the US and is the second leading

cause of all cancer deaths (behind lung cancer). Although cervical cancer is less

prevalent, over 12,000 women are diagnosed in the United States each year.

Second, there is strong evidence that health care utilization can affect ultimate

health outcomes in this setting: early detection of cancers through regular

screenings ­ clinical breast exams and mammograms for breast cancer and

Papanicolaou (`Pap') tests for cervical cancer ­ is commonly understood to be a

key if not the most important determinant of survival.2 Third, there is a large

insurance-related gradient in cancer screening utilization: in our data, for

example, uninsured women have past year mammography screening rates that are

roughly half those of insured women age 50-64.

           Historically, state and federal governments have adopted a number of

public policies to incentivize screenings, such as requiring that cancer screenings


2
    At the same time, welfare effects of increased detection of pre-cancers is more ambiguous.




                                                   2
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




be included in health insurance plans and/or prohibiting insurance companies

from charging out of pocket costs for mammograms and Pap tests (Nikpay 2016;

Wherry 2013; Adams et al. 2013; Bitler and Carpenter 2016, 2017). In addition

to insurance-based interventions, governments have also offered more direct

provision of breast and cervical cancer screenings.     In 1990, the Breast and

Cervical Cancer Mortality Prevention Act established federal funding for the

National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program (NBCCEDP). The

original mission of the NBCCEDP was to provide cancer screenings for uninsured

low-income women within the states as well as diagnostic testing for those with

abnormal screening results. NBCCEDP ­ which still exists today ­ is a federal

program; states were required to submit plans to the federal government to receive

funds, and they were also required to commit to use the majority of funds for

direct service provision and to provide matching state funds.         NBCCEDP

programs were rolled out at different times across all states from 1991 to 1999. A

follow-up program authorized in 2000 created the Breast and Cervical Cancer

Treatment Program (BCCTP) and allowed states to use Medicaid funds to pay for

treatment for uninsured women whose tumors were detected under NBCCEDP.

        The timing of these programs is consistent with their possibly having a

role in one of the most important public health improvements in modern times:

the reversal in age-adjusted cancer mortality rates during the 1990s.      Cutler

(2008) argues that increases in routine cancer screenings are the most important




                                                3
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




factor contributing to this phenomenon, while Berry et al. (2005) find that the

share of the decrease in the rate of breast cancer deaths from 1975 to 2000 due to

screening ranged from 28% to 65% (with treatment accounting for the rest).

Thus, major federal investments in screening and treatment programs for breast

and cervical cancer have the potential to have played important roles in advancing

women's health at the end of the 21st century.

        Our paper provides the first comprehensive study of the effects of the

NBCCEDP and BCCTP on women's preventive health behaviors and diagnoses

of breast and cervical cancers. We draw on data that include mammography use,

clinical breast exams, and Pap tests for over half a million women from the 1991-

2005 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), a publicly available

dataset that is designed to be representative at the state level in each year. The

main empirical approach takes advantage of the staggered timing of adoption of

the NBCCEDP and BCCTP rollouts across states in a difference in differences

(DD) framework with state and year fixed effects, combined with a proxy for

health insurance status, as the programs should have mainly affected outcomes for

uninsured women. We supplement these analyses with administrative data on

cancer detections from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)

Program, the standard source of data on cancer diagnoses in the field.

        To preview, we find that NBCCEDP increased recent utilization of

mammograms, clinical breast exams, and Pap tests among women age 50-64




                                                4
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




without a health plan (the group explicitly targeted by the program) by 5.8, 3.8,

and 3.5 percentage points, respectively. Estimates for 50-64 year old women with

a health plan (who were not directly eligible in most states) are much smaller in

magnitude and generally insignificant.              We also find some evidence that

NBCCEDP also increased all types of past-year screenings among slightly

younger 40-49 year old women without a health plan who were targeted by the

program to a lesser extent. Event-study models show that the effects are not

observed prior to program implementation and are obtained fairly quickly after

program implementation. Moreover, we find that our effects are unique to the

directly-provided services: we find no association between NBCCEDP and other

health behaviors such as cholesterol checks, flu shots, seatbelt use, or smoking.

        Regarding Medicaid coverage of cancer treatments for NBCCEDP-

eligible women, we find no effects of BCCPT on take-up of preventive cancer

screenings except for increases in clinical breast exams for 50-64 year old

uninsured women. Finally, we use cancer registry data to show that NBCCEDP

rollout across states was associated with statistically significant increases in

detection of in-situ pre-cancers of the breast and localized (stage 1) breast cancers

but was not meaningfully related to detection of cervical cancers.3 Overall our

findings provide important new evidence that relatively direct provision of



3
  Below, we acknowledge and discuss some uncertainty and debate within the medical community
regarding possible over diagnosis and overtreatment of the earliest stage in situ cancers which




                                                5
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




cancer-related preventive health services to low-income women was effective at

improving population health behaviors among uninsured women and resulted in

meaningful changes in breast cancer detection.

        The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 outlines institutional details

regarding breast and cervical cancer screenings and describes the NBCCEDP and

BCCTP. Section 3 provides a brief literature review. Section 4 describes the data

and empirical approach. Section 5 presents the main results, and Section 6 offers

a discussion and concludes.



2. Institutional Background

a. Breast and Cervical Cancer Screenings

Our paper focuses specifically on federal programs to improve breast and cervical

cancer screenings for uninsured low-income women. The standard screenings for

breast cancer are mammograms and clinical breast exams, while the standard

screening for cervical cancer is the Pap test. In mammography, a woman's

breasts are placed on a machine that takes low-dose X-ray pictures to check for

abnormalities.     Screening mammograms are typically given to asymptomatic

women to look for suspicious markers. Diagnostic mammograms usually occur

among women who have had a previous abnormal screening mammogram

(approximately 10% of those screened in the early 1990s), have a family history


complicates somewhat our ability to draw strong welfare conclusions about the effects on




                                                6
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




of breast cancer, or have certain symptoms (e.g., presence of lumps in a breast or

changes in a nipple or breast). Abnormal screening results can also lead to more

invasive procedures such as biopsy. The average cost of a mammogram over our

sample period was approximately $150. Clinical breast exams (CBE) are physical

exams of a woman's breasts performed by a doctor, nurse, or other health

professional to manually feel for abnormalities. In general, no special equipment

is required, and clinical breast exams are much cheaper than mammograms and

are often carried out during a check-up with an OB/GYN, or at times, during a

visit with a primary care physician or other health care professional. Clinical

breast exams are viewed as less effective than mammograms at detecting breast

cancer.

          The Pap test (sometimes also called "Pap smear," "cervical smear," or

"cervical test") is the standard method for detecting early cancer of the cervix. In

a Pap test, a swab is used to gather cells from the outer opening of the cervix.

These cells are examined under a microscope for abnormalities, particularly for

pre-cancerous changes usually caused by the human papillomaviruses which are

sexually transmitted. If the test is abnormal, colposcopy (a cervical examination

using a microscope) or a biopsy can follow. The average cost of a Pap test over

our sample period was around $25-$40. Like CBEs, Pap tests may be carried out




increased cancer detection.




                                                7
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




during a typical well-woman visit, while mammograms typically require an

additional visit to a specialized facility with the appropriate imaging equipment.

b. The National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program

(NBCCEDP)

The NBCCEDP program was introduced after being signed into existence in the

Breast and Cervical Cancer Mortality Prevention Act of 1990. Federal funding

was provided initially to fund efforts by 8 states to establish early detection

programs. An additional 18 states were funded in 1992, and by 1999 NBCCEDP

was provided to all 50 states and the District of Columbia (Ryerson, Benard, and

Major, 2002). Grantees were required to provide matching funding either in kind

or monetarily, and those obtaining funding were required to submit data on

demographics and outcomes for screened women to CDC.                 Initially, CDC

followed the guidelines of major medical organizations and funded screening of

women 40 and older for mammography/CBEs and women over 18 for Pap tests.

However, in 1996 NBCCEDP shifted the rules to require ¾ of the mammogram

funding be for care provided to women 50 and older to reflect changes in

screening guidelines. A further change removed those 65 and older who are

eligible for Medicare Part B from eligibility for NBCCEDP funded

mammography screenings after 1998, when Medicare started covering screening




                                                8
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




mammography fully. With an eye towards reaching underserved populations,

NBCCEDP also targets low-income women (women under 250% of poverty).4

c. The Breast and Cervical Cancer Treatment Program (BCCTP)

The BCCTP program gives states the option to use their Medicaid programs to

cover breast cancer treatments for women who were screened through the

NBCCEDP. The timing of when state Medicaid programs implemented such

coverage varied across states but was concentrated exclusively in 2001 and 2002.

An explicit rationale for the BCCTP was the idea that a low-income woman might

not take advantage of free NBCCEDP screening if she thought that she would not

be able to pay for the treatments were her mammogram or Pap test to indicate the

presence of cancer or cancer-related problems. If so, it is reasonable to expect

that extending coverage for treatment might further boost screenings among low-

income women.



3. Literature Review

Numerous studies in economics have examined the effects of insurance-related

interventions on breast and cervical cancer screenings, including several that have

used randomized experiments to generate exogenous variation in health insurance.

Manning et al. (1987) found that cost-sharing deterred participants from obtaining

preventive care relative to the `free' plan in the controlled setting of the RAND


4
    Notably, citizenship status plays no role in determining NBCCEDP eligibility.




                                                  9
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




Health Insurance Experiment (HIE) from 1971 to 1982. Lurie et al. (1987),

however, show that mammography rates among women aged 45-64 in the RAND

HIE were only around 2 percent, precluding direct tests of cost-sharing on

mammography in particular; moreover, for Pap tests they found no difference

between screening rates for people in the `free' plan versus people randomized to

cost-sharing.     Finkelstein et al. (2012) study low-income Medicaid-eligible

women and find that participants who took-up Medicaid (which did not have cost

sharing) in the state due to winning a lottery in 2008 (i.e., generally moved from

no insurance to public insurance) were significantly more likely to get a

mammogram in the first year after the program, an effect on the order of 60

percent relative to the control group mean.

        Other studies have used alternative quasi-experimental designs to

understand how health insurance affects cancer screenings. Decker (2005), for

example, finds a discontinuous increase in mammography screenings at age 65,

the universal Medicare eligibility age. In contrast, Kolstad and Kowalski (2010)

find no significant change in mammography rates for women in Massachusetts

relative to women in other states after the implementation of the state's mandated

health insurance reform in 2006, though Sabik and Bradley do find that the state's

reform increased mammography and Pap test rates three years following the

reform (2016). Tello-Trillo (2016) finds that a large public health insurance

disenrollment in Tennessee in 2005 that affected childless adults did not




                                               10
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




significantly affect breast or cervical cancer screenings, while Barbaresco et al.

(2015) study the young-adult coverage mandate of the ACA and find that it did

not significantly increase Pap test rates among young adult women

(mammograms were not recommended for asymptomatic women under age 27

affected by the ACA young adult mandate). Thus, there is a large literature that

has used exogenous variation in insurance coverage to study effects on breast and

cervical cancer screenings.

        Our work is also related to a growing body of research examining policy-

relevant determinants of cancer screenings among insured women more broadly.

Bitler and Carpenter (2016) show that state mandates requiring private insurers to

cover screening mammograms significantly increased mammography, while

similar mandates for Pap tests also increased Pap test rates among Hispanic

women (Bitler and Carpenter 2017). Kadiyala and Strumpf (2011) find that age-

specific recommendations and medical guidelines for cancer screening rates

significantly increase screening and detection, though they do not separately

examine effects by insurance status. Buchmueller and Goldzahl (2018) study the

effects of a national program of organized breast cancer screening in France,

finding that its staggered adoption across areas was associated with significant

increases in recent mammography screenings on the order of ten percentage

points or more.




                                               11
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




          Regarding the specific programs we study here, there has been substantial

attention paid to the NBCCEDP in public health and health services research.5

Two public health studies examine the mortality effects of NBCCEDP. Howard

et al. (2010) examine a panel of breast cancer mortality rates from 1991-2005 and

control for the timing of NBCCEDP rollout across states (similar to what we use

below) and, alternately, a measure of the intensity of NBCCEDP screening in a

state. Difference-in-differences models using the former measure provided no

evidence that the program significantly reduced breast cancer mortality rates,

while      models    using    the   latter    measure    provided    some     evidence    of

contemporaneous (but not lagged) effects of NBCCEDP screening intensity on

breast cancer mortality. They interpret these findings as mixed evidence for a role

of the program at reducing deaths from breast cancer. Hoerger et al. (2011) also

study the effects of NBCCEDP on mortality but use a simulation model using

data from 2008-2009 and find that between 1991 and 2006 the NBCCEDP saved

100,800 life-years compared with no program.

          Two public health studies have also examined the effects of NBCCEDP

on cancer screenings and are therefore more closely related to our study. Adams

et al. (2003) use variation in the state rollout of NBCCEDP and federal funding of

the program to examine whether the maturity (age) of a state program was

associated with increased mammography and Pap test use among women in the


5
    We are not aware of any studies that evaluate the effects of BCCTP on screening or cancer




                                               12
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




state, controlling for insurance type, demographic characteristics, and state and

year fixed effects from 1996-2000.              They find that program maturity was

significantly associated with increased use of both types of screenings. Adams,

Joski, and Breen (2003) examine whether NBCCEDP reduced race/ethnicity

disparities in screening outcomes using the same data and basic empirical setup as

the earlier study. They do not find that the program significantly reduced these

disparities.

        Relative to the limited existing work on these programs, then, our study

advances the literature in several important ways. First, we consider a longer

period (1991-2005 for screenings and 1985-2005 for diagnoses) compared to

previous work which has studied 1996-2000.6 Our added data from 1991-1995

includes the heart of the timing of rollout of NBCCEDP: by 1996 the majority of

states had already rolled out NBCCEDP.7 Examining the earlier period also

allows us to more credibly control for pre-existing trends in outcomes under

study. Adding the later period covers the entire period of BCCTP rollout and also

allows us to measure the medium term effects of NBCCEDP.                       Second, we



mortality outcomes.
6
  Prior studies examine 1996-2000 because these are the years the BRFSS separately identifies
source of insurance. However, a summary measure of whether the woman has any type of health
plan is available over the entire 1991-2000 period, and as the NBCCEDP program was explicitly
targeted at uninsured women, information on type of insurance is not critical.
7
  The timing of the state rollout of the NBCCEDP program is: 1991: 2 (CO, WV); 1992: 7 (CA,
MD, MI, MN, NM, SC, TX); 1993: 4 (MA, MO, NC, NE); 1994: 5 (GA, NY, OH, WA, WI);
1995: 9 (AK, AL, KS, NJ, OK, OR, PA, SD, UT); 1996: 10 (AR, AZ, CT, FL, IA, IL, LA, ME,
RI, VT); 1997: 9 (DC, ID, IN, KY, MT, ND, NH, TN, WY); 1998: 4 (DE, HI, NV, VA); 1999: 1




                                               13
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




explicitly study variation in the estimated effects of the programs by insurance

status, which is relevant because NBCCEDP in particular was initially explicitly

designed to target uninsured women. Prior work has controlled for insurance

status in estimating the effects of NBCCEDP but, importantly given how the

program is targeted, has not examined whether the program effects vary with

insurance status. Third, we separately consider outcomes of women age 40-49

versus 50-64 to study the effectiveness of the programs in promoting breast

cancer screenings.8 (We also look at women aged 21-39, who were directly

eligible for Pap tests.) States varied in when, whether, and to what extent they

targeted 40-49 year old women for mammograms (in part due to changing

understandings over this period about the appropriateness of mammography

screening for women in this age group).9 Finally, we consider a wider range of

outcomes than in previous work. In addition to mammograms and Pap tests, we

also study clinical breast exams and use as placebo tests other preventive health



(MS). This is depicted graphically in Figure 4. Figure 5 depicts the timing of state rollout of the
BCCTP.
8
  We also considered models for 65-74 year olds, but because of nearly universal eligibility for
Medicare at age 65 and its effects on health outcomes (Card et al., 2008, 2009), the group of
uninsured women in this age range is likely to be extremely small and different from the uninsured
population of slightly younger women. Although women age 65-74 were technically eligible for
NBCCEDP services over the early part of our sample period, they were not the primary target of
the program. Importantly, over our sample period Medicare covered all of the services we
consider as outcomes at some frequency, though the generosity of coverage changed over time. In
fact, Medicare did not start fully covering mammograms for age-eligible women until 1998, at
which time women at or above age 65 became explicitly ineligible for NBCCEDP mammograms.
We revisit the 65-74 year old women when we examine cancer diagnoses, below.
9
  We lack detailed information on timing of when the 40-49 year old women were targeted or not
targeted in each state.




                                                14
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




investments and behaviors that should not have been directly affected by

NBCCEDP or BCCTP (e.g., flu shots and cholesterol checks).



4. Data Description and Empirical Approach

Our main outcome data come from the Center for Disease Control's Behavioral

Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). Fielded annually since 1984, the

BRFSS includes questions about mammograms, clinical breast exams, and Pap

tests and was designed to be representative at the state level. Surveys are fielded

by the individual states and then sent to CDC to be compiled into a public-use

dataset. Our analysis focuses on the period 1991 to 2005 which spans the entire

period of NBCCEDP and BCCTP rollout across states.10 State participation in the

BRFSS increased over the late 1980s, and the last state joined the BRFSS in the

mid-1990s.

        The BRFSS breast health questions allow us to create consistent measures

of mammography use along several dimensions for women age 21 and older.11

Specifically, in 1995, women were asked: "A mammogram is an X-ray of each

breast to look for breast cancer. Have you ever had a mammogram?" Women

who report ever having had a mammogram are then asked about the timing of


10
   We focus on 1991 forward in the BRFSS due to the fact that insurance coverage or coverage by
"any health plan" is first available in 1991.
11
   Questions about the primary outcomes we study were placed into an optional `Women's Health'
module in 2001, 2003, and 2005, and only 11-15 states asked respondents about these outcomes in
those years.




                                               15
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




their most recent mammogram. We create two key outcome variables related to

mammography use: first, we identify Ever Had Mammogram as equal to one if

the woman reports ever having had a mammogram and zero otherwise. Second,

we create Had Mammogram in the Past Year as equal to one if the woman reports

that she had a mammogram within the past year and zero otherwise.12 The

analysis sample for these outcomes includes all women--including those who

have not ever had a mammogram--since we are interested in effects on

population mammography use.

        We also create nearly identical variables for outcomes related to clinical

breast exams. Women are asked if they have ever had a breast physical exam

(also known as a clinical breast exam or CBE).13 Women who indicate "yes" are

then asked the same follow-up questions about timing as for the mammography

screener regarding the recency of the most recent CBE. Following the previous

logic, we define: Ever Had CBE and Had CBE in Past Year.




12
   Item non-response is fairly low for these questions. We omit observations with a `don't know'
or `refused (DK/RF) response to the mammogram questions. Note that we lack exact timing of
the most recent mammogram (beyond first year, second year, or later). Moreover, any of the
mammography outcomes that measure recency of screening raise questions about recall bias, as
well as whether the woman is reporting behavior within the previous calendar year or within the
previous 365 days.
13
   Question wording for CBE changed over time. In 1991 the screener read: "The next questions
are about breast physical examination, which is when the breast is felt for lumps by a doctor or
medical assistant. Have you ever had a breast physical exam by a doctor or medical assistant?" In
1992 the BRFSS replaced `breast physical exam' with `clinical breast exam' and replaced `doctor
or medical assistant' with `doctor, nurse, or other professional'. Starting in 1993, the question
specifically indicated that the purpose of the exam is to `feel the breast for lumps'.




                                               16
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




        Next, we create nearly identical variables for outcomes related to cervical

cancer screenings. Women are asked if they have ever had a Pap test (referred to

as "Pap smear" in the BRFSS).14 Women who indicate "yes" are then asked the

same follow-up questions as for the mammography screener regarding the timing

of the most recent Pap test. Following the previous logic, we define: Ever Had

Pap Test and Had Pap Test in Past Year.

        Finally, we consider a variety of health outcomes that we use as placebo or

falsification tests in the analyses below.             Specifically, we study outcomes

reflecting that the woman: Had a Flu Shot in the Past Year, Had Blood

Cholesterol Checked in the Past Year, Always Wears a Seatbelt, and Currently

Smokes Regularly. While it is plausible that there are real spillovers of the

NBCCEDP and/or BCCTP health care visits on these outcomes, any effects

should plausibly be much smaller than the directly targeted outcomes we study

above. More likely these outcomes should not be directly affected by the program

rollout, such that if we observed meaningful associations between the program

and these outcomes that would suggest model misspecification or otherwise cast

doubt on our main interpretation that direct provision (uniquely) increased

screenings.



14
  Actual question wording changed very slightly from 1991 to 1992 and from 1992 to 1993. In
1991 women were first told that a Pap smear tests for cancer of the cervix or uterus before they
were asked about whether they had heard of a Pap smear. We code individuals who report never
having heard of a Pap smear as never having had a Pap test. Starting in 1992, women were no




                                               17
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




          We also observe standard demographic characteristics in the BRFSS,

including age, race, and education.15               The BRFSS also includes a summary

measure of health insurance coverage: we are able to identify whether the woman

is covered by "any health plan," although we cannot determine the type of plan

(e.g., employer sponsored vs. public insurance (Medicare/Medicaid)). For our

evaluation of NBCCEDP this limitation is not particularly problematic since the

program explicitly targeted uninsured women.

          To estimate the effect of NBCCEDP and BCCTP on outcomes we use

straightforward difference-in-difference models that identify program effects

using variation across states in the timing of rollout of the programs. Specifically,

we formulate the model as:

    (1)   Yist = 0 + 1Xist + 2(STATE HAS ROLLED OUT THE NBCCEDP

          PROGRAM)st + 3(STATE HAS ROLLED OUT THE BCCTP

          PROGRAM)st + 4Zst + 5Ss + 6Tt + ist

where Yist are the various dichotomous screening outcomes for woman i in state s

at time t. Xist is a vector of individual-level demographic characteristics that

includes: age-group dummies (21-24, or 5 year age groups after that, leaving out

one dummy), race (non-Hispanic black, non-Hispanic other race, leaving out non-


longer asked whether they had heard of a Pap smear; instead, women were asked about lifetime
cervical cancer screening after the interviewer first defined the procedure.
15
   We also observe employment and household income (in ranges), but we choose not to control
for them in the regression models below due to their likely endogeneity with our outcomes and
key variables of interest.




                                               18
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




Hispanic White), Hispanic ethnicity, education (less than high school, high school

degree, some college, DK/RF, leaving out college degree or more), and marital

status (never-married, widowed/divorced/separated, cohabiting, DK/RF, leaving

out married). The relevant policy variables are dummies indicating that the state

has rolled out its NBCCEDP and BCCTP programs, respectively.16

        We also include covariates that vary at the state and year level and that are

standard in two-way fixed effects models such as ours. These variables are

captured in Zst, a vector of state economic and demographic characteristics,

including: the unemployment rate, the HMO penetration rate, the number of

obstetric beds in the state per 1000 women age 15-44, the share of women age 15-

44 with private health insurance, the share of women age 15-44 who work (or

whose spouses work) at private firms of various sizes (<24, 25-99, 100+), real

median income for a family of 4, and the state fractions black, Hispanic, and

urban. The Zst vector also includes controls for other relevant public policies that

may be expected to affect private or public access to insurance such as Medicaid

expansions for pregnant women, welfare reform, laws requiring women to be able

to directly access an OB/GYN without referral, and state participation in the



16
   Note that the BRFSS questions introduce a "reference window" problem due to the fact that the
questions typically ask about screening behavior over some recent period. Given this, it is
important to account for the systematic BRFSS interview structure when defining someone as
treated by the policy in question. Specifically, we can make use of the fact that BRFSS interviews
are distributed almost uniformly across the calendar year. This information means that we can
create a more precise treatment variable that captures the share of the recent period that the
individual was treated by the NBCCEDP or BCCTP program.




                                               19
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




federally funded WISEWOMAN program.17 For the models of Pap test outcomes

we control for the presence of a state mandate requiring insurance coverage of

Pap tests. For the models of mammography and CBE outcomes we control for

the presence of a state mandate requiring insurance coverage of mammograms.18

Dummy variables for each state are captured by Ss and control for time-invariant

state-specific factors. Dummy variables for each survey year are captured by Tt

and control for period-specific shocks common to all states in any given year.19

Throughout, we cluster the standard errors at the state level (Bertrand, Duflo, and

Mullainathan 2004). Regressions are weighted to be population representative,

and the main sample is all women aged 21-64 interviewed by the BRFSS in

survey years 1991-2005. Because eligibility for mammography was explicitly

targeted toward 40-64 year olds (and later to 50-64 year olds in many states), we

separately examine 21-39 year olds from 40-49 or 50-64 year olds for all

outcomes.20


17
   Bitler et al. (2005) found that welfare reforms adopted over this time period reduced health
insurance coverage, mammography, and Pap test use, particularly for single Hispanic women.
The Well-Integrated Screening and Evaluation for Women Across the Nation (WISEWOMAN)
program was funded by the CDC and provides screening for high blood pressure,
hypercholesterolemia, and interventions to help women eat better, exercise more, and quit
smoking (Will and Loo 2008). Three states were funded from 1995-1998 and 14 states were
funded from 1999-2007.
18
   Specifically, we separately control for the presence of a mandate requiring coverage of an
annual mammogram, a mandate requiring coverage of a biennial mammogram, and a mandate
requiring coverage of a baseline mammogram (Bitler and Carpenter 2016). Models for placebo
outcomes control for both mammogram and Pap test mandates in addition to the other controls.
19
   We also include month of interview dummies throughout (though not shown in the estimating
equation) to account for idiosyncratic month effects.
20
   Note that 21-39 year olds were not technically eligible for NBCCEDP-sponsored mammograms.
We analyze them as an additional placebo-type test for understanding the effects of the program.




                                               20
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




        Finally, because eligibility for NBCCEDP services (and thus eligibility for

any BCCTP services) was explicitly tied to availability of other sources of

insurance, we estimate equation (1) for each age group in the full sample and

separately by whether the woman reports having a health plan. If the programs

were effective, we would expect utilization increases associated with program

rollout primarily for the women without a health plan. Any associated `effects'

for the sample of women with a health plan are more likely to reflect the effects of

program-sponsored outreach, and in that case we would expect larger estimated

effects for the sample of women without a health plan if we want to isolate the

unique effect of NBCCEDP-financed and BCCTP-induced screenings.



5. Results

a. Descriptive Statistics

In Figures 1-3 we show the trend from 1991 to 2005 for past-year mammograms,

clinical breast exams, and Pap tests, respectively, for women age 50-64 who were

targeted by and eligible for all NBCCEDP services.                 We show these trends

separately for insured and uninsured women. A few patterns are notable. First,

past-year screenings for all outcomes are substantially higher for insured women

compared to uninsured women, with the largest discrepancy observed for


To do so, we code the NBCCEDP variable as equivalent to the way it is defined for older old
women. That is, the NBCCEDP variable in these models is not defined to be age-specific, despite
that in truth it did have some age-specific eligibility criteria.




                                               21
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




mammography: past-year mammography rates for uninsured women are roughly

double the rates of insured women. Second, past-year mammography rates saw

remarkable improvements for all 50-64 year old women during the 1990s, while

Pap test rates increased modestly and clinical breast exams exhibited no change.

Third, there were declines in all types of screenings in the early 2000s.

        Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the key demographic variables

used in this analysis for adult women in the BRFSS. Column 1 presents means

for 21-39 year old women, column 2 presents means for 40-49 year old women,

and column 3 presents means for 50-64 year old women. We present statistics for

basic demographic characteristics (e.g., age, race, education, marital status),

cancer screening outcomes, and NBCCEDP rollout variation. The pattern of

demographic characteristics across groups indicates that most of the sample for

each age group is white non-Hispanic, while about ten percent of the sample is

black non-Hispanic, and a similar proportion is Hispanic. The majority of the

sample is married, and well over 80 percent of the sample has a health plan.

Regarding the cancer-screening outcomes, we find a strong age gradient in

lifetime and past year mammography: the 21-39 year old women are substantially

less likely than either the 40-49 or 50-64 year old women to have had breast

cancer screenings, which was consistent with the recommendations of major

medical organizations such as the US Preventative Services Task Force or the

American Cancer Society over the vast majority of our sample period for




                                               22
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




screening of asymptomatic women. For clinical breast exams, we find that over

90 percent of women in all age groups reports having ever had a CBE, while 68-

70 percent reports having had one in the past year. Notably, there is not a strong

age gradient in clinical breast exam utilization. Finally, we find very high rates of

lifetime Pap test use, and we find that recent Pap tests are declining in age.

b. Results on Insurance Status and Cancer Screenings

        We present the first set of evaluative results on the effects of the

NBCCEDP program in Table 2 for the outcome reflecting the likelihood of

having any health plan. Since our primary empirical strategy is to compare

outcomes for uninsured women (who were directly eligible) versus insured

women (who were not directly eligible) coincident with NBCCEDP and BCCTP

rollout, it is important first to evaluate whether these programs are associated with

the presence of a health plan at all. We present the coefficient estimate on the

variable indicating the state has rolled out each program from a fully saturated

difference-in-differences model from equation (1). Each entry is from a separate

model. The results in Table 2 provide little evidence that program rollout was

meaningfully associated with the presence of a health plan. Although we find a

marginally significant positive coefficient in column 1 for 21-39 year old women

for NBCCEDP, the actual point estimate is small both absolutely (indicating a 0.8

percentage point increase) and relative to the average rate of having a health plan

in the population for that age group (nearly 82 percent as reported in Table 1).




                                               23
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




Moreover, the estimates for slightly older women ages 40-49 and 50-64 are even

smaller in magnitude and are not statistically significant, and all of the BCCTP

estimates are small and statistically insignificant. Overall, we conclude that the

programs were not strongly associated with insurance coverage, particularly for

40-49 and 50-64 year old women. This suggests that our models stratified by the

presence of a health plan provide meaningful tests of whether direct service

provision was effective.

        In Table 3 we report estimates of the effect of NBCCEDP on the

mammogram outcomes.             As in Table 2, each entry is from a separate fully

saturated model that includes all the controls in equation (1). Columns 1 and 2

show the results for Ever Had a Mammogram and Had a Mammogram in the Past

Year, respectively, for the 21-39 year old sample. Columns 3 and 4 (5 and 6) do

the same for 40-49 (50-64) year olds. The top panel reports estimates from the

full sample for all years in which BRFSS identifies both mammography outcomes

and health insurance outcomes, as the latter is critical to an evaluation of the

programs given their eligibility requirements. The middle panel reports estimates

for women who currently have a health plan and therefore should not have been

directly eligible for NBCCEDP services. The bottom panel reports estimates for

the women who lack any health plan, i.e., the directly targeted treatment group.

        The results in Table 3 provide strong support for the idea that NBCCEDP

(but not BCCTP) played an important role in increasing past-year mammography,




                                               24
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




particularly among 40-49 and 50-64 year old women.               Specifically, among

women age 50-64 (who were directly targeted by and explicitly eligible for

NBCCEDP mammograms over our entire sample period), we find in the bottom

panel that NBCCEDP was associated with a 5.8 percentage point increase in past-

year mammography screenings for women without a health plan, with a

statistically insignificant 1.2 percentage point increase among women with a

health plan. Past-year mammography rates among uninsured women age 50-64

increased by about 12 percentage points over our period; we estimate that

NBCCEDP can account for nearly half of this increase. The point estimate for

lifetime mammography use in column 5 of Table 3 is also sizable and positive

(1.9 percentage points), but it is not statistically significant. In the full sample, we

do not estimate that the NBCCEDP-induced increase among uninsured women

was large enough to induce statistically significant overall increases in past year

mammography for 50-64 year old women, though notably less than 12 percent of

the 50-64 year old sample reports that they do not have a health plan. There are

similarly large increases in use of a mammogram last year for 40-49 year olds

with NBCCEDP while BCCTP has no effect for the 40-49 year olds getting

screenings.

        A few other patterns in Table 3 merit mention.             First, we do find

significant increases in both lifetime mammography and past-year mammography

for 21-39 year old women in the full sample, which is contrary to expectations, as




                                               25
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




these women were not targeted by the program. These effects are smaller than

those observed for older women age 40-49 or 50-64. When we cut these results

by health plan status we find a 1.7 percentage point increase in past year

mammography for uninsured 21-39 year old women associated with NBCCEDP

that is statistically significant at the ten percent level. There are several reasons

these increases in screenings for younger women could be attributable to

NBCCEDP even though uninsured 21-39 year old women were not directly

targeted. First, in the early rollout of NBCCEDP, the age-based eligibility rules

may not have been followed to the letter. Second, the 40-49 and 50-64 year old

women who were screened under NBCCEDP may have provided informational

spillovers to their slightly younger friends and family members; in that case, it

could be that the younger and older women are obtaining recent mammograms

not directly provided by NBCCEDP but indirectly induced by a NBCCEDP-

provided mammogram of a friend or family member. Finally, it is possible that

having outside funding from the CDC for women aged 40-49 and 50-64 frees up

other money at clinics serving low-income women to provide services to younger

women. We cannot directly address these hypotheses, but they are important

areas for future work.

        We present the associated results for clinical breast exams in Table 4, the

format of which is identical to Table 3. The results for clinical breast exams in

Table 4 also provide strong evidence that NBCCEDP significantly increased past-




                                               26
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




year use of CBEs. As with the mammography results in Table 3, we estimate that

among 50-64 year old women without a health plan, NBCCEDP is associated

with a 3.8 percentage point increase in the likelihood a women reports she had a

past-year CBE. The associated estimate for women with a health plan is also

positive and statistically significant (unlike the results for mammograms), but it is

much smaller in magnitude (2.1 percentage points) than the estimate for women

without a health plan. We also find that the large increases in past-year CBE for

women without a health plan translate into sizable full sample increases in this

outcome. This same basic pattern is replicated to an even larger extent in column

4 for 40-49 year old women, and as with the mammography outcomes we also

find a marginally significant effect of NBCCEDP at increasing CBE among

uninsured 21-39 year old women. Overall the findings in Table 4 ­ like those in

Table 3 for past year mammography ­ are most supportive of a causal effect of

NBCCEDP rollout at increasing past year CBE utilization among uninsured 40-49

and 50-64 year old women.                Notably, unlike the results in Table 3 for

mammograms, we do find a significant role for BCCTP at significantly increasing

CBE among 50-64 year old uninsured women (with no effects for insured women

of the same age group). This suggests that allowing states to use Medicaid funds

to cover treatments for breast cancer induced some women to get CBEs.

        We present the results for Pap tests in Table 5, and again the format

follows the previous tables. Results for Pap tests are less clear than those in




                                               27
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




Tables 3 and 4 for mammograms and CBEs, respectively, in part because lifetime

and past-year Pap test rates are so much higher than the rates for the outcomes

measured in the earlier tables. Despite this, we find some support for a role of

NBCCEDP at increasing Pap test rates among 21-39 and 40-49 year old women.

Specifically, we estimate that NBCCEDP significantly increased past-year Pap

test use among uninsured 21-39 (40-49) year old women by 2.4 (5.6) percentage

points, with much smaller estimated effects on insured women of the same age.

Notably, the younger women age 21-39 were eligible for NBCCEDP-provided

Pap tests. We find a similar pattern for 50-64 year old women: a substantively

meaningful positive estimate for the uninsured sample (3.5 percentage points) and

smaller estimates for the insured sample, though neither estimate is statistically

significant.21 We do not find any consistent effects of BCCTP on Pap test rates

for any age group.22


21
    The ACS and USPSTF recommendations for the older groups of women actually do not
recommend annual Pap test screenings, but we are unable in the BRFSS to identify the
`recommended' screening interval (past 3 years or past 5 years if the recent Pap tests were
negative).
22
   In Appendix Table 1 we provide evidence on an alternative outcome that may shed light on the
underlying mechanisms through which NBCCEDP boosted screenings: whether the woman
reports she had a checkup in the past year. We present results for the sample of women with a
health plan in the top panel and for the sample of women without a health plan in the bottom
panel. It is plausible that uninsured women may pay out of pocket (perhaps on a sliding scale) at
clinics for checkups at which time health care providers inform them of NBCCEDP or BCCTP
services. Alternatively, it could be that women who are being primarily served by these programs
could view their program-related health care interaction as having been a `checkup' when asked
by the BRFSS interviewer. In either of these cases, we might expect to observe a significant
association between NBCCEDP and BCCTP rollout and reports of a past year checkup among
uninsured women. Indeed, we find evidence in Appendix Table 1 that NBCCEDP is significantly
associated with increased likelihood of reporting a past year checkup for 21-39 and 50-64 year old
women without a health plan. The NBCCEDP estimate for 40-49 year old women and the




                                               28
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




        We next turn to examining the robustness of the main findings that

NBCCEDP increased breast and cervical cancer screenings for uninsured women.

In columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table 2 we present event-study estimates of the

effects of NBCCEDP for uninsured 50-64 year old women on past-year

mammogram and past-year CBE likelihood, respectively, where we replace the

NBCCEDP dummy with a series of indicator variables representing time since

program rollout in the state, controlling for all the other factors as in the baseline

specification. Results indicate that the increases in screenings attributable to

NBCCEDP are generally not driven by significant differences in states prior to

NBCCEDP rollout, consistent with a key assumption of the research design. The

results also indicate that the effects of NBCCEDP appear very quickly after

implementation and remain sizable several years after program rollout. We find

similar event-study patterns for past-year Pap test rates for uninsured 50-64 year

old women in column 1 of Appendix Table 3.23

        In Table 6 we present the results of alternative robustness tests where we

replace the key outcomes with other `placebo' preventive behaviors and risky

behaviors that should not have been plausibly affected by NBCCEDP or BCCTP.


BCCTP estimates for women of all age groups without a health plan are also positive and sizable
but are not statistically significant. Moreover, among the sample of women with a health plan we
find no relationship between the NBCCEDP rollout and reports of past year checkups. These
patterns further support the idea that there has been an important role for NBCCEDP at improving
access to care and utilization among uninsured women with respect to breast and cervical cancer
health.
23
   In results not reported but available upon request, we found similar event-study patterns for
uninsured 40-49 year old women.




                                               29
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




Specifically we report the program coefficients in similarly specified two-way

fixed effects models of the likelihood of always wearing a seatbelt (column 1),

getting a flu shot in the past year (column 2), having cholesterol checked in the

past year (column 3), and being a current smoker (column 4). We focus here on

50-64 year old women without a health plan.                    We find no economically or

statistically significant association between the NBCCEDP or BCCTP rollouts

and any of the falsification outcomes in Table 6. This supports our general

interpretation that the state rollout of these programs was uniquely responsible for

substantial improvements in preventive cancer screenings among uninsured

women.2425


24
   In Appendix Tables 4 (for 40-49 year old women) and 5 (for 50-64 year old women) we report
estimates of the effect of NBCCEDP on the covered outcomes separately by race/ethnicity and
education for women without a health plan. For 40-49 year old uninsured women we find that
NBCCEDP was effective at increasing preventive screenings for white women and for relatively
highly educated (some college at least) women. For 50-64 year old uninsured women we find that
NBCCEDP was particularly (and only) effective at increasing past-year mammography among
non-Hispanic black and Hispanic women, and the program was also associated with significant
increases in the likelihood of past-year CBE for non-Hispanic black women. For the 50-64 year
old women we also find that NBCCEDP effects are larger among relatively highly educated
women (some college at least). It is possible that the less-educated women are being served
through other public programs, though notably all women in Appendix Tables 4 and 5 report that
they do not currently have a health plan (which plausibly includes public insurance such as
Medicaid). Another possibility is that conditional on not having a health plan ­ which was the key
eligibility criteria of the original program ­ the more highly educated women have more access to
information, networks, and logistical resources to access the NBCCEDP services. Finally, it is
possible that the less-educated women without a health plan ­ many more of whom should be
eligible for income-based public insurance than in the more highly educated group ­ have already
revealed their low demand for health care. Under this explanation it is not surprising that the less-
educated women have smaller responses to the program than do more highly educated women.
25
   In Appendix Table 6 we investigate whether NBCCEDP was particularly effective in states with
a larger number of federally qualified health centers (FQHCs). Prior work on FQHCs
demonstrates their positive effects at improving health for the same types of populations likely to
be eligible for NBCCEDP services; thus, it is natural to ask whether NBCCEDP's effects were
amplified by the presence of many FQHCs. To investigate this question we obtained data on the




                                                 30
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




c. Results on Cancer Diagnoses

        Next, we provide evidence on the effects of NBCCEDP and BCCTP on

breast and cervical cancer diagnoses.               If these programs of relatively direct

provision were effective, we might expect that state program rollout would be

positively associated with more breast cancers being detected than would occur in

the absence of the programs. Since the women who were most affected by the

program were low-income underserved women whose tumors might have gone

unnoticed for longer than other women with stronger attachment to the health care

system, we might also expect that the effects of the program funding on tumor

detection would be observed throughout the distribution of cancer stages as

opposed to being limited to the earliest stage cancers (as would be the case for

most screening programs targeted at asymptomatic women).

        To test this, we examine total cancer incidence as well as diagnoses at

each stage using data from the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results

(SEER) system, which are registry data on the universe of cancer diagnoses (and

also on in-situ pre-cancers) within nine areas/states that have been collected since



number of uncompensated care cases reported in a state from LoSasso and Meyer (2006). We
then estimate a variant of the baseline model where we control for NBCCEDP rollout, the number
of FQHC uncompensated care cases, and the interaction of the two. A positive and significant
interaction effect would indicate that NBCCEDP was particularly effective in places with a larger
number of FQHCs. The results in Appendix Table 6 do not indicate that FQHCs played an
amplifying role in the effectiveness of NBCCEDP. While we continue to find a significant main
effect of NBCCEDP at increasing preventive cancer-related screenings among 40-49 and 50-64
year old uninsured women, we do not find either a significant main association of FQHC
uncompensated care cases nor a significant interaction effect of FQHC cases with NBCCEDP




                                               31
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




1973 (SEER Research Data 1973-2012).26                     These are the standard cancer

diagnosis data used in the field. Note that we do not observe a woman's health

insurance status in the SEER data.

         We examine the effects of NBCCEDP on breast and cervical cancer

detections by estimating models where the outcome is the log of the count of the

number of cancers at each stage detected for women age 21-39, 40-49, and 50-64

in each state and year, and we include the same right hand side variables as in

equation (1).27      We assume a 1-month delay between initial screening and

diagnosis (Selove et al. 2016), and we control for population as an additional

independent variable.          Unlike the earlier results, we present p-values in



rollout with respect to any of the outcomes under study. All interaction coefficients are
substantively small and statistically insignificant.
26
   We study 1985-2005. The 9 sites/states in SEER are: Georgia, Connecticut, Detroit (Michigan),
Hawaii, Iowa, New Mexico, San Francisco Bay (California), Seattle (Washington), and Utah.
Note that when the National Cancer Institute (NCI) refers to total cancer incidence, it generally
excludes the earliest stage in-situ cancers but includes a very small number of unstaged cancers
(National Cancer Institute, 2013). These earliest stage `in situ' diagnoses are independently
interesting and potentially important in our context, and so we analyze them separately. In the
context of breast cancer, `in-situ' refers both to ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and to the less
common lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS). Erbas et al. (2006) discuss uncertainty about what
share of DCIS tumors will progress to invasive breast cancer. Regarding uncertainty about LCIS,
the American Cancer Society's "Breast Cancer Facts and Figures 2011-2012" report indicates that
"many oncologists believe ... that LCIS is not a true cancer, but an indicator of increased risk for
developing invasive cancer in either breast" (p1). The 2015 version of the "Breast Cancer Facts
and Figures" report indicates that of the 60,290 carcinoma in situ detected in that year
(constituting 20 percent of all breast tumors), 83 percent of those are DCIS while just 12 percent
are LCIS (p1).
27
   For the small number of cells with zero cancer detections we add one because the log of zero is
not defined. Note that we combine diagnoses within 5-year age bands and have estimated similar
models combining black, white, and other race women together for this analysis because there are
some SEER sites with very small populations of black and other race women and thus the `zero
cancer detections' problem is substantially worse if we consider race groups separately. We
present the log count models for ease of interpretation and because these models allow us to adjust
p-values for the small number of clusters (Cameron et al. 2008). We do so with Mammen (1993)




                                                32
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




parentheses for the usual inference calculations for the key coefficients and

present alternative p-values in brackets for the Wild-bootstrap procedure which

adjusts for the small number of clusters (Cameron et al. 2008), 9 in our data. We

present results for breast cancer diagnoses in Table 7 and for cervical cancer

diagnoses in Table 8. The format of these tables is identical: each panel reports

the coefficient on the NBCCEDP rollout variable from a fully saturated model

separately for 25-39 year old women (top panel), 40-49 year old women (middle

panel), and 50-64 year old women (bottom panel).

        The results for breast cancer diagnoses in Table 7 indicate that NBCEEDP

significantly increased detection of early stage pre-cancers and localized (stage 1)

breast cancers for 50-64 year old women, even after adjusting for the small

number of clusters.28        The NBCCEDP estimate for 50-64 year old women

indicates that the program significantly increased detection of in-situ pre-cancers

in column 1 by 16 percent and significantly increased detection of localized stage




weights and imposing the null hypothesis. We control for age and race dummies, but no other
demographics are available.
28
   We also considered estimating models of breast cancer mortality, but we chose not to examine
deaths for several reasons. First, there is usually a long and variable lag between mammography
and breast cancer mortality that has changed considerably over time as treatment technologies
have changed. This means there is not a clear econometric strategy that consistently yields a
particular lag structure for linking particular types of diagnoses to later expected declines in
mortality across our time period. Second, when a person has breast cancer, there are usually
multiple mammograms involved (e.g., an initial screening one and subsequent diagnostic ones)
which additionally complicates decisions about how to appropriately attribute program-induced
screenings to breast cancer mortality. We leave this important question to future work. Other
studies have directly examined the relationship between NBCCEDP and breast cancer mortality
and find mixed results (Howard et al. 2010, Hoerger et al. 2011).




                                               33
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




1 breast cancers in column 2 by 6 percent.29 Estimates for detection of later stage

breast cancers for 50-64 year old women are small and statistically insignificant,

though we estimate in column 6 that when we include in-situ cancers, we find that

NBCCEDP increased detection of total breast cancers by 8 percent.30 We do not

find other consistent evidence for 40-49 year old women or 25-39 year old

women that NBCCEDP meaningfully changed cancer diagnoses.

         The associated results for cervical cancer diagnoses in Table 8 return no

evidence that NBCCEDP ­ which significantly increased cervical cancer

screenings among uninsured women ­ significantly increased detection of pre-

cancers or cancers of the cervix for women in any age group. The models do

return evidence that NBCCEDP rollout is significantly associated with fewer

distant stage cervical cancer diagnoses for both 40-49 and 50-64 year old women.

While this pattern is consistent with the idea that NBCCEDP may have moved

cervical cancer detections from later to earlier stages, there are at least three key

patterns that call this interpretation into question.31 First, we find no statistically



29
   We control for BCCTP rollout in all models but do not report the coefficient estimates as there
was no BCCTP-related increase in mammography. Consistent with this, none of the BCCTP
estimates suggest it lead to statistically significant increases in cancer detection.
30
   We present event-study estimates for 50-64 year old women for the breast cancer diagnoses in
columns 3-8 of Appendix Table 2.
31
   In results not reported but available upon request, we found that these diagnosis patterns were
not sensitive to inclusion of linear time trends for each SEER site, nor to the inclusion of controls
for the share of the cohort's life that would have been exposed to legal abortion access (since Pap
tests are often obtained in combination with family planning service visits). The patterns were
also not meaningfully sensitive to controls for Medicaid family planning waivers or abortion
clinics within the state. Nikpay (2016) looks at federal funding of family planning clinics during




                                                 34
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




significant offsetting increase in early stage cervical cancers associated with

NBCCEDP rollout, as might be expected if the effect were real. Second, the

reduction in distant stage cervical cancers associated with NBCCEDP is also

observed for 50-64 year old women for whom we did not observe a significant

increase in Pap tests associated with NBCCEDP (Table 5).

        Finally, in results not reported but available upon request, we also

implemented an alternative research design that leverages the fact that NBCCEDP

services were primarily targeted at women under the age of 65 (since women 65

and older are nearly universally eligible for Medicare).                    Specifically, we

considered triple difference models on a sample of women age 50-74 where we

included fixed effects for: each five-year age group interacted with each state;

each five-year age group interacted with each year; and each state interacted with

each year (as well as the demographic controls described earlier). In these fully

interacted models any state/time varying confounding factors are eliminated, and

we focus on a variable that is the NBCCEDP rollout interacted with the age

groups who are directly targeted and eligible by the program: 50-64 year olds. In

these models we found no evidence of statistically significant associations

between NBCCEDP rollout and distant stage cancer diagnoses for the targeted

women (i.e., women age 50-64). Moreover, the relevant coefficient estimate was

approximately half the magnitude of the associated estimate in the bottom panel


the War on Poverty led to an increase in use of Pap tests. Wherry (2013) and Adams et al. (2013)




                                               35
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




of Table 8. The null finding in this fully interacted specification also was true for

each of the other cancer stages in Table 8.32

         Overall, then, we conclude from Tables 7 and 8 that NBCCEDP ­ which

significantly increased breast and cervical cancer screenings among uninsured

women ­ was associated with significant increases in detections of early stage

pre-cancers and cancers of the breast but was not meaningfully related to

detections of cancers of the cervix.                  We acknowledge that the welfare

consequences of the significant increases in in-situ pre-cancers of the breast are

not obvious given active debates in the medical literature about whether those in-

situ pre-cancers would progress to breast cancer if untreated and related concerns

about overdiagnosis and overtreatment (Cavallo 2018).33 Despite this, we do also

find evidence in Table 7 that NBCCEDP rollout was also associated with

statistically significant increases in detections of localized stage 1 breast cancers

for which the positive welfare implications are much less ambiguous.



6. Discussion and Conclusion




found that state use of Medicaid family planning waivers led to an increase in cancer screenings.
32
   Appendix Table 7 shows these DDD estimates for both breast (top panel) and cervical (bottom
panel) cancers and also shows that these models continue to suggest that NBCCEDP was
associated with statistically significant increases in diagnoses of in-situ pre-cancers of the breast.
33
   Within the economics literature, Kowalski (2018) studies selection into mammography within
the context of a randomized clinical trial and finds that: 1) women who are more likely to receive
mammograms are healthier; and 2) women who are more likely to receive mammograms are more
likely to experience harms from them.




                                                 36
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




The results above suggest that the National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early

Detection Program (NBCCEDP) and, to a lesser extent, the Breast and Cervical

Cancer Treatment Program (BCCTP) played an important role at increasing

preventive cancer-related health utilization for women without a health plan over

the 1990s and early 2000s, a period of unprecedented increases in women's

preventive health behaviors.            Specifically, we estimate that the program

significantly increased past-year mammography, clinical breast exams, and Pap

tests among 40-64 year old women without a health plan. We did not find large

NBCCEDP effects for same age women with a health plan, which is expected

since NBCCEDP originally required lack of insurance as a key eligibility

criterion. A variety of other falsification and robustness tests ­ including an

event-study model ­ support our interpretation that NBCCEDP was causally

responsible for significant improvements in the breast and cervical cancer

prevention outcomes among the uninsured.              We estimate that NBCCEDP

accounts for approximately half the increase in past-year mammography among

the uninsured over the 1990s.             Moreover, we find evidence that NBEEDP

increased detection of early stage breast cancers (local as well as in-situ). For the

BCCTP that allowed states to pay for cancer treatment using state Medicaid

funds, we find less consistent evidence of effects on outcomes except for a

significant increase in clinical breast exams among 50-64 year old women without

a health plan.




                                               37
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




        Notably, we find consistently weaker evidence that NBCCEDP increased

Pap tests relative to clinical breast exams and mammograms.            For example,

among uninsured 50-64 year old women, we find robust evidence that NBCCEDP

increased mammograms but not Pap tests. There are several possible reasons for

this. First, recommendations regarding Pap tests are declining with age ­ the

exact opposite of mammograms. Since 50-64 year olds are much less likely to be

having pelvic exams as part of a standard well-woman visit, it is perhaps not

surprising that we find weaker evidence on the relationship between NBCCEDP

and Pap tests. Second, Pap tests are much cheaper than mammograms (e.g., $15

vs. $150) such that even without health insurance it is more likely that a woman

could afford to get a Pap test without the help of public programs (though CBEs

are also much cheaper than mammograms, and we do find effects on CBEs).

        We also find much less evidence that BCCTP increased screenings

compared to NBCCEDP: we only find effects of BCCTP at increasing CBEs

among uninsured 50-64 year old women. It could be that the cancer treatment

payment program gets these women `in the door' to get a CBE but does not

induce more screening mammograms.                   As screening mammograms require

special equipment and are generally performed in a separate facility, this could

explain the lack of effects of BCCTP on mammography for the group where we

find the program induced large increases in clinical breast exams.          Overall,

however, the general lack of effects of BCCTP on screening take-up suggests that




                                               38
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




­ to the extent women understand what each program does ­ the inability to pay

for treatment if a tumor is found is not the key factor in low screening take-up

among uninsured low-income women.

        Our results are not without limitations, many owing to limitations of the

data. For example, all of our BRFSS outcomes are self-reported, and there is

evidence that social disadvantage is positively related to over-reporting of

preventive service use such as cervical cancer screening (e.g., Lofters et al. 2013).

We think it unlikely that such reporting bias would be systematically correlated

with the extensive variation in the timing of NBCCEDP rollout across states, but

it is not something we can directly test. Of course, our complementary results on

cancer diagnoses are not susceptible to such biases. Another data limitation is

that we do not observe the sequencing of various outcomes, such as check-ups

and cancer screenings or the ordering of when a woman received, say, a

mammogram and a Pap test. This information would be helpful for more credibly

measuring spillover effects of direct funding provision, for example.

        Despite these limitations, our results significantly advance our

understanding of one of the most remarkable public health improvements of the

past several decades and suggest that direct government provision of cancer

screenings was responsible for a substantial share of the increase in preventive

health behaviors among uninsured women in the 1990s.




                                               39
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams, E. Kathleen, Nancy Breen, and Peter Joski (2006). "Impact of the
      National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program on
      Mammography and Pap Test Utilization Among White, Hispanic, and
      African American Women: 1996-2000," Cancer, 109(2 Supplement): 348-
      358.

Adams, E. Kathleen, Curtis Florence, Kenneth Thorpe, Edmund Becker, and Peter
      Joski (2003). "Female Cancer Screening, 1996-2000," American Journal
      of Preventive Medicine, 25(4): 301-307.

Adams, E. Kathleen, Genevieve Kenney, and Kataya Galactionova (2013).
      "Preventive and Reproductive Health Services for Women: The Role of
      California's Family Planning Waiver," American Journal of Health
      Promotion, 27(3 Supplement): ES1-ES10.

American Cancer Society (2019). "History of ACS Recommendations of Early
      Detection of Cancer in People Without Symptoms." Available at:
      https://www.cancer.org/health-care-professionals/american-cancer-
      society-prevention-early-detection-guidelines/overview/chronological-
      history-of-acs-recommendations.html. Last accessed July 18, 2019.

----- (2015). "Cancer Facts and Figures 2015. Special Section: Breast Carcinoma
         In Situ." Atlanta: American Cancer Society, Inc. Available at:
         https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/cancer-org/research/cancer-facts-and-
         statistics/annual-cancer-facts-and-figures/2015/special-section-breast-
         carcinoma-in-situ-cancer-facts-and-figures-2015.pdf. Last accessed July
         18, 2019.

----- (2011-12). "Breast Cancer Facts & Figures 2011-2012." Atlanta: American
        Cancer            Society,        Inc.                  Available         at:
        https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/cancer-org/research/cancer-facts-and-
        statistics/breast-cancer-facts-and-figures/breast-cancer-facts-and-figures-
        2011-2012.pdf. Last accessed July 18, 2019.


Bailey, Martha and Andrew Goodman-Bacon (2015). "The War on Poverty's
       Experiment in Public Medicine: Community Health Centers and the
       Mortality of Older Americans," American Economic Review, 105(3):
       1067-1104.




                                               40
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




Baker, Laurence and Jia Chan (2007). "Laws Requiring Health Plans to Provide
       Direct Access to Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and Use of Cancer
       Screening by Women," Health Services Research, 42(3): 990-1006.

Barbaresco, Silvia, Charles Courtemanche, and Yanling Qi (2015). "Impacts of
       the Affordable Care Act Dependent Coverage Mandate on Health-Related
       Outcomes of Young Adults," Journal of Health Economics, 40: 54-68.

Berry, Donald A., Kathleen A. Cronin, Sylvia K. Plevritis, Dennis G. Fryback,
       Lauren Clarke, Marvin Zelen, Jeanne S. Mandelblatt, Andrei Y. Yakovlev,
       Dik F. Habbema, and Eric J. Feuer (2005). "Effect of Screening and
       Adjuvant Therapy on Mortality from Breast Cancer," New England
       Journal of Medicine, 352(17): 1784-1792.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). "How Much
       Should We Trust Difference-In-Differences Estimates?" Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249-275.

Bitler, Marianne P. and Christopher S. Carpenter (2017). "Effects of State
        Cervical Cancer Insurance Mandates on Pap Test Rates," Health Services
        Research, 52(1): 156-175.

----- (2016). "Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer
        Diagnoses," American Economic Journal ­ Economic Policy, 8(3): 39-68.

Bitler, Marianne P., Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary W. Hoynes (2005). "Welfare
        Reform and Health," Journal of Human Resources, 40(2): 309-334.

Blackman, Donald K., Eddas M, Bennett, and Daniel S. Miller (1999). "Trends in
      Self-Reported Use of Mammograms (1989-1997) and Papanicolaou tests
      (1991-1997) ­ Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System," Centers for
      Disease Control Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 48(SS-6): 1-22.

Breen, Nancy and Larry Kessler (1994). "Changes in the Use of Screening
       Mammography: Evidence from the 1987 and 1990 National Health
       Interview Surveys," American Journal of Public Health, 84(1): 62-67.

Buchmueller, Thomas and Leontine Goldzahl (2018). "The effect of organized
     breast cancer screening on mammography use: Evidence from France,"
     Health Economics, 27: 196-1980.




                                               41
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




Buchmueller, Thomas C., Sean Orzol and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard (2015). "The
     Effect of Medicaid Payment Rates on Access to Dental Care Among
     Children," American Journal of Health Economics, 1: 194-223.

Buchmueller, Thomas C., John Ham and Lara Shore-Sheppard (2016). "The
     Medicaid Program," in Robert Moffitt, ed., Means-Tested Transfer
     Programs in the United States: Volume II.

Busch, Susan H., and Noelia Duchovny. 2005. "Family Coverage Expansions:
       Impact on Insurance Coverage and Health Care Utilization of Parents,"
       Journal of Health Economics, 25: 876-90.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller (2008). "Bootstrap-
      Based Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors," The Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 90(3): 414-427.

Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas (2009). "Does Medicare Save
       Lives," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2): 597-636.

----- (2008). "The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance Coverage on Health
        Care Utilization: Evidence from Medicare," American Economic Review,
        98(5): 2242-58.

Cavallo, Jo (2018). "When is Active Surveillance Appropriate in the Treatment
       of DCIS? A Roundtable Discussion with Shelly Hwang, MD, MPH; Ann
       H. Partridge, MD, MPH; and Lawrence J. Solin, MD". The ASCO Post,
       available    online     at:   https://www.ascopost.com/issues/march-25-
       2018/when-is-active-surveillance-appropriate-in-the-treatment-of-dcis/.
       Last accessed June 26, 2019.

Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Yelowitz, and
      Daniela Zapata (2019). "Effects of the Affordable Care Act on Health
      Behaviors After 3 Years," Eastern Economic Journal, 45(1): 7-33.

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber (1996a). "Health Insurance Eligibility,
       Utilization of Medical Care, and Child Health," Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 111: 431-66.

----- (1996b). "Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the
        Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women," Journal of Political Economy,
        104: 1263-96.




                                               42
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




----- (2001). "Public Health Insurance and Medical Treatment: The Equalizing
        Impact of the Medicaid Expansions," Journal of Public Economics, 82:
        63-90.

Cutler, David. (2008). "Are We Finally Winning the War on Cancer?" Journal of
        Economic Perspectives, 22(4): 3-26.

Decker, Sandra L. (2005). "Medicare and the Health of Women with Breast
      Cancer," Journal of Human Resources, 40(4): 948-968.

Dubay, Lisa, Theodore Joyce, Robert Kaestner and Genevieve Kenney (2001).
      "Changes in Prenatal Care Timing and Low Birth Weight by Race and
      Socioeconomic Status: Implications for the Medicaid Expansions for
      Pregnant Women," Health Services Research, 36: 373-98.

Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber,
       Joseph P. Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and the Oregon
       Health Study Group (2012). "The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment:
       Evidence from the First Year," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3):
       1057-1106.

Hoerger, Thomas J,, Ekwueme Donatus U., Miller Jacqueline W., Uzunagelov
      Vladislav, Hall Ingrid J., Segel Joel, Royalty Janet, Gardner James G.,
      Smith Judith Lee, and Li Chunyu (2011). "Estimated effects of the
      National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program on Breast
      Cancer Mortality," American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 40(4): 397-
      404.

Howard, David H., Donatus U. Ekwueme, James G. Gardner, Florence K.
      Tangka, Chunyu Li, and Jacqueline W. Miller (2010). "The Impact of a
      National Program to Provide Free Mammograms to Low-Income,
      Uninsured Women on Breast Cancer Mortality Rates," Cancer, 116(19):
      4456-4462.

Kadiyala, Srikanth and Erin Strumpf (2011). "How Effective is Population-Based
      Cancer Screening? Regression Discontinuity Estimates from the U.S.
      Guideline Screening Initiation Ages," working paper.




                                               43
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




Kolstad, Jonathan and Amanda Kowalski (2010). "The Impact of Health Care
       Reform on Hospital and Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts,"
       NBER Working Paper #16102.

Kowalski, Amanda (2018). "Behavior within a Clinical Trial and Implications for
      Mammography Guidelines," NBER Working Paper No. 25049.

Lee, Nancy C., Faye L. Wong, Patricia M. Jamison, Sandra F. Jones, Louise
      Galaska, Kevin T. Brady, Barbara Wethers, and George-Ann Stokes-
      Townsend (2014). "Implementation of the National Breast and Cervical
      Cancer Early Detection Program," Cancer, 120(S16): 2540-2548.

LoSasso, Anthony and Bruce Meyer (2006). "The Health Care Safety net and
      Crowd-Out of Private Health Insurance," working paper.

Lofters, Aiasha K., Moineddin, Rahim, Hwang, Stephen W., and Glazier Richard
       H. (2013). "Does social disadvantage affect the validity of self-report for
       cervical cancer screening?" International Journal of Women's Health, 5:
       29-33.

Lurie, Nicole, Nancy B. Ward, Martin F. Shapiro and Robert H. Brook (1984).
       "Termination from Medi-Cal--Does It Affect Health?" New England
       Journal of Medicine, 480-84.

Mammen, Enno (1993). "Bootstrap and Wild Bootstrap for High Dimension
    Linear Models," The Annals of Statistics, 21(1): 255-285.

Manning, Willard, Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler, and
      Arleen Leibowitz (1987). "Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical
      Care," American Economic Review, 77(3): 251-277.

Nelson, David, Shayne Bland, Eve Powell-Griner, Richard Klein, Henry Wells,
       Gary Hogelin, and James Marks, (2002), "State Trends in Health Risk
       Factors and Receipt of Clinical Preventive Services Among US Adults
       During the 1990s," Journal of the American Medical Association,
       287(20): 2659-2667.

Nikpay, Sayeh (2016). "Federal Support for Family Planning Clinics Associated
      with Dramatic Gains in Cervical Cancer Screening," Women's Health
      Issues, 26-2 (2016), 176-182.




                                               44
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




Ryerson, A. Blythe, Vicki Benard, and Anne Major (2002), "National Breast and
      Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program: 1991-2002 National Report,"
      CDC US Department of Health and Human Services.

Ryerson, A. Blythe, J. Miller, C Eheman, and M White (2007). "Use of
      Mammograms Among Women Aged  40 years --- United States, 2000-
      2005," Centers for Disease Control Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
      Report, 56(3): 49-51.

Sabik, Lindsay and Cathy Bradley (2016). "The impact of near-universal
       insurance coverage on breast and cervical cancer screening: evidence from
       Massachusetts," Health Economics, 25: 391-407.

Selove, Rebecca, Barbara Kilbourne, Mary Kay Fadden, Maureen Sanderson,
       Maya Foster, Regina Offodile, Baqar Husaini, Charles Mouton, and
       Robert S. Levine (2016). "Time from Screening Mammography to Biopsy
       and from Biopsy to Breast Cancer Treatment among Black and White,
       Women Medicare Beneficiaries Not Participating in a Health Maintenance
       Organization," Women's Health Issues, 26(6): 642-647.

Tangka, Florence, Joseph Dalaker, Sajal Chattopadhyah, James Gardner, Janet
      Royalty, Ingrid Hall, Amy DeGroff, Donald Blackman, and Ralph Coates.
      (2006). "Meeting the mammography screening needs of underserved
      women: the performance of the National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early
      Detection Program in 2002-2003 (United States)," Cancer Causes and
      Control, 17: 1145-1154.

Tello-Trillo, D. Sebastian (2016). "Effects of Losing Public Health Insurance on
       Healthcare Access, Utilization and Health Outcomes: Evidence from the
       TennCare Disenrollment," working paper.

Wherry, Laura (2013). "Medicaid Family Planning Expansions and Related
      Preventive Care," American Journal of Public Health, 103(9), 1577-1578.

Will, Julie C. and Ryan K. Loo (2008). "The WISEWOMAN Program:
       Reflection and Forecast," Preventing Chronic Disease, 5(2): 1-9.




                                               45
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




Figure 1
Trends in Past Year Mammography by Insurance Status, 50-64 year old women,
1991-2005 BRFSS




Figure 2
Trends in Past Year Clinical Breast Exams, 50-64 year old women, 1991-2005
BRFSS




                                               46
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




Figure 3
Trends in Past Year Pap Tests, 50-64 year old women, 1991-2005 BRFSS




Figure 4
State NBCCEDP Rollout




                                               47
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




Figure 5
State BCCTP Rollout




                                               48
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                       Table 1
                 Descriptive Statistics, BRFSS Females, 1990-2005
Variable                                  21-39 year old      40-49 year old      50-64 year old
                                             women               women               women

White non-Hispanic                         .703 (.457)          .749 (.434)         .794 (.405)
Black non-Hispanic                         .115 (.319)          .107 (.309)         .096 (.295)
Other race non-Hispanic                    .044 (.206)          .040 (.196)         .030 (.172)
Hispanic                                   .133 (.340)          .097 (.296)         .074 (.261)

Less than high school degree               .096 (.294)          .099 (.298)         .154 (.361)
HS degree                                  .299 (.458)          .316 (.465)         .363 (.481)
Some college                               .305 (.461)          .282 (.450)         .247 (.432)
Bachelor's degree or more                  .299 (.458)          .301 (.459)         .233 (.423)

Married                                    .591 (.492)          .700 (.458)         .672 (.469)
Widowed/Divorced/Separated                 .117 (.321)          .210 (.407)         .276 (.447)
Never married                              .245 (.430)          .069 (.253)         .041 (.198)
Living with a partner                      .046 (.209)          .018 (.135)         .008 (.089)

Has any health insurance                   .812 (.390)          .867 (.339)         .880 (.325)

Ever had a mammogram                       .244 (.429)          .774 (.418)         .840 (.367)
Had mammogram in past year                 .128 (.328)           .479 (.500         .597 (.491)
Ever had a clinical breast exam            .903 (.296)          .932 (.251)         .919 (.273)
Had clinical breast exam in past year      .703 (.457)          .681 (.466)         .692 (.462)
Ever had a Pap test                        .952 (.214)          .977 (.150)         .967 (.179)
Had Pap test in past year                  .751 (.432)          .673 (.469)         .624 (.484)

 NBCCEDP in respondent's state                .646 (.478)        .706 (.456)         .692 (.462)
 BCCTP in respondent's state                  .217 (.412)        .256 (.436)         .269 (.443)
 N                                              555807             332195              379776
Author calculations, 1991-2000 BRFSS adult females 21-64. Weighted means (standard
deviations). Sample size for each variable varies slightly due to certain questions not being asked
in each year. Reported sample size is the sample size for the demographic characteristics
(race/ethnicity, education, and marital status) which were asked in each wave.




                                                49
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                     Table 2:
                         NBCCEDP and BCCTP Not Meaningfully Related to Presence of a Health Plan
                                       BRFSS 1991-2005, 21-64 year old women
                                                      (1)                                   (2)                                   (3)
                                                21-39 year olds                       40-49 year olds                       50-64 year olds

 NBCCEDP                                             .008*                                  .007                                 -.004
                                                     (.005)                                (.005)                                (.005)
 BCCTP                                                .002                                  .004                                 -.004
                                                     (.005)                                (.006)                                (.005)

 Adjusted R squared                                   .12                                   .11                                   .09
 N                                                  495295                                308830                                352737
Notes: Each panel of each column shows the results from a separate regression model. Additional controls in all models include: five-year age group
dummies; laws mandating access to OB/GYNs; insurance mandates for mammography; race/ethnicity; education; marital status; share of women 15­44
with private health insurance; share of women who work or who have a husband who works at a firm with 24 or fewer employees, 25­99 employees or
100 or more employees; the unemployment rate; welfare reform; the level of HMO penetration (as a share of the population); the number of obstetric
beds per 100 women 15­44; the eligibility threshold for Medicaid eligibility for a pregnant woman in the state as a share of the FPL; the presence of a
CDC-funded WISEWOMAN program; share urban; share black; share Hispanic; and state, year, and month of interview fixed effects. * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors throughout are clustered at the state level and estimates are weighted.




                                                                          50
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                              Table 3:
                                                NBCCEDP, BCCTPA, and mammograms
                                                BRFSS 1991-2005, 21-64 year old women
                                                (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
                                          21-39 year olds   21-39 year olds    40-49 year olds   40-49 year olds   50-64 year olds   50-64 year olds
                                            Ever had a      Had a Mamm.          Ever had a      Had a Mamm.         Ever had a      Had a Mamm.
                                           Mammogram         in Past Year       Mammogram         in Past Year      Mammogram         in Past Year
Full Sample
NBCCEDP                                        .012**           .010**              .001             .020**             .004             .015**
                                                (.005)           (.004)            (.007)             (.009)           (.007)             (.008)
BCCTP                                           -.004            -.005              -.009            .0005              -.009             -.011
                                               (.008)           (.011)             (.007)            (.014)            (.007)            (.011)
Adjusted R squared                              .11              .06                .05               .03               .06               .04
N                                             384299           383759             229205            228585            249905            248870
Women with a health plan
NBCCEDP                                        .013**            .008               -.002             .012              .005              .012
                                                (.006)          (.005)             (.007)            (.009)            (.005)            (.009)
BCCTP                                          -.012*           -.0003              -.011             -.001            -.010*             -.012
                                               (.007)           (.010)             (.008)            (.018)            (.005)            (.009)
Adjusted R squared                              .13              .07                .04               .02               .05               .03
N                                             318946           318506             199717            199225            220165            219342
Women without a health plan
NBCCEDP                                         .007            .017*               .015            .057***             .019            .058***
                                               (.008)           (.008)             (.017)            (.020)            (.023)            (.014)
BCCTP                                           .023             -.022              -.006             .001              .009              .008
                                               (.022)           (.022)             (.016)            (.037)            (.027)            (.026)
 Adjusted R squared                             .05              .03                .05               .03               .07               .04
 N                                             64822            64727              29222             29104             29412             29219
See notes to Table 2.




                                                                          51
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                          Table 4:
                                        NBCCEDP, BCCTPA, and clinical breast exams (CBE)
                                            BRFSS 1991-2005, 21-64 year old women
                                                (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
                                          21-39 year olds   21-39 year olds   40-49 year olds   40-49 year olds   50-64 year olds   50-64 year olds
                                            Ever had a       Had a CBE in       Ever had a       Had a CBE in       Ever had a       Had a CBE in
                                               CBE             Past Year           CBE             Past Year           CBE             Past Year
Full Sample
NBCCEDP                                         .001             .010             -.004            .029***             .004             .020**
                                               (.004)           (.007)            (.005)            (.009)            (.004)             (.008)
BCCTP                                           .002             .007             -.001             -.004              .001              .001
                                               (.007)           (.010)            (.004)            (.015)            (.006)            (.011)
Adjusted R squared                              .08              .04               .06               .03               .05               .03
N                                             383946           382907            228835            227853            249324            247552
Women with a health plan
NBCCEDP                                         .005             .007             -.005             .019**             .005             .021**
                                               (.003)           (.007)            (.005)             (.007)           (.004)             (.008)
BCCTP                                          -.002             .004             -.003             -.006             -.003             -.066
                                               (.006)           (.010)            (.005)            (.016)            (.007)            (.013)
Adjusted R squared                              .06              .03               .04               .02               .03               .02
N                                             318660           317868            199416            198641            219668            218246
Women without a health plan
NBCCEDP                                        -.021*           .023*             -.002             .070**             .013             .038**
                                               (.011)           (.013)            (.014)             (.029)           (.016)             (.016)
BCCTP                                           .002            -.001             -.006              .005             .037*            .069***
                                               (.015)           (.022)            (.013)            (.029)            (.021)            (.026)
Adjusted R squared                              .09              .04               .07               .03               .06               .03
N                                              64754            64517             29162             28963             29333             29000
See notes to Table 2.




                                                                         52
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                                  Table 5:
                                                     NBCCEDP, BCCTPA, and Pap Tests
                                                    BRFSS 1991-2005, 21-64 year old women
                                                (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
                                          21-39 year olds   21-39 year olds    40-49 year olds   40-49 year olds   50-64 year olds   50-64 year olds
                                          Ever had a Pap     Had Pap Test      Ever had a Pap     Had Pap Test     Ever had a Pap     Had Pap Test
                                               Test          in Past Year           Test          in Past Year          Test          in Past Year
Full Sample
NBCCEDP                                         -.001            .005               -.001           .022**              .002             .016*
                                               (.003)           (.006)             (.003)            (.008)            (.005)            (.008)
BCCTP                                            .001            .011              .0001              -.012           -.009**             -.009
                                               (.004)           (.011)             (.004)            (.016)            (.003)            (.013)
Adjusted R squared                                .07             .03                .03               .02               .03               .03
N                                             383706           382503             228773            227541            249370            246850
Women with a health plan
NBCCEDP                                          .001            .001               -.003              .014             .002               .015
                                               (.002)           (.006)             (.002)            (.008)            (.004)            (.009)
BCCTP                                           -.002            .007                .002             -.008           -.007*              -.009
                                               (.003)           (.009)             (.004)            (.014)            (.003)            (.013)
Adjusted R squared                                .06             .03                 .02               .02              .02                .03
N                                             318472           317550             199366            198364            219712            217635
Women without a health plan
NBCCEDP                                         -.011           .024**               .012            .056**              .010             .035
                                               (.008)            (.011)            (.016)             (.027)           (.011)            (.024)
BCCTP                                            .005             .017              -.012              -.038            -.016             .012
                                               (.013)            (.026)            (.012)             (.041)           (.015)            (.029)
Adjusted R squared                                .09              .04                .06               .03               .05              .04
N                                              64707             64437             29147              28926            29339             28911
See notes to Table 2.




                                                                          53
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                         Table 6:
                             NBCCEDP, BCCTPA, and Other Health Behaviors (Falsification Tests)
                                BRFSS 1991-2005, 50-64 year old women without a health plan
                                                       (1)                         (2)                    (3)                 (4)
Outcome is:                                    Always wears a seatbelt   Got a flu shot last year    Had cholesterol    Current smoker
                                                                                                    checked last year

NBCCEDP                                                 .002                      .013                    -.025              -.002
                                                       (.026)                    (.017)                  (.034)             (.013)
BCCTP                                                   -.003                     .015                    .008               -.010
                                                       (.021)                    (.021)                  (.027)             (.019)
Adjusted R squared                                      .09                       .04                     .04                .07
N                                                      11234                     33640                   25920              41501
See notes to Table 2.




                                                                         54
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                       Table 7:
                     NBCCEDP Increased Detection of Early Stage Pre-Cancers and Cancers of the Breast
                                       SEER 1985-2005, 25-64 year old women
                                   (1)                  (2)                 (3)                   (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                               In-situ pre-          Localized            Regional              Distant         Total Incidence ­    Total Incidence ­
                                 cancers             (Stage 1)         (Stages 2 & 3)          (Stage 4)        excluding in-situ    including in situ
 25-39 year old women
 NBCCEDP                           .043                 -.002                -.020                -.004               -.045                -.027
                                  (.321)               (.969)               (.563)               (.896)              (.376)               (.470)
                                  [.290]               [.968]               [.547]               [.893]              [.348]               [.448]
 R-squared                          .67                  .78                  .79                  .53                 .81                  .82
 N                                 1701                 1701                 1701                 1701                1701                 1701
 40-49 year old women
 NBCCEDP                           .098                 -.077                .029                -.130                -.060                -.002
                                  (.185)               (.150)               (.700)              (.084)*              (.393)               (.976)
                                  [.147]               [.111]               [.689]              [.049]*              [.367]               [.976]
 R-squared                          .85                  .82                  .81                  .74                 .80                  .80
 N                                 1134                 1134                 1134                1134                 1134                 1134
 50-64 year old women
 NBCCEDP                               .147                 .060                -.013               .018                 .041               .076
                                    (.018)**              (.074)*              (.641)              (.569)               (.198)            (.063)*
                                   [.003]***             [.040]**              [.412]              [.552]               [.160]           [.031]**
 R-squared                              .85                  .82                 .82                 .80                  .80                .80
 N                                    1701                 1701                 1701                1701                 1701              1701
Notes: Each entry shows the coefficient from a separate regression model. The dependent variable is one plus the log of the number of breast cancer
diagnoses to women in various age groups using SEER-9 data. Though not shown, all models also include state and year fixed effects and dummies for
5-year age groups and race. All models include dummies for the relevant populations of women in the age group. All models also include all the state-
level Xs discussed in the text. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors throughout are clustered at the state
level; p-values for this process are reported in parentheses; p-values calculated using Wild Bootstrap are in brackets.




                                                                          55
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                      Table 8:
                     NBCCEDP Did Not Meaningfully Increase Detection of Early Stage Cervical Cancers
                                      SEER 1985-2005, 25-64 year old women
                                   (1)                  (2)                 (3)                   (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                               In-situ pre-          Localized            Regional              Distant         Total Incidence ­    Total Incidence ­
                                 cancers             (Stage 1)         (Stages 2 & 3)          (Stage 4)        excluding in-situ    including in situ
 25-39 year old women
 NBCCEDP                           -.020                .011                 -.025                .005                -.033                -.013
                                  (.430)               (.807)               (.530)               (.916)              (.280)               (.667)
                                  [.403]               [.801]               [.511]               [.913]              [.246]               [.655]
 R-squared                          .74                  .49                  .42                  .40                 .54                  .54
 N                                 1701                 1701                 1701                 1701                1701                 1701
 40-49 year old women
 NBCCEDP                           -.039                .023                 -.027               -.095                -.037                -.056
                                  (.496)               (.636)               (.726)              (.091)*              (.200)               (.203)
                                  [.475]               [.622]               [.717]              [.055]*              [.163]               [.166]
 R-squared                          .85                  .59                  .48                  .46                 .68                  .69
 N                                 1134                 1134                 1134                1134                 1134                 1134
 50-64 year old women
 NBCCEDP                              .053                 -.017                -.006               -.114                -.059              -.076
                                     (.179)               (.717)               (.920)             (.012)**              (.154)             (.163)
                                     [.141]               [.707]               [.918]            [.001]***              [.116]           [.031]**
 R-squared                             .82                  .84                  .49                 .51                  .73                .73
 N                                    1701                 1701                 1701                1701                 1701               1701
Notes: Each entry shows the coefficient from a separate regression model. The dependent variable is one plus the log of the number of cervical cancer
diagnoses to women in various age groups using SEER-9 data. Though not shown, all models also include state and year fixed effects and dummies for
5-year age groups and race. All models include dummies for the relevant populations of women in the age group. All models also include all the state-
level Xs discussed in the text. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors throughout are clustered at the state
level; p-values for this process are reported in parentheses; p-values calculated using Wild Bootstrap are in brackets.




                                                                          56
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                       Appendix Table 1:
                                        NBCCEDP, BCCTPA, and Past Year Checkups
                                   BRFSS 1991-2005, 21-64 year old women without a health plan
                                                                   (1)                   (2)               (3)
                                                             21-39 year olds       40-49 year olds   50-64 year olds
Full Sample
NBCCEDP                                                           .009                  .012              .011
                                                                 (.010)                (.012)            (.012)
BCCTP                                                             .068                  .069              .070
                                                                 (.059)                (.063)            (.063)
Adjusted R squared                                                .38                   .41               .50
N                                                               495993                309228            353242
Women with a health plan
NBCCEDP                                                           .004                  .006              .007
                                                                 (.010)                (.012)            (.013)
BCCTP                                                             .079                  .083              .078
                                                                 (.063)                (.067)            (.065)
Adjusted R squared                                                .42                   .44               .53
N                                                               410457                268857            311084
Women without a health plan
NBCCEDP                                                          .024*                  .022             .044**
                                                                 (.012)                (.021)             (.019)
BCCTP                                                             .056                  .029              .038
                                                                 (.043)                (.038)            (.049)
Adjusted R squared                                                .28                   .27               .32
N                                                                84838                 39973             41653
See notes to Table 2.




                                                               57
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                  Appendix Table 2:
                NBCCEDP Event Study Estimates for Past Year Screenings and Breast Cancer Outcomes
      50-64 year old women without a health plan (BRFSS 1991-2005) and 50-64 year old women (SEER 1985-2005)
                               (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)           (8)
                              Had a         Had a CBE      In-situ pre-    Localized     Regional      Distant       Total         Total
                           mammogram        in past year     cancers       (Stage 1)    (Stages 2 &   (Stage 4)    Incidence     Incidence
                           in past year                                                      3)                   (excluding   (including in
                                                                                                                    in-situ)        situ)
5 or more years before         -.054          -.0003         -.160*             -.043     .125*         -.016         -.004         -.030
state NBCCEDP                 (.035)          (.044)         (.075)            (.066)     (.065)       (.050)        (.070)        (.071)

3-4 years before state         -.012           .021          -.107*             -.042      .024         -.009        -.051         -.085
NBCCEDP                       (.033)          (.035)         (.074)            (.063)     (.068)       (.048)       (.058)        (.049)

2 years before state           -.004           .026            -.121            -.041     -.049         .005         -.102        -.140*
NBCCEDP                       (.019)          (.032)          (.057)           (.091)     (.055)       (.058)       (.081)        (.073)

Year before state               --                  --          --               --         --           --           --            --
NBCCEDP

Year of state                  .040          .056***           .046             .023      -.030         .001         -.026         -.025
NBCCEDP                       (.024)          (.019)          (.049)           (.054)     (.059)       (.057)       (.049)        (.044)

1-2 years after state        .060***         .065***         .199***            .044     -.093**        .022         -.024         .014
NBCCEDP                       (.019)          (.018)          (.044)           (.070)     (.036)       (.040)       (.053)        (.045)

3-4 years after state        .061***          .057**         .344***           .155*      -.063         -.092       .044*          .106
NBCCEDP                       (.021)           (.026)         (.071)           (.083)     (.045)       (.066)       (.068)        (.056)

5 or more years after         .066**         .089***         .448***            .094      -.120         -.126        -.028         .062
state NBCCEDP                  (.028)         (.029)          (.121)           (.079)     (.074)       (.104)       (.067)        (.057)

 Adjusted R squared             .04             .03             .85             .82         .82          .80         .80           .80
 N                            29219            29000          1701             1701        1701         1701        1701          1701
For columns 1 and 2, see notes to Table 2. For columns 3-8, see notes to Table 7.




                                                                          58
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                  Appendix Table 3:
               NBCCEDP Event Study Estimates for Past Year Screenings and Cervical Cancer Outcomes
      50-64 year old women without a health plan (BRFSS 1991-2005) and 50-64 year old women (SEER 1985-2005)
                                    (1)                 (2)           (3)              (4)           (5)            (6)              (7)
                               Had a Pap test       In-situ pre-   Localized        Regional       Distant         Total            Total
                                in past year          cancers      (Stage 1)     (Stages 2 & 3)   (Stage 4)     Incidence        Incidence
                                                                                                              (excluding in-   (including in
                                                                                                                   situ)            situ)
 5 or more years before            -.051               -.082        -.124**         -.096**       -.148**        -.159**          -.179**
 state NBCCEDP                     (.036)             (.054)         (.052)          (.038)        (.049)         (.060)           (.059)

 3-4 years before state             .005               -.008          -.028          -.009         -.092*         -.038            -.065
 NBCCEDP                           (.029)             (.048)         (.054)          (.029)        (.047)        (.051)           (.050)

 2 years before state              .037*             -.092**          -.042           .038          -.006         .016             -.007
 NBCCEDP                           (.021)             (.028)         (.048)          (.044)        (.042)        (.043)           (.047)

 Year before state                   --                  --            --              --            --             --              --
 NBCCEDP

 Year of state NBCCEDP              .036               -.002          .002            .081          -.081         .039             -.008
                                   (.022)             (.046)         (.060)          (.052)        (.045)        (.037)           (.039)

 1-2 years after state            .063***             .116**          -.032          -.009        -.149**         -.089            -.091
 NBCCEDP                           (.067)              (.042)        (.081)          (.056)        (.051)        (.061)           (.059)

 3-4 years after state            .067**              .130*           .003            .030        -.145**         -.062            -.085
 NBCCEDP                           (.028)             (.057)         (.097)          (.072)        (.059)        (.085)           (.080)

 5 or more years after state      .094**             .278***          .019            .090         -.136*         -.010            .002
 NBCCEDP                           (.038)             (.080)         (.127)          (.095)        (.071)        (.097)           (.096)

 Adjusted R squared                 .04               .82               .84           .78            .83           .78             .81
 N                                 28911             1701             1701           1701           1701          1701            1701
For column 1, see notes to Table 2. For columns 2-7, see notes to Table 8.




                                                                            59
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                       Appendix Table 4:
                                      NBCCEDP Effects by Race/Ethnicity and Education
                                   BRFSS 1991-2005, 40-49 year old women without a health plan
                                                        (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)              (5)
                                                    White non-   Black, non-   Hispanic      High school     Some college or
                                                     Hispanic     Hispanic                  degree or less       more
Mammogram in Past Year
NBCCEDP                                               .042*         .057         .088             .042          .082***
                                                      (.023)       (.039)       (.054)           (.031)          (.029)
CBE in Past Year
NBCCEDP                                              .090**        -.029         .070             .030          .128***
                                                      (.037)       (.055)       (.055)           (.040)          (.031)
Pap Test in Past Year
NBCCEDP                                              .082**        -.049         .069             .046           .074**
                                                      (.038)       (.032)       (.082)           (.033)           (.028)
See notes to Table 2.




                                                                  60
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                      Appendix Table 5:
                                 NBCCEDP and BCCTPA Effects by Race/Ethnicity and Education
                                  BRFSS 1991-2005, 50-64 year old women without a health plan
                                                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)              (5)
                                                    White non-   Black, non-   Hispanic    High school     Some college or
                                                     Hispanic     Hispanic                degree or less       more
Mammogram in Past Year
NBCCEDP                                                .009       .232***      .113**         .033            .140***
                                                      (.019)       (.051)       (.046)       (.019)            (.035)
CBE in Past Year
NBCCEDP                                                .013       .128***        .075         .011            .127***
                                                      (.018)       (.039)       (.056)       (.022)            (.032)

BCCTP                                                .107***        .075         .116        .087**             .023
                                                      (.032)       (.088)       (.157)        (.038)           (.055)
Pap Test in Past Year
NBCCEDP                                                .015        .095**        .117         .039              .036
                                                      (.025)        (.041)      (.071)       (.027)            (.033)
See notes to Table 2.




                                                                  61
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                         Appendix Table 6:
                                            FQHCs do not Amplify the Effects of NBCCEDP
                                                 BRFSS 1991-2005, Adult Women
                                                     (1)                       (2)                       (3)
                                               CBE in past year        Mammogram in past year   Pap test in past year
40-49 year old women
NBCCEDP                                             .079**                     .047*                   .061*
                                                     (.035)                    (.025)                  (.032)
FQHC Uncompensated Care                                .011                    -.008                    -.008
                                                     (.011)                    (.007)                  (.009)
NBCCEDP * FQHC UC                                     -.004                     .005                    -.002
                                                     (.008)                    (.005)                  (.006)
Adjusted R squared
N                                                   28963                      29104                   28926
50-64 year old women
NBCCEDP                                               .043                     .044*                     .046
                                                    (.028)                     (.021)                  (.028)
FQHC Uncompensated Care                               .015                     -.001                     .008
                                                    (.011)                     (.011)                  (.009)
NBCCEDP * FQHC UC                                    -.002                      .007                    -.005
                                                    (.009)                     (007)                   (.007)
Adjusted R squared
N                                                   29000                      29219                   28911
See notes to Table 2.




                                                                  62
Effects of Direct Care Provision to the Uninsured




                                                       Appendix Table 7:
                            DDD Estimates of the Effect of NBCCEDP on Breast and Cervical Cancers
                                            SEER 1985-2005, 50-74 year old women
                                    (1)                  (2)                  (3)                    (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                                In-situ pre-          Localized             Regional               Distant         Total Incidence ­    Total Incidence ­
                                  cancers             (Stage 1)          (Stages 2 & 3)           (Stage 4)        excluding in-situ    including in situ
 Breast Cancers
 NBCCEDP * Targeted               .162***                .057                 .099*                 .005                .115*                0.156**
 (50-64 year olds)                 (.006)               (.385)                (.051)               (.935)               (.051)                (.018)
                                   [.000]               [.358]                [.022]               [.933]               [.022]                [.003]
 R-squared                           .85                  .82                   .83                  .81                  .80                   .79
 N                                  2835                 2835                  2835                 2835                 2835                  2835
 Cervical Cancers
 NBCCEDP * Targeted                 -.033                -.059                .031                 -.024               -.051                   -.061
 (50-64 year olds)                 (.425)               (.508)               (.704)               (.468)              (.552)                  (.505)
                                   [.401]               [.488]               [.693]               [.446]              [.534]                  [.485]
 R-squared                           .82                  .85                  .79                  .84                 .81                     .81
 N                                  2835                 2835                 2835                 2835                2835                    2835
Notes: Each entry shows the coefficient from a separate regression model. The dependent variable is one plus the log of the number of cervical cancer
diagnoses to women in various age groups using SEER-9 data. Though not shown, all models also include fixed effects for state, year, and 5-year age
groups, as well as each of their two-way interactions. All models also include race dummies and dummies for the relevant populations of women in the
age group. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors throughout are clustered at the state level; p-values for this
process are reported in parentheses; p-values calculated using Wild Bootstrap are in brackets.




                                                                            63
