                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    INCOME GROWTH AND THE DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF URBAN SPATIAL
                              SORTING

                                        Victor Couture
                                        Cecile Gaubert
                                       Jessie Handbury
                                          Erik Hurst

                                     Working Paper 26142
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26142


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 2019, Revised January 2020



We thank Hero Ashman and Allison Green for outstanding research assistance. We thank Treb
Allen, David Atkin, Don Davis, Jonathan Dingel, Ingrid Ellen, Alessandra Fogli, Ed Glaeser,
Gabriel Kreindler, Christopher Palmer, Steve Redding, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Jung Sakong,
Yichen Su, Jacob Vigdor, and Jonathan Vogel for many helpful comments as well as seminar
participants at Berkeley, Baruch, Chicago, Edinburgh, Georgetown, HEC Montreal, Illinois, LSE,
Northwestern, Notre Dame, NYU, Oxford, Penn State, the Princeton IES Workshop, Stanford,
UCLA, Toronto, Warwick, Wharton, Yale, the 2017 Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
conference on "Understanding Urban Decline," the 2018 European and U.S. Urban Economic
Association meetings, the 2019 Barcelona GSE Summer Forum and various NBER programs.
Victor Couture thanks the Fisher Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics at UC Berkeley for
financial support. Cecile Gaubert thanks the Fisher Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics
and the Clausen Center for International Business and Policy at UC Berkeley for financial
support. Jessie Handbury thanks the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Victor Couture, Cecile Gaubert, Jessie Handbury, and Erik Hurst. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Income Growth and the Distributional Effects of Urban Spatial Sorting
Victor Couture, Cecile Gaubert, Jessie Handbury, and Erik Hurst
NBER Working Paper No. 26142
August 2019, Revised January 2020
JEL No. D11,R12,R13,R23

                                           ABSTRACT

We explore the impact of rising incomes at the top of the distribution on spatial sorting patterns
within large U.S. cities. We develop and quantify a spatial model of a city with heterogeneous
agents and non-homothetic preferences for neighborhoods with endogenous amenity quality. As
the rich get richer, demand increases for the high quality amenities available in downtown
neighborhoods. Rising demand drives up house prices and spurs the development of higher
quality neighborhoods downtown. This gentrification of downtowns makes poor incumbents
worse off, as they are either displaced to the suburbs or pay higher rents for amenities that they do
not value as much. We quantify the corresponding impact on well-being inequality. Through the
lens of the quantified model, the change in the income distribution between 1990 and 2014 led to
neighborhood change and spatial resorting within urban areas that increased the welfare of richer
households relative to that of poorer households, above and beyond rising nominal income
inequality.

Victor Couture                                    Jessie Handbury
University of California, Berkeley                The Wharton School
Haas School of Business                           University of Pennsylvania
2220 Piedmont Avenue                              1463 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                           Philadelphia, PA 19104
couture@berkeley.edu                              and NBER
                                                  handbury@wharton.upenn.edu
Cecile Gaubert
Department of Economics                           Erik Hurst
University of California, Berkeley                Booth School of Business
687 Evans Hall                                    University of Chicago
Berkeley, CA 94720                                Harper Center
and NBER                                          Chicago, IL 60637
cecile.gaubert@berkeley.edu                       and NBER
                                                  erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26142
1     Introduction
Over the last three decades income inequality in the United States has grown sharply, with income
growth concentrated at the top of the earnings distribution. At the same time, higher income
individuals have been moving back into urban cores, transforming downtown neighborhoods and
sparking a policy debate on gentrification within many US cities. We posit that these trends are
linked. Rich households are more likely to live downtown than middle-income households in part
because these areas afford them access to local amenities like restaurants or entertainment venues.1
As the incomes of the rich increase, aggregate demand for neighborhoods with these luxury urban
amenities rises and more of them choose to reside downtown, triggering the redevelopment of
previously low income neighborhoods.
    In this paper, we develop a model to formalize this mechanism. We use the model to quantify
how top income growth contributes to neighborhood change, measure the associated welfare effects,
and guide policy designed to curtail the resulting gentrification. The key model features include (i)
non-homothetic preferences for location: rich and poor households make systematically different
location choices within a given city and (ii) endogenous neighborhood development: the quality of
amenities in city neighborhoods responds endogeneously to demand. The macro and trade literature
have highlighted that a rise in nominal income inequality can induce an even stronger increase in
real income inequality in the presence of such non-homothetic preferences and endogeneous supply
responses. We apply this logic to the endogenous development of neighborhoods within cities.
    Figure 1 motivates our analysis by summarizing the changes in spatial sorting by income in large
U.S. cities from 1970 to today. Specifically, the figure plots the propensity of households in each
Census income bracket to live "downtown" in 1970, 1990, and 2014 relative to the average household
in each period. Downtown is defined as the set of constant boundary Census tracts closest to the
city center that account for 10% of each CBSA's population in 2000. We restrict our analysis to the
100 largest CBSAs based on 1990 population.2 The figure documents that the propensity to live
downtown is U-shaped in household income, and has been so since at least 1970. As is well known,
poorer households are over-represented in downtown areas of a CBSA. A perhaps lesser known fact
is that richer households are also systematically over-represented downtown: above $100, 000, the
propensity to live downtown increases with income. Notably, Figure 1 also shows that the U-shape
has shifted in the recent period. Between 1990 and 2014, the rich have become more likely to reside
downtown, and the poor less so.
    We develop a model of a stylized city that accommodates such U-shape sorting patterns and
then use the model to investigate how much of the recent change in the U-shape can be traced back
to changes in the income distribution over time. In the model, households are heterogeneous in in-
comes and choose where to live among neighborhoods that offer different qualities of amenities and
   1
     For example, Aguiar and Bils (2015) estimate that restaurant meals and non-durable entertainment are among
the goods with the highest income elasticities. Couture and Handbury (2017) document that downtown areas of
major cities have a higher density of such amenities.
   2
     See Appendix A for a more detailed discussion of the construction of this figure. In this appendix we also show
that the patterns in Figure 1 hold within detailed demographic groups.


                                                         1
                    Figure 1: Downtown Residential Income Propensity by Income




                                                               2.5
                          Share of Income Brackets in Urban Tracts

                                                      2
                                       (Normalized*)
                       .5        1        1.5




                                                                     0                            100000                 200000                             300000
                                                                                                      Median Family Income

                                                                                                 1970                     1990                    2014
                                                                     Normalized by aggregate urban share: 0.174 in 1970, 0.103 in 1990, and 0.077 in 2014



Note: This figure shows sorting by income in 100 large CBSAs in 1970, 1990, and 2014. The 100 CBSAs are those
with the largest population in 1990. Each point plots the share of families in a given Census income bracket who
reside downtown in a given year ­ normalized by the share of all families who reside downtown that year ­ against the
median family income (in 1999 dollars) of that Census income bracket in that year. The downtown area of each CBSA
is defined as the set of tracts closest to the center of each CBSA that account for 10% of that CBSA's population in
2000. The number of points on the graph is limited by the number of income brackets reported by the Census for
tract-level data. We compute the median income in each bracket using IPUMS microdata for the corresponding year
in the 100 largest CBSAs. The IPUMS microdata is adjusted for top-coding using the generalized Pareto method,
as described in Appendix C.


housing. Households trade off neighborhood attractiveness against cost of living. This cost depends
on local housing prices and on the cost of commuting to work. Preferences for neighborhoods are
non-homothetic: households with higher incomes are more willing to pay the higher cost of living
in desirable neighborhoods. On the supply side, neighborhoods are built by private developers
who compete for land within each area of the city. As top incomes grow, demand for high quality
neighborhoods downtown rises leading to an increase in prices throughout downtown, including in
low quality neighborhoods where the poor live. An increase in the supply of high quality neighbor-
hoods, and an associated decrease in the variety of low quality neighborhoods, amplifies this price
mechanism. Through these mechanisms, an influx of richer households downtown unambiguously
hurts the lower income renters residing there.
    The model also builds in mitigating forces through which an influx of higher incomes downtown
could benefit incumbent poor households. First, households travel to consume amenities outside
of their neighborhood of residence. An improvement in the quality of other neighborhoods in the
city benefits all households who travel to consume these amenities, beyond its residents. Second,
local governments build public amenities like parks or schools that benefit all households in a given
location. The provision of public amenities increases as the tax base downtown increases. Third,
some low income downtown residents own their homes, and hence reap the benefits of house price



                                                                                                                2
appreciation. Given these mitigating forces, how an influx of richer households into downtown areas
affects the well-being of lower income households on net is a quantitative question.
    Before fully estimating the model, we use micro data to provide evidence for the model's key
sorting mechanism. We exploit changes in spatial sorting patterns in response to a CBSA-wide
income shock, driven by plausibly exogenous variation in labor demand across cities. Our instru-
mental variable estimation shows that an income shock raises house prices and amenity quality
downtown more than in the suburbs and induces the rich to re-sort into downtowns. These results
suggest that income growth triggers within-city spatial sorting disproportionately drawing the rich
downtown, consistent with our model of non-homothetic location choices.
    This micro evidence yields an estimate for the elasticity that governs how income-dependent
within-city location choices are, a key parameter in our quantitative analysis. A second impor-
tant model elasticity governs the magnitude of the gains from accessing a variety of non-tradable
amenities in the city. We identify this parameter using a gravity equation for amenity consump-
tion, derived from the model, and a rich novel database of smartphone location data that traces
the extent to which individuals from different neighborhoods travel to different venues. After fully
quantifying the model, we show that it is able to replicate the fact that downtown areas are dispro-
portionately populated by both very low and very high earners, mimicking the U-shape in Figure
1. In the model, low income households minimize the costs of housing and commuting by residing
in low quality neighborhoods downtown. At the same time, higher income households are attracted
downtown by the density of high quality, high amenity luxury neighborhoods offered there.
    We use the quantified model to back out how much of the change in spatial sorting between
1990 and 2014 comes from changes in the income distribution. We find that (i) the increased
incomes of the rich since 1990 are causing a phenomenon that looks like urban gentrification ­
the in-migration of higher income residents downtown causes the amenity mix of neighborhoods to
change ­ and (ii) this mechanism can explain roughly one-half of the urbanization of the rich (top
income decile) and roughly one-half of the suburbanization of the poor (bottom income decile).3
These findings highlight that, while other forces outside of the model are also arguably contributing
to neighborhood change over the last few decades, the rising incomes of the rich play a quantitatively
important role in the recent rise in gentrification of urban centers.
    To further validate the model, we present additional counterfactual analyses. First, we show that
a similar procedure applied to the 1970-1990 change in the income distribution leads to a much more
limited spatial sorting response compared to 1990-2014, like in the data. While incomes increased
during the 1970-1990 period, our analysis suggests that there was not a sufficiently large increase in
    3
      Throughout the paper, we often use "neighborhood change" of low income neighborhoods and "gentrification"
interchangeably. We realize that gentrification is a complex process with many potential definitions and drivers. Our
interpretation is closest to the definition in the Merriam-Webster dictionary that defines gentrification as "the process
of renewal and rebuilding accompanying the influx of middle-class or affluent people into deteriorating areas that often
displaces poorer residents." Our paper is not intended to explore all potential underlying causes of neighborhood
gentrification. Rather, we wish to focus on the dimension of gentrification that follows the rise in top incomes.
Specifically, we focus on the interaction of rising top incomes, non-homothetic preferences for urban amenities, and
endogenous spatial responses.



                                                           3
households at very high income levels to trigger much neighborhood change downtown. Second, we
show that the model also performs quite well at explaining cross-CBSA variation in spatial sorting
during the 1990 to 2014 period. We feed into our model changes in the income distribution that are
CBSA specific. The resulting model predictions match well the actual patterns of neighborhood
change observed empirically within each CBSA. These additional counterfactuals further highlight
the ability of our model to match empirical patterns linking changes in the income distribution and
changes in the propensity of high income individuals to locate downtown.
    We next use the quantified model to study the normative implications of changes in spatial
sorting. We find that the 1990-2014 increase in income inequality triggered an even larger increase
in well-being inequality once accounting for changes in neighborhood quality and spatial sorting.
Quantitatively, mitigating forces like the public provision of amenities are not strong enough to
overcome the base mechanism, which hurts the poor primarily through higher rents. Overall,
we find that accounting for endogenous spatial sorting responses increased well-being inequality
between the top and bottom deciles of the income distribution by 1.7 percentage points (on a base
of 19 percentage points) during the past three decades. We further estimate that the welfare of low
income renters was actually reduced by 0.5% from the resulting gentrification stemming from top
income growth during this period.
    Finally, we use the model to study the effect of stylized `anti-gentrification' policies, for instance
one that taxes housing in high quality neighborhoods downtown to subsidize housing in low quality
neighborhoods downtown. We find that such policies can be effective in maintaining a diverse
income mix downtown. However, these policies do not overturn the increase in well-being inequality
that we find for 1990-2014, as price and quality upgrades are to a large extent pushed to the
suburbs. In contrast, a policy that relieves housing supply constraints downtown mitigates the
negative welfare impact of neighborhood change on the poor, but does not curb the influx of the
rich into downtowns.

Related Literature This paper contributes to four main literatures. First, a growing literature
studies how nominal income inequality growth can induce even stronger real income inequality
growth in models with non-homothetic preferences and endogeneous supply responses, especially
in the context of international trade.4 We apply this logic to the endogenous development of
neighborhoods within cities.
    Second, we contribute to the quantitative spatial economics literature reviewed in Redding and
Rossi-Hansberg (2017), more specifically to the strand that studies the internal structure of cities
(Ahlfeldt et al. (2015); Allen et al. (2015); Redding and Sturm (2016)). Different from our approach,
these papers feature homogeneous workers, homothetic preferences, and model a specific city with
no extensive margin of within-city locations. We propose a stylized model of a representative city
   4
     Faber and Fally (2017) show that more productive firms target wealthier households; Jaravel (2018) shows that
innovation is skewed towards the growing top income market segment; Fajgelbaum et al. (2011), Fajgelbaum and
Khandelwal (2016) and Faber (2014) study the welfare consequences of trade across the income distribution. Dingel
(2016) provides evidence that the higher income residents generate endogenous supply of higher quality products in
U.S. cities.


                                                        4
that allows us to model the extensive margin: the number and quality of neighborhoods in a city
is endogenous. Our approach also uniquely studies spatial sorting and well-being across the full
distribution of incomes, with a common non-homothetic preference structure across incomes.5 The
model's core mechanisms are drawn from Fajgelbaum et al. (2011) and relate to the assignment
model of Davis and Dingel (2019). Our framework retains the tractability of quantitative spatial
models, which allows us to take it to the data and quantify the impact of policies on neighborhood
change and welfare.6 Our paper therefore also complements recent work examining the welfare
implications of urban policies by Diamond et al. (Forthcoming), Eriksen and Rosenthal (2010),
Baum-Snow and Marion (2009), Diamond and McQuade (2019) and Hsieh and Moretti (2019).
       Third, we contribute to the literature that studies changes in spatial sorting over time. In
an early contribution, Gyourko et al. (2013) show that the increase in high incomes nationally
can explain the upward co-movement of incomes and house prices observed in "superstar cities."
Diamond (2016) shows that homophily among the college educated amplifies sorting behavior across
cities. Different from Diamond (2016), households have identical non-homothetic preferences in our
model. Changes in consumption and location choices stem from changes in income. Furthermore,
we model the economics behind the endogenous supply of neighborhoods within a city that fuels
increases in welfare inequality. Contemporaneous work also studies welfare inequality within cities.
For example, Fogli and Guerrieri (2019) focus on educational outcomes while Su (2018b) emphasizes
the role of rising value of time for high skilled workers. Our focus on urban amenities as an important
dimension of neighborhood heterogeneity follows the early insights of Brueckner et al. (1999) and
Glaeser et al. (2001) on the "consumer city." Recent work by Almagro and Dominguez-Iino (2019)
and Hoelzlein (2019) also study how endogenous amenities reinforce sorting by income within cities.
       Fourth, our approach complements a flourishing literature that highlights various causes and
consequences of gentrification and neighborhood change.7 Within this literature, our paper builds
on a growing strand that concludes that amenities play an important role in explaining demographic
shifts downtown, relative to changing job locations (Glaeser et al. (2001), Baum-Snow and Hartley
(2018), Couture and Handbury (2017), Su (2018b)). Couture and Handbury (2017), for example,
document rising average commute distance for high-wage workers from 2002 to 2011 despite their
moving into downtown areas, and rising propensity to reverse-commute among the rich, i.e., to live
downtown but work in the suburbs. These findings illustrate that changing job location or changing
taste for commutes alone are unlikely to rationalize the rising propensity of high-skilled workers to
   5
     Our paper complements recent work by Tsivanidis (2019) who uses Stone-Geary preferences to study the distri-
butional effects of infrastructure investment in Bogota across two skill groups. In country-wide spatial equilibrium
models, Peters et al. (2018) use PIGL preferences of a representative agent to study structural change across U.S.
counties and Fajgelbaum and Gaubert (2018) study optimal spatial policies in models with heterogeneous workers
who have heterogeneous but homothetic preferences over endogenous city amenities.
   6
     Gaigne et al. (2017) theoretically analyze an extension of a classic linear city model with jobs and amenities
exogenously given at different locations on the line, in which non-homothetic preferences generates heterogeneous
spatial sorting.
   7
     See, for example, Guerrieri et al. (2013), Edlund et al. (2019), Ellen et al. (2019), Berkes and Gaetani (2018),
Vigdor et al. (2002), Lance Freeman (2005), McKinnish et al. (2010); Ellen and ORegan (2010), Ding et al. (2016);
Brummet and Reed (2019), Meltzer and Ghorbani (2017), Lester and Hartley (2014), and Autor et al. (2017).



                                                         5
live downtown. We contribute to this literature by documenting and quantifying a novel channel
(rising top incomes, coupled with income effects on location choice), as well as methodologically,
by providing a quantitative model that allows for policy assessment.
        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out the model and its properties. Section
3 presents the data and provides empirical evidence for the main mechanism of the model, while the
model is fully quantified in Section 4. The impact of the 1990-2014 change in income distribution
on within-city spatial sorting is presented in Section 5. Section 6 discusses the corresponding
normative and policy implications.


2        A model of the residential choice of heterogeneous households
We begin by developing a benchmark model of a representative city where households have hetero-
geneous incomes. Households with different incomes make different residential choices in the city;
in turn, the urban landscape responds to the economic composition of the city. The benchmark
model is stylized so as to emphasize its key mechanisms. We will later incorporate more realistic
features to guide the empirical analysis. Additional details are provided in Appendix B.

2.1        Benchmark Model
2.1.1       Demand for neighborhoods

Model setup          The city is populated by households whose income w is distributed according to a
density L (w). This income distribution is taken as a primitive of the model. One of our key objects
of interest will be how the city equilibrium changes as the income distribution L (w) changes.
        Each household  selects a neighborhood r to reside in, trading-off quality of life in a given
neighborhood against the corresponding cost-of-living.8 Specifically, they derive utility from the
consumption of a freely traded good taken as the numeraire, as well as from the quality of life in
their residential location, as summarized by the following indirect utility:

                                      vr ( ) = ((1 - r )w - pr ) Br br.                                      (1)

In this expression, w is the wage of household  , Br is the quality of neighborhood r, and br
is household  's idiosyncratic preference for neighborhood r, which we detail below. In order to
live in neighborhood r and enjoy its residential amenities, households have to pay for one unit of
housing, at rent pr , and incur a commuting cost to work r . Households choose the neighborhood
r that maximizes their utility (1).
        Neighborhoods r are differentiated along several dimensions. First, they can be located in
one of two broad areas indexed by n: Downtown (n = D) and the Suburbs (n = S ). Second,
neighborhoods vary in their intrinsic quality, indexed by j , which captures the attractiveness of
    8
    We make the implicit assumption that, in a first step that is not modeled, workers find jobs with income w in
the city. In a second step, they choose where to live within the city.



                                                       6
local urban amenities as well as the quality of the housing stock. Third, within a location-quality
pair (n, j ), neighborhoods are differentiated horizontally - but symmetric, as we detail below.
Households have an idiosyncratic preference for each neighborhood br drawn from a Generalized
Extreme Value distribution:
                                                                     -  
                                                                       
                                                                   - 
                            F ({br }) = exp -                     br     .                         (2)
                                                                        
                                                 n,j       rRnj


where Rnj denotes the set of neighborhoods of quality j in area n of the city. This nested structure
captures the intuitive feature that the preferences of a given household are more correlated between
neighborhoods of the same quality and located in the same part of the city, making them closer
substitutes, than they are for neighborhoods of different quality or location. Specifically, the
parameter  captures the substitutablility of neighborhoods of different (n, j ) types, while  governs
the substitutablility of horizontally differentiated neighborhoods of the same (n, j ) type, with  <  .
   We assume for simplicity that horizontally differentiated neighborhoods are otherwise symmetric
within each (n, j ) pair, so that Br = Bnj . We further assume that within each broad area n,
neighborhoods are symmetric in their access to jobs. Downtown neighborhoods are characterized
by a better access to jobs than those in the Suburbs (D < S ), because of shorter distances and
a higher availability of public transportation Downtown. Finally, note that housing prices will be
identical in equilibrium across neighborhoods within each location-quality pair, so that pr = pnj .
   Our demand function in (1) resembles a conventional discrete choice of location setup, widely
used in the quantitative spatial economics literature, except that it features location choices that
are income dependent. We discuss these sorting properties next, before closing the benchmark
model with a discussion of neighborhood development.

Residential Sorting by Income         Given expression (1) and making use of the model's symmetry,
the share of households who locate in a neighborhood of type (n, j ) among households with income
w is:                                                   
                                                       Vnj (w)
                                     nj (w) =                           ,                          (3)
                                                   n ,j    Vn ,j (w )

where Vnj (w) is the inclusive value of all neighborhoods of type (n, j ) for a household with income
w that can simply be summarized as:

                                                ~nj (w - p
                                      Vnj (w) = B        ~nj ) ,                                   (4)

where                                                  1
                                       ~nj  Bnj N  (1 - n )
                                       B                                                           (5)
                                                 nj




                                                  7
is a model-consistent measure of the attractiveness of option (n, j ), while

                                                            pnj
                                                  p
                                                  ~nj =                                                            (6)
                                                          1 - n

is the corresponding cost-of-living index. We discuss the micro-foundation of these quality and
cost-of-living terms later in this section. For now, note that Nnj is the endogenous number of
neighborhoods of a given area-quality type, and that utility increases with Nnj through a love of
variety effect: given the idiosyncratic preferences (2), more neighborhoods to choose from leads to
a higher average utility.
      Examining (3) and (4), we see that, at all levels of incomes, the propensity of a household to
reside in a given neighborhood depends positively on the quality of its amenities and negatively
on its cost of living. More interesting, across incomes, the utility of higher income households is
less sensitive to higher costs of living. This yields residential sorting of households by income, as
summarized below:

Proposition 1. High income households are over-represented in high cost-of-living neighborhoods.
                                                     2 log Vnj (w)                            2 log nj (w)
      Proposition 1 stems from the fact that           w p  ~nj      > 0, or equivalently       w p ~nj      > 0. This
result comes from assuming that each household consumes one unit of housing, which makes higher
income households less sensitive to house prices so, all else equal, they are over-represented in
expensive neighborhoods. We would obtain a similar result if utility was Stone-Geary between the
consumption of tradable good and housing, with a minimum housing requirement.9
      Applying the result from Proposition (1) with a focus on commuting costs, we also find that
 2 log nj (w)
    wn          > 0, i.e., high income households are over-represented in higher commuting cost neigh-
borhoods. This property of the model echoes a traditional explanation put forward in the urban
literature for why poorer households often make the choice to live downtown: better access to jobs
downtown, in particular given the availability of public transportation there.
      The intensity of sorting by income in the city is crucially shaped by the preference parameter
. Indeed, the relative propensity to live in various neighborhood types by income can be written
as:                                                                                   
                            nj (w)/nj (w )              (w - p
                                                             ~nj ) / (w - p
                                                                          ~nj )
                                             =                                           ,                         (7)
                            n j (w)/n j (w )            w-p ~n j / w - p  ~n j

so that:

Lemma 1. The intensity of income-based residential sorting increases with , all else equal.
   9
     In contrast to what we do here, the literature in economic geography frequently models housing consumption
assuming Cobb-Douglas preferences, which deliver a constant expenditure share of housing and a unit income elasticity
of housing. This assumption is well suited for models of location choice across cities with homogeneous workers,
as shown by Davis and Ortalo-Magne (2011). They compute, city by city, the distribution across households of
expenditure on housing divided by income, and show that the median of this distribution is stable across cities. In
contrast, our model focuses on within-city sorting and on heterogeneous incomes. Across incomes, Aguiar and Bils
(2015) show using CEX data that housing consumption has an income elasticity that is lower than 1. Our model
assumption is better suited than one relying on Cobb-Douglas preferences to capture the empirical fact that the
expenditure share on housing decreases with income, as we show in Figure 6 below.


                                                          8
   The higher is , the more richer households are over-represented in expensive neighborhoods,
                      2 log nj (w)
all else equal (        wpnj         > 0). In that sense, the parameter  governs the strength of non-
homotheticity in location choice. This makes  a particularly important parameter to estimate in
our quantitative exercise.
   We now turn to a key stylized fact that our model aims to capture: the U-shaped propensity to
live Downtown by income, established empirically in Figure 1. In this case, our object of interest
is the share of households that lives Downtown at each level of income, D (w) =              j   Dj (w).
We focus on the specification that we retain in quantification, with two quality tiers j = {L, H },
where L and H indicate low and high quality neighborhoods. In that case, there are four (n, j )
neighborhood types in the city: DH , DL, SH , and SL. We get the following result:

Lemma 2. The share of households living Downtown is a U-shaped function of income if the
following condition holds:
                                      pDL     pSL     pSH     pDH
                                           <       <       <       .                                 (8)
                                     1 - D   1 - S   1 - S   1 - D
                                                                     ~nj )-1 , a measure of cost of
Proof. To establish this result, it is useful to define nj (w)  (w - p
living relative to income: nj (w) increases with cost of living in (n, j ) and decreases with income
w. The share of households living in each type of neighborhood varies with income as follows:

                                       log nj (w)
                                                  =  [nj (w) - ¯ (w)] ,                              (9)
                                          w

where ¯ (w) =       n,j   nj (w) nj (w). Equation (9) implies that the share of households living in a
neighborhood (n, j ) rises with income at income w if and only if neighborhoods (n, j ) are costlier
than the average neighborhood where households with income w live. In particular, it implies
that the share of households living in the most expensive neighborhood in the city necessarily
increases with income, and the share of households living in the least costly neighborhood of the
city necessarily decreases with income. For D (w), we have:

                     log D (w)            log DL (w)             log DH (w)
                               = L|D (w)             + H |D (w)             ,                       (10)
                        w                     w                      w

where j |D (w) is the probability that a household at income w lives in quality j conditional on
                                                           log DL (w)              log DH (w)
residing downtown. By the argument made above,                 w         0, while      w       0, given
                                                                                       L|D (w)
the ordering of cost-of-living in (8).    Similar derivations show that, in addition,    w      0 while
H |D (w)                                                                               D (w)
 w          0. Taken together, these      comparative statics deliver the result that w  0 for low
           D (w)
w, while   w        0 for high w: the share of households living Downtown is a U-shaped function
of income, i.e. both the very rich and the very poor are over-represented downtown.

   When cost-of-living is ordered as in (8), high income households are attracted downtown by
high quality amenities provided in expensive neighborhoods, while low income households are at-
tracted downtown by a relatively low cost of living (taking into account commuting) in low quality
neighborhoods. Up to this point, we have characterized the properties of the model on the demand


                                                     9
side, given price and quality of various neighborhood options. We now close the model with an
endogenous supply of neighborhoods of various qualities and prices in the city.

2.1.2      Closing the Model: Neighborhood Development

Setup       Neighborhoods are supplied by private developers, who choose the quality and location
(n, j ) of the neighborhood they develop. Developers build housing units Hnj of quality j in location
n using equipped land Kn through a linear production function:

                                                             Kn
                                                   Hnj =         ,                                              (11)
                                                             knj

where knj denotes the land requirement for one unit of housing in neighborhoods (n, j ).10 The land
requirement for housing increases with quality, i.e., knj > knj when j > j , capturing the idea that
housing units in higher quality neighborhoods are larger, and/or devote more space to residential
amenities.
       Land is provided by atomistic landowners. We assume that the city has two segmented land
markets, one for each location n  {D, S }. In each land market, there is perfect competition
between landowners to rent out their land to developers, at unit rent Rn . We summarize the
aggregate supply in land market n with a reduced-form land-supply equation:

                                            0
                                      Kn = Kn (Rn ) n , for n = {D, S }                                         (12)

                                        0 is a n-specific exogenous shifter for the size of downtown
where Kn is land supply in area n, and Kn
and the suburbs. The elasticity of land supply         n   is higher in the suburbs (   S   >   D ),   capturing the
notion that is is easier to expand equipped land at the outskirts of the city - through greenfield
development and sprawl - than in densely built downtowns, where extending equipped land supply
requires, for instance, building high-rises or redeveloping older warehouses or industrial areas.
       Developers pay a fixed cost fnj to develop a differentiated neighborhood r of type (n, j ). They
then rent out housing units at price pnj , which they set according to monopolistic competition.
There is free entry of developers into each segment (n, j ): the number Nnj of neighborhoods of type
(n, j ) adjusts so that the operating profit of a developer in neighborhood type (n, j ) just offsets the
fixed cost, i.e.,
                                           w   nj (w) (pnj - knj Rn ) dL(w)
                                   fnj =                                    .                                   (13)
                                                         Nnj

Equilibrium         The pricing and entry behavior of developers are described in detail in Appendix
B.3. Given unit housing demand and monopolistic competition, equations (3) and (4) lead to the
  10
    In what follows, we use "equipped land" and "land" interchangeably. The model can easily be extended to feature
an actual production function for equipped land that combines land area with capital, with a production function
that can be n, j specific. Given that this extension does not bring additional insight, we keep the formulation as
simple as possible here.




                                                        10
following housing pricing formula:

                                                             1 ¯
                                         pnj =      knj Rn +    Wnj ,                                              (14)
                                                 +1          +1

      ¯ nj is a measure of demand for a neighborhood of type (n, j ).11 Together with land rents,
where W
these prices pin down the operating profits of developers.

Definition 1. An equilibrium of the model is a distribution of location choices by income nj (w),
housing prices pnj , land rents Rn , and number of neighborhoods Nnj such that (i) households
maximize their utility; (ii) developers and landowners maximize profits; (iii) developers make zero
profits; and (iv) the markets for land and housing clear.

       Given the structure of the model, it is straightforward to show that an equilibrium of the
model can be expressed in terms of changes relative to another reference equilibrium that has
different primitives, such as a different city-level distribution of income. We leverage this approach
in section 5.12 Having closed the model, we now discuss its general equilibrium properties, with a
focus on tracing out how a given shock to the income distribution in the city impacts the relevant
endogeneous variables of the model in equilibrium.

2.2       Discussion: Effect of an Income Shock
We have established above that sorting by income crucially depends on two endogenous neighbor-
hood characteristics: an amenity composite and a cost-of-living composite {B~nj , p
                                                                                  ~nj } defined in
equations (5) and (6). Given that neighborhood developers respond to changes in demand, neigh-
borhood characteristics change endogenously following an income shock to the city, as we discuss
next.
       To fix ideas, we study the effect of a small increase in the relative number of high-income
households in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance (FOSD). Specifically, we consider a
class of income distributions indexed by , L (w), ordered in the sense of FOSD, that is:

                                             >   L (w)  L (w).

Starting at income distribution L (w), we consider an infinitesimal increase in . We focus on the
specification we retain in the empirical analysis, with two layers of quality (H igh and Low) and an
initial U-shape pattern of sorting by income under income distribution L (w) as in Lemma 2.
       The key sorting mechanism in the model in response to a shift in the income distribution acts
through changes in housing prices, themselves driven by changes in land prices (equation (14)), as
follows:
  11                 ¯ nj =        ((1-n )w-pnj )-1 nj (w)wdL(w)
                              w (1-n )
       Specifically, W                         -1                where nj (w) = 1{(1 - n )w - pnj > 0}.
                              w ((1-n )w -pnj )   nj (w)dL(w)
  12
     The model may give rise to multiple equilibria if the agglomeration effects at play are too strong compared to the
dispersion forces, driven by the housing supply (in-)elasticity n and the idiosyncratic preference for locations-quality
types driven by . Around our estimated parameter values, we have not found evidence for such multiple equilibria,
suggesting that the calibrated n and  are low enough for equilibrium uniqueness.


                                                          11
Lemma 3. Given a small increase  in the relative number of high income households, land prices
                        RD
downtown increase:            0.
                                                                                 1
                                                             knL LnL +knH LnH    n
Proof. Combining equations (11) and (12) yields Rn =                Kn0              , where we have defined
                                                                DH (w)                  DL (w)
Lnj =      w   nj (w) dL(w). We have established above    that     w      0     while   w         0, which
        LDH
yield           0   while L   0
                            DL
                                   using classic results in monotone comparative statics. Given that
kDL < kDH , we      get that R
                              
                               D
                                   0.

   Through the market for land downtown, a demand shock for housing in high quality neigh-
borhoods transmits to the entire downtown area ­ including in low quality neighborhoods. The
intensity of the price increase is driven in particular by the housing supply elasticity         D.   A more
inelastic supply downtown leads to steeper price increases there, all else equal. Given the impact
of neighborhood prices on sorting, higher prices downtown tend to increase the share of high in-
come residents and decrease the share of low income residents there, reinforcing the initial sorting
patterns. This price mechanism is further reinforced by an amplification mechanism, as follows:
Lemma 4. Given a small increase  in the relative number of high income households, the perceived
                                                                    ~
quality of the most expensive neighborhood option increases (  BDH
                                                                   > 1), while the perceived quality
                                                           ~
                                                           B
of the least expensive neighborhood option decreases (      
                                                             DL
                                                                  < 1).
                                         LDH                 LDL
Proof. We use again the result that              > 0 while         < 0, combined with the free entry
condition (13). This yields    NDH
                                     > 1 while   NDL                                 ~jn in 5, Lemma 4
                                                        < 1. Given the definition of B
                                                 
follows.

   This result is quite intuitive: as the number of high income households increases in the city,
there is increased demand for the luxury option DH (the strength of which is governed by ),
which results in an increased supply of such high quality neighborhoods downtown. Importantly,
this endogenous increase in the supply of DH neighborhood makes the DH option even more
attractive, because preferences for neighborhoods (equations (1) and (2)) embed a love of variety
effect: the more options to choose from, the better the quality of the match between households
and the neighborhood they choose. Through this love of variety effect, an increase in the supply
of DH neighborhoods increases the attractiveness of these types of neighborhoods, amplifying
the price mechanism described above (governed by           D)   and further fueling the sorting of richer
households downtown - a phenomenon that looks like urban gentrification. The intensity of this
feedback loop depends on the elasticity of substitution across neighborhoods within an nj pair, 
as seen in equation (5). Our framework therefore formalizes a model for the gentrification of poorer
neighborhoods in a city, as a result of demand and supply shifts for these neighborhoods.

2.3     Extensions and Empirical Implementation
Our benchmark model is stylized along several dimensions. Notably, the benchmark model's main
mechanisms increase welfare inequality unambiguously in response to top income growth: endoge-
nous supply responses (lemma 4) benefit the rich while hurting the poor through price effects

                                                   12
(lemma 3). In this section, we develop model extensions that add nuance to this benchmark model,
including mechanisms through which the inflow of richer households downtown may benefit the
poor. For simplicity, we review these extensions one at a time, although we incorporate them
jointly in a unified quantitative framework in sections 4 and 5.

2.3.1    Consumption of amenities outside of one's neighborhood

A limitation of the benchmark model is the assumption that increased variety of neighborhoods of
a given nj type only benefits inhabitants of that type of neighborhood. In reality, the gentrification
of downtown neighborhoods can benefit all inhabitants of the city, to the extent they can travel
to consume urban amenities there - as they do in the data. We embed this amenity consumption
into the model, by assuming that non-housing expenditure is spent on a Cobb-Douglas aggregate
of private urban amenities a and the traded good c, and the demand for urban amenities for a
household living in r is a CES aggregate of amenity options in all neighborhoods. That is, the
utility of household  that lives in neighborhood r  Rnj is:

                                                                     1-
                                                 ar       cr
                               Ur ( ) = Br                                br                              (15)
                                                         1-
                                                                                    
                                                                                    -1
                                                                1             -1
                                   ar =           j (r)j (r )   
                                                                    (arr )               ,                (16)
                                             r

where arr is consumption of amenities in r for a household living in r,  > 1 is the elasticity
of substitution between amenities in different neighborhoods, and the disutility term j (r)j (r )
depends on the dissimilarity in quality between a household's own neighborhood and the destination
neighborhood.13 Commuting to amenities is costly, with a cost that increases with distance. The
cost of consuming amenities in neighborhood r for a household living in r is d    a
                                                                              rr pr , where  governs
how the cost of commuting to consume amenities in r varies with the distance drr between r and
r , and pa
         r is the price of amenities in r . Given our symmetry assumptions, neighborhoods in Rnj
                                                     a .
offer the same price index for amenity consumption, Pnj
    These amenities are provided by the private developers, who build both housing units and
retail space when they develop neighborhoods. Beyond renting out housing units, they operate
non-tradable services like restaurants and entertainment options that are marketed to households
living in the neighborhood as well as to those living in other parts of the city. Developers use
K h and K a units of land to build Hnj
                                    h housing units and H a retail areas of quality j in location
                                                         nj
n. Land markets clear, accounting for demand coming from both housing units and retail space.
Developers in the retail amenity sector are monopolistically competitive, so they set amenity prices,
  13
     We normalize jj = 1. Typically jj  1 if j = j , so that households value horizontal differentiation within
quality level, but to a lesser degree outside of their preferred quality type.




                                                         13
denoted pa
         nj , at a constant markup over marginal costs, i.e.:

                                                      
                                          pa
                                           nj =          k a Rn .                                 (17)
                                                      - 1 nj

The equilibrium price for housing is still pinned down by (14) but is now denoted ph
                                                                                   nj . The number
                                                     h + a - f
Nnj of neighborhoods of type (n, j ) adjusts so that nj                     i
                                                         nj   nj = 0, where nj for i = h, a is
the operating profit of a developer of type (n, j ) in activity i.
   Through this channel, households benefit from an increased supply of urban amenities outside
of their own type of neighborhood. Quantitatively, the strength of this effect will be disciplined,
first, by how much individuals consume amenities outside of their own type of neighborhood in the
                                                                          mk , the share of expenditure
data. The sufficient statistic that captures this effect in the model is Snj
on amenities spent on neighborhood of type (m, k ) for households living in neighborhood of type
(n, j ), as detailed further in the Appendix:


                                                               1-
                                   mk           Nm,k d- 
                                                      mm (Rm )
                                  Snj =                             1-   .                        (18)
                                              n ,j   Nn ,j d- 
                                                            nn (Rn )

   Second, the strength of this channel is also driven by  , which governs the love of variety in
                                                                                      mk and 
consumption of amenities across neighborhoods. Section 4 discusses how we discipline Snj
using novel smartphone data which tracks individual visits to urban amenities within a city.

2.3.2   Publicly-financed amenities

Another limitation of the benchmark model is that it does not account for the fact that higher
income households moving downtown increase the tax base and hence the provision of public
amenities in urban municipalities, whereby benefiting poor incumbent households. To capture this
notion, we assume that part of the attractiveness of neighborhoods is driven by public amenities
such as parks, public schools, or policing, financed by local governments. They respond to taxes
according to:
                                                  o
                                           Bnj = Bnj (Gn ) ,                                      (19)

where Gn is local government spending in area n,  is the supply elasticity of public amenities, and
 o captures the part of amenities not determined by local government spending. Governments
Bnj
can levy taxes on local households, summarized by Tn (w) for households with income w. Spending
is equal to taxes levied in the location n:
                                                                

                                Gn =     L(w)              nj (w) Tn (w)dw.                       (20)
                                                      j


   As the tax base downtown increases, government revenues Gn increase, which raises amenities
for all households downtown, irrespective of the quality of their neighborhood.


                                                          14
2.3.3      Home ownership

The benchmark model is static, hence it cannot capture the important notion that, as neighbor-
hoods downtown gentrify, homeowners in gentrifying neighborhoods reap the price appreciation of
their home. We embed this notion in the quantitative model in a simple way, allowing for household
income to depend not only on their labor income, but also on the capital appreciation of their real
estate portfolio, denoted by (w). Combined with taxes described above, net household income
becomes:
                                          (1 - n )w +  (w) - Tn (w).                                            (21)

       We allow the real estate portfolio  (w) to depend on household type w to capture the corre-
sponding heterogeneity in homeownership rates and initial locations in the data. As land prices in
downtown neighborhoods increase, incumbent homeowners receive a capital gain on their housing
stock making them better off compared to renters. The extent of this mitigating force is governed
by  (w) which we discipline empirically by matching homeownership rates by income in different
locations.

2.3.4      Change in Job Location

Our focus is to isolate the effect of changes in income on changes in spatial sorting, through non-
homothetic preferences for neighborhoods. We have kept the model minimal on other dimensions
that likely contribute, in part, to changes in sorting. Change in jobs location is one such dimension.
The framework can be extended ­ at the cost of a more cumbersome exposition ­ to model the
joint choice of workplace and residential location as in Ahlfeldt et al. (2015). This extension would
allow us to account for the possibility that changes in job location triggers skill-dependent re-
sorting, a different channel for changes in spatial sorting by income. However, we note that current
evidence in the literature indicates that spatial job sorting plays little to no role in explaining
recent downtown gentrification. First, Su (2018b) investigates job urbanization by skill from 1994
to 2010, and finds no difference in job location trends between high- and low-skilled jobs: they
both suburbanize somewhat over that time period, at the same rate. Second, Baum-Snow and
Hartley (2018) decompose the role of residential demand vs. labor demand in explaining 2000-2010
downtown gentrification. They conclude that labor demand plays little role. Third, Couture and
Handbury (2017) conclude that high wage jobs - in the upper third of the wage distribution - do
not urbanize fast enough from 2002-2011 to be an important driver of urban gentrification.14 Given
the general conclusion in the urban literature that job location is not an important driver of recent
urban gentrification, and given also the limited impact that commuting costs ultimately have on
our quantification, we have refrained from complexifying the model in that dimension.
  14
     Moreover, data from the U.S. Census shows that commuting times increased the most for downtown CBSA
residents in the top income deciles between 1990 and 2014 (authors' calculations). This is consistent with the recent
literature documenting the increased propensity of high income households living in urban centers to reverse commute
- i.e., to live downtown and work in the suburbs.




                                                         15
The mechanisms described in this subsection mitigate the adverse effect of an increase in income
inequality on welfare inequality, while endogeneous neighborhood supply amplify the baseline price
effect. The net effect of increased incomes of the rich on welfare inequality through spatial sorting
is therefore ambiguous. We turn next to its quantification.


3         Evidence on Spatial Sorting by Income
In this section, we provide empirical evidence in support of the non-homothetic sorting mechanism
at the heart of our model. The strength of that sorting mechanism pins down the parameter ,
which will be important for the quantitative exercise that follows.

3.1        Mapping Model to Data
Our empirical work requires data on household location decisions and housing costs mapped into
the spatial units employed in the model. Herein, we describe this mapping and summarize our
main data sources. The full exposition of the data work is detailed in Appendix C.

Spatial Units and Classifications               We equate the notion of a city to a Core-Based Statistical
Area (CBSA), and that of a neighborhood to a census tract. All data are interpolated to constant
2010-boundary tracts and 2014-boundary CBSAs using the Longitudinal Tract Data Base (LTBD).
         Within each CBSA, we define downtown as the set of tracts closest to the center of the CBSA
that accounted for 10 percent of the CBSA's population in 2000.15 This spatial boundary of
downtown is constant across all years. We refer to all remaining non-downtown tracts in each
CBSA as suburban, so that tracts are either classified as downtown (D) or suburban (S ). Appendix
C.3 features maps showing which tracts in New York, Chicago, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Boston
and Las Vegas are classified as downtown and suburban.
         We pursue two different approaches to segment tracts into high and low quality. First, as our
baseline approach, we define neighborhood quality using residential demographic composition. We
draw from Diamond (2016), who shows that the college-educated share can proxy for endogenous
amenities. Specifically, we classify a neighborhood to be high quality if at least 40 percent of
residents between the ages of 25 and 65 have at least a bachelor's degree. Under this definition, 15,
22, and 32 percent of census tracts in the top 100 CBSAs are respectively classified as high quality
in 1990, 2000, and 2014.16
         Second, we classify neighborhoods using a proxy for the quality of local amenities. This proxy
is an index of the quality of the restaurants located in a tract. We construct this index in two steps.
    15
     We use the CBSA centers from Holian and Kahn (2012), who identify the coordinates returned by Google Earth
for a search of each CBSA's principal city.
  16
     We calibrate our model to moments based on initial 1990 quality definitions only, but rely on parameters estimated
using time-series data. In theory, these parameter estimates could be affected by the fact that national education
growth pushes the share of tracts with 40 percent or more college-educated upward between 1990 and 2014. In
practice, we control for this aggregate growth, relying only on cross-CBSA regressions that are invariant to national
trends.


                                                          16
We first leverage novel smartphone movement data (Couture et al., Work in Progress) to measure
the quality of the 100 largest restaurant chains in the smartphone data. We define chain quality
as the propensity of high-income individual to visit a given chain, relative to the propensity of the
average individual, controlling for their relative proximity to establishments.17 Then, we classify a
census tract as high or low quality using the National Establishment Time-Series (NETS) geocoded
census of local restaurants in 2000 and 2012. A census tract is high quality for a given year if the
average quality of its chain restaurants is higher than 1.1 ­ a cut-off chosen so that both definitions
of quality yield a similar overall share of high quality tracts in year 2000.
       In what follows, we present all our results for the college share quality measure. We demonstrate
the robustness of our main estimation and counterfactual welfare results to the restaurant measure
of neighborhood quality in the respective appendices for these sections.

Income and House Prices Our data on location choice by household income is from the 1990
Census and the 2012-2016 American Community Surveys (henceforth referred to as the "2014
ACS"). For each census tract, census tables report the number of households by income bracket.
Since the boundaries of census brackets change over time, we define alternative income brackets that
are constant in real terms over time. We summarize each constant bracket m by the median income
wm of households within the bracket.18 We drop brackets with median annual income smaller than
$25,000; given the presence of public housing, such households are not well represented by the
model.19 In the CBSA-level analysis herein, nj,ct (wm ), denotes the share of households in income
bracket m that reside tract of area-quality (n, j ), out of all households in that CBSA c at time t.
       We measure house prices using Zillow's 2 Bedroom Home Value Index. Focusing on housing
units of a given size helps control for the changing composition of housing units across different
areas within a CBSA over time. Since house prices from Zillow are not available prior to 1996,
we proxy for house prices in our initial period (1990) using data for years 1996-1998.20 We pool
prices for years 2012-2016 for our end period (2014). Pooling over several years lessens the impact
of transitory house prices fluctuations on our results. Finally, we convert Zillow's index for the
median price of a 2 bedroom house in a given area and time period to an annual user cost.21 In
the CBSA-level analysis herein, for example, ph
                                              nj,ct denotes the annual user cost of a median priced
2 bedroom house in area-quality pair (n, j ) within CBSA c at time t.
  17
      The smartphone data contains 600 million visits to the 100 largest restaurant chains between 2016 and 2018. We
identify smartphone devices as high-income if their users reside in census blocks whose median resident income exceeds
$100,000. We measure propensity to visit a chain keeping only trips starting from home. Among the restaurant chains
with the highest quality are smaller gourmet chains like Shake Shack (1st), Zo¨   es Kitchen (2nd) and California Pizza
Kitchen (3rd), as well as large national chains like Chipotle (6th), Panera Bread (7th), and Starbucks (14th).
   18
      We reallocate households to these constant brackets assuming a uniform income distribution within each original
bracket. For each interior bracket, wm is equal to its mid-point. We assign the top bracket the median income of
that bracket in the 2000 IPUMS microdata.
   19
      For instance, data from the department of Housing and Urban Development shows that in our downtowns in
2014, about 30 percent of households earning between $5,000 and $14,000 in 1999 dollars lived in subsidized housing.
   20
      House prices were relatively flat over the 1990 to 1995 period suggesting that this measurement issue is unlikely
to bias our results in any meaningful way.
   21
      The annual user cost of housing is 4.7 percent of house prices in 2000, and 4.6 percent in 2014 according to data
from the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.


                                                          17
       All nominal variables including income and house prices are deflated to 1999 dollars using the
urban CPI.

3.2      Changes in the Income Distribution and Residential Sorting: Evidence
We now provide empirical support for the sorting mechanism in the model. Our analysis uses data
for 1990 and 2014 and focuses on the 100 CBSAs with the largest 1990 population.

3.2.1      Descriptive Evidence

This analysis aims to test whether changes in a city's income distribution generate different spatial
sorting patterns for different income groups. As the city gets richer, our model predicts that
richer households move downtown ("urbanize") relative to the average household, while poorer
households move out ("suburbanize"). A first look at the data supports this prediction. We show
that different income groups display systematically different spatial re-sorting patterns in cities
that exhibit different city-wide income growth patterns. We use cross-city variation to estimate the
correlation between city-wide income growth and spatial sorting for each income bracket m with
the following regression:

                                   D,c (wm )/D,c
                              ln                      = m +  m Incomec + c
                                                                         m
                                                                           ,                                  (22)
                                   S,c (wm )/S,c
             D,c (wm )/D,c
where        S,c (wm )/S,c    is the change in the propensity of households at income level wm to reside
downtown relative to all households in CBSA c between 1990 and 2014. Incomec is one of two
measures of income growth in c during the same time period. The first measure is simply CBSA
average income growth. The second measure is designed to capture top income growth, as the
change in the ratio between the 95th percentile and the median of the CBSA income distribution.
Note that  m > 0 implies that income group m becomes more likely to reside downtown (relative
to other income groups) in CBSAs that experienced more income growth across all areas.
       Figure 2 plots point estimates and 95 percent confidence bands for the  m coefficients from
regression (22). The left-hand plot shows that richer households urbanized more, and poorer
households less, in CBSAs that experienced more average income growth. The right-hand plot
shows even stronger patterns of urbanization of rich households and surburbanization of poor
households in CBSAs with more top income growth. A 10 percent increase in the 95/50 ratio
of incomes is associated with a 20 percent increase in the propensity of households earning more
than $150,000 to live downtown relative to the average household, and a 10 percent decrease in the
corresponding propensity for households earning less than $40,000. These cross-CBSA correlations
suggest that shifts in the income distribution may be a quantitatively important factor in explaining
the evolution of sorting by income from 1990 to 2014 shown in Figure 1, i.e., in explaining the
relative urbanization of the rich and suburbanization of the poor.22
  22
   Appendix Figure C.5 provides an alternative illustration of this cross-city variation: scatterplots showing that
CBSAs with higher average and top income growth saw greater urbanization of high-, relative to low-, income


                                                        18
  Figure 2: Correlation between Change in Propensity to Live Downtown and Change in CBSA
               Income Distribution by Household Income between 1990 and 2014

                                                                                      Change in Ratio of 95th to 50th
                                Change in Average Income                                   Income Percentile
                   3




                                                                              4
                   2




                                                                              2
              Elasticity




                                                                 Elasticity
                  1




                                                                              0
                   0




                                                                              -2
                   -1




                           25000 40000 60000 100000 175000                         25000 40000 60000 100000 175000

                                              Median HH Income within Bracket
                                                        (log scale)

                                                       95% CI                  Coefficient


Note: This figure shows income bracket-specific coefficients, along with 95 percent confidence intervals, for regressions
of the propensity of households in that income bracket to reside downtown in a CBSA against a measure of CBSA
income growth. Each income bracket specific regression comes from exploiting cross-CBSA variation with observations
weighted by CBSA population. The independent variable in the left panel is the change in average CBSA income
while the independent variable in the right panel is the change in the ratio of the 95th to the the 50th percentile of
household income in the CBSA. The y-axis shows the income bracket specific regression coefficients and the x-axis
shows median income within each income bracket. All changes are from 1990 to 2014.



3.2.2    Model-Consistent Estimation

The descriptive results above suggest that income growth and sorting by income are associated
across CBSAs, but it still remains to show that this link is consistent with the mechanism proposed
in section 2, and plausibly causal. We now fill this gap, testing the key sorting mechanism in the
model with an instrumental variable strategy that addresses factors that confound the link between
income growth and spatial re-sorting.

Estimating Equation Equation (7) in the model is key for what we do next. It shows that
household location choice is a simple function of disposable income (income net of commute-adjusted
housing prices). In particular, equation (7) implies that any changes in sorting by income are driven
solely by changes in housing prices pnj , i.e., by the higher willingness of richer households to pay
the higher cost of locating in more attractive neighborhoods. Put differently, changes in house

households.


                                                            19
prices pnj capture all there is to know about how a change in the income distribution in the city
will impact sorting. Our empirical strategy is therefore to measure how, across cities, changes in
house prices, driven by changes in income growth, trigger spatial re-sorting by income. To do so, we
derive the following estimating equation from (7), interpreting different time periods and different
cities as different equilibria of the model and taking log differences across two time periods and two
pairs of income groups m and m for each CBSA c:

        Dj,c (wm )       Dj,c (wm )        wm - p h
                                                  Dj,c       wm - p h
                                                                    Dj,c
     ln            -  ln            =   ln        h
                                                       -  ln                                              .    (23)
        Sj,c (wm )       Sj,c (wm )        wm - pSj,c        wm - phSj,c


 Normalizing brackets m and m such that wm > wm , the dependent variable is positive if the
richer income bracket urbanizes faster than the poorer income bracket. The independent variable
is positive when house prices rise faster downtown than in the suburbs. This results from the
unit housing requirement: the same house price growth decreases the disposable income of the
rich by a smaller percentage than that of the poor. Therefore, if the rich urbanize faster than the
poor in response to house price growth downtown relative to the suburbs, then  will be positive,
consistent with the model. In contrast, if sorting patterns were unrelated to income, we would
estimate  = 0. Estimating (23) therefore provides a test of our income sorting mechanism. We
now turn to estimating (23).23

Identification         Beyond the sorting mechanism that we aim to estimate, there may be other local
shocks that drive both sorting and housing price growth across cities, confounding identification.
Note that any local shocks that are valued equally by all incomes, or whose impact is captured
by a switch in quality level j , will not compromise identification. These shocks are captured
by Bnj in the model and controlled for by differencing across income groups m and m within
a quality tier in a CBSA. Similarly, income-specific shocks that affect the attractiveness of all
neighborhood types in a CBSA uniformally will be controlled for by differencing between the
downtown D and suburban S areas of each CBSA. To confound identification, shocks need to
be both biased towards either downtown or the suburbs and income-specific, and not controlled
for by our quality levels. Using the terminology of the model, such a shock would make the
attractiveness of neighborhood of type nj income specific, i.e., equal to Bnj (wm ) instead of Bnj , thus
introducing an error term into equation (23). Denoting the unobserved income-specific component
of neighborhood attractiveness as           nj (wm )   = Bnj (wm ) - Bnj , the error in equation (23) is equal to
        Dj,c (wm   )           Dj,c (wm )
 ln     Sj,c (wm   )   -  ln   Sj,c (wm )
                                            . This error term will only be non-zero if demand shocks vary
both by income and location within each city. Such shocks could include downtown-biased growth
  23
     Without micro panel data we cannot observe how the location choice of a given household changes as their income
w changes. We instead estimate (23) using 45 distinct income-bracket pairs of wm and wm for each quality tier j .
We pool our estimation across income pairs and organize the data such that wm > wm . As a result, the maximum
number of observations in each of our regressions is 9000, though in many specifications, we have less given missing
data at the CBSA-area-quality triplet. We also remove any observation with w - ph  cnj < 0 (1.4% of our sample). We
                                                   w-ph
                                                      cDj
then censor the top and bottom 1 percent of ln     w-ph
                                                              in each year.
                                                      cSj




                                                            20
in amenities by local city planners that are only valued by the high-skilled, like private schooling,
luxury retail, or proximity to high-skilled jobs. If these factors make downtowns more attractive to
high-income households and drive house prices up downtown relative to the suburbs, they would
bias our estimate of the coefficient  upwards.
       To overcome this identification challenge, we use an instrumental variable strategy. We instru-
ment for relative changes in house prices using an idea closely related to our theory. First note
that the housing supply elasticity is lower downtown (both by assumption in our model and in the
data per recent work by Baum-Snow and Han (2019)). So, CBSA-level income growth will generate
more house price growth downtown than in the suburbs; we verify that this is the case empirically
below. This suggests instrumenting the difference in house price growth between downtown and the
suburbs in equation (23) using a plausibly exogenous CBSA-level income shock. We implement this
idea using a shift-share (Bartik) shock to CBSA per capita income. The Bartik shock predicts the
change in CBSA average earnings by projecting trends in industry-level average earnings observed
elsewhere in the country on each CBSA's initial industry mix.
       The exclusion restriction is that proposed in Borusyak et al. (2018): industry shocks need to be
conditionally exogenous, in the sense that they are uncorrelated with the income- and downtown-
biased error term described above. Specifically, we assume that industries that experienced higher
national wage growth were not initially disproportionately located in CBSAs where downtowns
gained skill-biased amenities relative to the suburbs.
       This exclusion restriction may be violated if the industries that experienced higher national
wage growth are themselves both downtown- and skill-biased. For example, if tech firms employ
high-skilled individuals and are initially over-represented downtown, then national wage growth
in tech could attract high income individuals downtown. To address this concern, we show that
our results are robust to excluding various sets of industries that are either downtown- and/or
skill-biased. First, we exclude the top quartile of downtown-biased industries from the compu-
tation of our Bartik shock. Specifically, we remove industries in which residents of urban areas
are most likely to work.24 This isolates wage growth in suburbanized industries to instrument for
relative house price growth downtown. Second, we recompute a Bartik instrument leaving out tech
industries and then separately finance, insurance, and real estate (FIRE) industries. These indus-
tries disproportionately employ higher skilled workers. As we highlight below, all three alternative
instruments yield similar results to our main instrument. We interpret this as further evidence,
consistent with recent research, that access to jobs is not underlying the recent in-migration of high
income individuals into urban centers.
       Our exclusion restriction could still be violated if our Bartik instrument is larger specifically in
CBSAs where industries that employ downtown residents experienced faster national wage growth
than industries that employ suburban residents. To directly test for this, we calculate area-specific
Bartik shocks by interacting national industry-level wage growth with CBSA-specific industry
  24
     To do so, we first rank industries by the share of their workers that lives downtown. Then, starting from the
industry with the most urbanized workers, we remove industries entirely from our Bartik computation until 25 percent
of all workers have been removed.


                                                        21
shares calculated first considering only workers who reside downtown, and second considering only
workers who reside in the suburbs.25 We find that our baseline Bartik is almost perfectly correlated
with the suburbs-only Bartik (correlation of more than 0.99), but less so with the downtown-only
Bartik (correlation of 0.76). This is not surprising, given that the suburbs account for 90 percent
of CBSA population. Moreover, our baseline Bartik is uncorrelated with the ratio between its
downtown-specific and suburban-specific analogs. In other words, our Bartik shock is not larger
in CBSAs where workers in high wage growth industries are initially over-represented downtown.
Collectively, these results reassure us that the growth of industries that are located downtown and
employ high income workers are not driving our identification of .

Identifying Variation         Before estimating  using equation 23, we illustrate the variation in the
data that allows for identification. We first verify that, in line with the logic above, the Bartik
income shock raises house prices more downtown than in the suburbs. To illustrate this variation, we
plot our Bartik shock between 1990 and 2014 for each CBSA (on the x-axis) against  ln(ph      h
                                                                                       Dj,c /pSj,c )
(on the y-axis) in the left panel of Figure 3. There are 200 observations in the figure: 2 quality tiers
within each of our 100 CBSAs. We find that within each quality tier, a more positive income shock
raises housing prices downtown relative to the suburbs. This variation underlies the significant
first-stage statistic in our estimation of  below.
   Next, we report the reduced-form regression of change in spatial sorting directly on the Bartik
shock. To simplify the presentation, we pool quality tiers and show the results of the following
regression for each of our 10 income brackets:

                                D,c (w)/D,c                             Bartik
                         ln                      = w +  w Incomec                  w
                                                                                 + c .                   (24)
                                S,c (w)/S,c
   This regression is exactly the same as our descriptive regression (22), except that the Bartik
income shock replaces actual income growth. In equation (24),  w > 0 implies that following a
positive CBSA Bartik shock, the propensity of income group w to live downtown rises relative to
that of the average CBSA resident. The right panel of Figure 3 reports estimates from equation
(24), along with their 95 percent confidence bounds. We find that a CBSA income shock causes
differential spatial sorting responses from the rich vs. the poor. In particular, rich households are
more likely than poor households to move downtown in response to an income shock. For all the
top five income groups,  m > 0 and all estimates are statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
Conversely, all the bottom five income groups have estimates of  m < 0, with all but the middle
income group estimate being statistically significant. To summarize, Figure 3 provides reduced-
form evidence consistent with the key mechanism in our model. As CBSA income increases, house
prices grow faster downtown, and richer households are more likely to re-sort downtown relative to
poorer households.
  25
     These computations are only possible in 27 CBSAs in which PUMAs are small enough to map into our downtown
definition.




                                                     22
                                                                Figure 3: Identifying Variation for 
                                  Changes in House Prices Downtown Relative                                Elasticity of Change in Share Downtown
                                    to the Suburbs vs. Bartik Income Shock                                  with Respect to Bartik Income Shock
                                                                2
                                          = 7.32  = 1.93 R = 0.09                                                          Filler text




                                                                                           15
              1       .5




                                                                                           10
      ( P Dj / P Sj )
 h




                                                                                      Elasticity
           0
 h




                                                                                          5
  -.5




                                                                                           0
              -1




                           -.06         -.04          -.02         0       .02




                                                                                           -5
                                                Bartik Income Shock
                                                                                                   25000      40000    60000        100000          175000
                                                                 LQ                                           Median HH Income within Bracket
                                                                 HQ                                                     (log scale)
                                                       Pooled                                                          95% CI      Coefficient
Note: On the left, we plot changes in downtown relative to suburban house prices within each quality tier on the
y-axis, against the Bartik income shock between 1990 and 2014 on the x-axis for each of the largest 100 CBSAs.
The house price data is from the Zillow 2 Bedroom Index in 1996-1998 and 2012-2016. We drop the top and bottom
1% of (ph       h
           Dj /pDj ) from the plot. On the right, we show income bracket-specific coefficients, along with 95 percent
confidence intervals, from equation (24) on the y-axis (regression of Bartik income shock on changes in normalized
urban share from 1990 to 2014), against median income within each income bracket on the x-axis. Both panels show
CBSA population weighted regression coefficients


Estimates of                                   Having clarified the variation that identifies (23), we are now ready to estimate
 ­ the parameter that governs the intensity of income-based sorting. Our baseline results are
reported in the first two columns of Table 1. Column 1 shows an OLS estimate, and column
2 shows an IV estimate using the Bartik instrument. We weight both OLS and IV regressions
by the number of observations in each cell. This downweights cells with fewer individuals where
measurement error may be higher.
           Our OLS estimate is somewhat lower than our IV estimate (2.34 vs. 3.07), but we cannot reject
that they are the same. Our instrument has strong first stage predictive power with an F-stat
of 23. Columns (3)-(5) show IV estimates for alternative Bartik shocks that exclude urbanized,
FIRE, and Tech industries. These estimates are similar to our base results, ranging from 2.47
to 3.21. This suggests that our instrument is not correlated with labor demand shocks that are
concentrated in urban centers of CBSAs and that disproportionately affect high income individuals.
As an additional robustness exercise, we also estimated the regression 90 separate times ­ once for
each possible wm - wm income pair and for each quality level ­ instead of running the pooled
regression (23). There, we find that our weighted median estimates of  are similar to those above.
Importantly, we find that these m-m -pair specific  estimates are essentially uncorrelated with the
difference in gross income between the wm - wm pairs in the regression. This invariance is a test
of the functional form assumptions embedded in the model.26
  26
           Appendix C.5 shows further robustness of our estimates of  to many different specifications, including different


                                                                                 23
                                        Table 1: Estimation of elasticity 


                                 (1)        (2)                 (3)           (5)            (6)
         ^                      2.34       3.07                 2.69          2.47           3.21
                               (0.27)     (0.63)               (0.69)        (0.75)         (0.65)

         Instrument             None       Base             Omit            Omit           Omit
                                                          Top Urban         FIRE          Hi-Tech
                                                          Industries      Industries     Industries

         R2                      0.24
         KP F-Stat                         23.1                16.7           14.8           16.5

         Obs                    5,586      5,586               5,586         5,586          5,586
Notes: This table shows estimates from equation (23). Data from 100 largest CBSAs where neighborhood quality
defined from education mix of residents. Each observation is weighted by the number of households in the income
bracket. Column 3 to 5 also control for share of omitted industries. Standard errors clustered at the CBSA-quality
level are in parentheses. KP F-Stat = Kleinberger-Papp Wald F statistic.


    To summarize, we use our preferred IV estimate in column 2 and set  = 3.0 in our model
calibration. As we show later,  is an important parameter determining our welfare results. In our
counterfactual exercises we show the sensitivity of our results to alternate values of  between 2
and 4 which encompass roughly the two standard deviation bands of our estimate in column 2.

3.3    Neighborhood Change
Before moving on to our full model quantification, we highlight one additional reduced form re-
lationship that is consistent with our model. In the model, changes in demand for locations are
amplified by endogeneous neighborhood change. As high income households move downtown, neigh-
borhoods with low quality amenities are replaced by neighborhoods with high quality amenities.
Figure 4 shows that the typical downtown tract saw larger increases in neighborhood quality than
the typical suburban tract, particularly in CBSAs that had larger Bartik income shocks. This is
the case using either of our quality proxies. The left panel plots the percentage point growth in the
population-weighted median tract college share downtown minus that for the suburbs against the
Bartik income shock. This panel shows that downtowns became relatively more educated than the
suburbs in response to CBSA income growth increases between 1990 and 2014. Likewise, the right
panel plots the growth in the population-weighted median tract restaurant quality index down-
town relative to the suburbs against the Bartik income shock. This figure shows that restaurant
quality increased sharply downtown relative to the suburbs in response to CBSA income growth.
time periods, different house price measures, and different quality cut-offs. These robustness estimates are all within
two standard error bands of our preferred estimate. Finally, we also note that we implemented the corrected shift-
share IV standard errors as suggested in Ad~ao et al. (2018). These standard errors are derived under the identifying
assumption that we make here, which is that industry shocks are conditionally exogenous. We find that all coefficients
remain significant at the 1% level.


                                                          24
Figure 4: Difference in Amenity Quality Growth between Downtown and the Suburbs Across
CBSAs with Different Aggregate Bartik Income Shocks
                                                                 College Share                                                                                                                        Restaurant Chain Quality
                                                                                                          2
                                                           Slope = 2.85 Standard Error = 0.75 R = 0.13                                                                                                      Slope = 3.96 Standard Error = 1.06 R = 0.13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                        Median Growth in Tract-Level Restaurant Quality (%)
                                                                                             Houston                                                                                                                                              Salt Lake City
 Median Change in Tract-Level College Share

                                              .3




                                                                                                 Denver




                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                                                       Atlanta
         Downtown minus Suburbs
                                              .2




                                                                                                                                                    Downtown minus Suburbs
                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Flint
                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                              -.2
                                                                                                          Palm Bay
                                                                                                                Lafayette
                                              -.1




                                                                                                         Oxnard                                                                                                                                               Palm Bay          Colorado Springs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hartford
                                                                                              Des Moines Hartford                                                                                                                                           San Antonio
                                                                                       Baton Rouge                                                                                                                                            Augusta
                                                                                                   Tucson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Winston
                                              -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                              -.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bakersfield
                                                    -.08        -.06     -.04        -.02            0                .02                                                                           -.08         -.06     -.04        -.02              0                 .02
                                                                       Bartik Shock on Income                                                                                                                           Bartik Shock on Income


Note: These figures plot the difference in the change in the median quality of tracts downtown between 1990 and 2014
and the median quality of tracts in the suburbs over the same period across CBSAs. This quality growth differential
is plotted against CBSA-level Bartik income shocks over the same period for the largest 100 CBSAs in 1990. On
the x-axis of each plot is the Bartik income shock from 1990 to 2014. In the left plot, tract quality growth in an
area (downtown or the suburbs) is measured as the absolute change in the population-weighted median college share
across tracts in that area. In the right plot, tract quality growth in an area is measured as the percent change in the
population-weighted median restaurant chain quality index ­ as described in section 3.1 ­ across tracts in the area.
The line through each scatterplot shows the CBSA-population weighted linear fit.


The association between large income growth and outsized quality growth downtown relative to
the suburbs is driven, for the most part, by absolute quality growth downtown. Collectively, these
results highlight that CBSAs with more income growth saw more amenity improvements downtown
than in the suburbs, as predicted by our model.


4                                                   Model Quantification
Having established the empirical relevance of the key model mechanism and provided a micro-based
estimate of , we now turn to quantifying the remaining structural parameters of the model. We
do so in two stages. In a first stage, we estimate key model elasticities and calibrate others. In a
second stage, we use the method of moments to calibrate the remaining parameters of the model.
We refer the reader to Appendix D for the full details of the procedure.

4.1                                                 Model Parametrization
Table 2 lists the twelve elasticities we estimate (including ). We discuss the selection of each
parameter briefly here. The role played by these parameters in driving sorting patterns and welfare
results are discussed in detail in section 5. All of the parameters selected here are for our baseline
calibration. We explore robustness over a range of values for each parameter in section 6.3.

Demand Parameters ( , ,  , and  )                                                                                           Income sorting (governed by ) is amplified in the model
by endogenous neighborhood development. The intensity of this effect is governed by the shape

                                                                                                                                 25
                                       Table 2: Key Model Parameters

         Parameter   Description                                          Value             Source

         Non-homotheticity
                     Between-type neighborhood substitution elasticity      3.0           Estimation

         Land Price Responses

          D          Downtown land supply elasticity                        0.6    Calibrated to Saiz (2010)
          S          Suburban land supply elasticity                        1.3    Calibrated to Saiz (2010)

         Amplification
                     Within-type neighborhood substitution elasticity       6.5        Assumption = 
                     Amenity share                                         0.15              CEX
                     Substitution elasticity across neighborhoods          6.5       Estimation+literature
                     Distance elasticity across neighborhoods               0.2      Estimation+literature

         Other
         TD          Downtown local property tax                            0.2         IPUMS 2000
         TS          Suburban local property tax                            0.3         IPUMS 2000
                     Public amenity supply elasticity                      0.05          Literature
          C
         D           Commute costs as share of labor income downtown       0.044     Authors' calculation
          C
         S           Commute costs as share of labor income suburbs        0.059     Authors' calculation




parameter  , which controls gains from variety in residential neighborhood choice. For our baseline
calibration, we set  = 6.5, a conservative upper bound equal to the elasticity of substitution for
consumption amenities ( ) that we estimate below.27
       The parameters ,  , and  govern demand for consumption amenities that households can visit
­ they correspond to the full specification of the model discussed in section 2.3. We parameterize
, the share of net disposable income spent on non-tradable consumption amenities, using CEX
expenditure data. We estimate the product of  , the elasticity of substitution that governs gains
from consumption amenity variety, and  , the cost of travel distance, using a gravity equation for
amenity consumption in different neighborhoods of the city. We estimate this gravity regression,
derived directly from the model, using the smartphone data introduced in section 3. The richness
of the smartphone data allows us to make three important provisions to help with identification
in an otherwise standard gravity approach. First, we keep only visits to venues that match our
model notion of non-tradable consumption amenities. Second, we add tract origin and destination
fixed-effects to control for unobserved amenity price and quality, which would be impossible using
sparse travel surveys. Third, we can limit our attention to visits that start from home and come
directly back home, to control for many unobserved determinants of venue choice, such as a venue
being on ones way to work. This gravity estimation yields  = 1.3. We also find a  around 0.2
  27
    Existing research suggests that there is less socio-economic diversity within census tracts than there is within
retail establishments such as grocery stores and restaurants. In the context of our model, this suggests that the
substitution elasticity for residential amenities ( ) is an upper bound for  .



                                                        26
using data on restaurant travel costs and meal prices from Couture (2016) and so recover ^ = 6.5,
which reassuringly stands midway in the range of values for similar elasticities from the existing
literature.28 See Appendix D for further details on the estimation of these parameters.

Land Supply Elasticities (            S   and    D)    In the model, the area-specific elasticity of land supply
( n ) directly translates into an elasticity of housing supply. We calibrate              D   and   S   to match the Saiz
(2010) housing supply elasticity estimates for cities that have an average household density similar
to that in our representative downtown and suburban areas. This yields ^D = 0.60 and ^S = 1.33.29
These numbers are conservative relative to the supply elasticities estimated in Baum-Snow and
Han (2019) for the center and periphery of the city.30

Commuting Costs (S and D )                      We estimate the area-specific commuting cost (n ) with data
on trip time to work by car from the geo-coded 2009 National Household Travel Survey combined
with estimates of the value of commuting time from the meta-analysis in Small et al. (2007). This
yields baseline values of D = 0.044 and S = 0.059.

                          mk )
Trip Share to Amenities (Snj                                        mk defined in (18) measure the share of
                                                Expenditure shares Snj
amenity consumption spent in neighborhoods of type mk for a household living in a neighborhood
of type nj . We proxy for these share with the corresponding trip shares reported in Table 3 that we
read directly from the same smartphone data used to estimate demand for consumption amenities.

Public Amenities (TD , TS , )                We calibrate local taxes (Tn ) to match the unit-level average
real estate taxes paid as a share of annualized housing costs in 2000, using tract-level data from the
2000 Census. This implies a local property tax rate as a fraction of the annual user cost of housing
of 30% in the suburbs and 20% downtown. We set the elasticity of the endogenous component of
the public amenity with respect to these tax revenues () to 0.05 (Fajgelbaum et al., 2018).

Homeownership ((w)) In our benchmark model, we assume that all housing rents in the city
(land rents and fixed costs of development) accrue to an absentee landlord and none are transferred
to the city residents, i.e., that (w) = 0 for all w. In our counterfactual analysis, however, we
want to be able to account for the heterogeneous rate of home ownership in contributing to spatial
  28
     Atkin et al. (2018) find an elasticity of substitution of 3.9 for retail stores in Mexico, Einav et al. (2019) find 6.1
for offline stores in the U.S., Su (2018a) and Couture (2016) find 7.5 and 8.8 respectively for restaurants in the U.S.
  29
     In our downtowns, the average CBSA population-weighted household density is 4, 300 households per square
mile, versus 300 in the suburbs. The highest density CBSA, New York, has 850 households per square mile, so the
average density in D is out-of-sample. However, ^D = 0.60 turns out to equal the elasticity of housing supply in
Miami, which is the metropolitan area with the most inelastic housing supply in Saiz (2010).
  30
     Baum-Snow and Han (2019) estimate tract-specific indexes with an interquartile range of 0.46-1.12 using a
repeated sales price index and 0.99-1.59 using a hedonic index. They also estimate a representative supply elasticity
as a function of distance which implies a supply elasticity of 0.21 (0.35) at the city center and 1.43 (0.86) at the
periphery using the repeat sales (hedonic) price index. Our estimates imply that, if anything, we overestimate the
elasticity of supply downtown and underestimate the difference in the elasticity of supply between downtown and the
suburbs. Robustness checks in Appendix E show that both biases will lead us to underestimate both the degree of
sorting that result from top income growth and the associated welfare effects.


                                                            27
                                     Table 3: Non-tradable Trip Shares

                                                          Destination
                                                   DL     DH     SL       SH
                                              DL   0.61   0.20   0.12    0.07




                                     Origin
                                              DH   0.07   0.82   0.03    0.08
                                              SL   0.02   0.03   0.78    0.17
                                              SH   0.01   0.03   0.19    0.77

Notes: This table shows the share of trips observed in the smartphone data to non-tradable services in neighborhoods
of each quality-area type. Each row shows the allocation of trips for individuals that live in neighborhoods of each
quality-area type. Appendix C defines the non-tradable services included and provides further details on this data
source.


sorting responses, in order to allow households who own their home to reap the benefits of rising
house prices. To do so, we discipline (w) by transferring to households at each labor income level
capital gains corresponding to their average real estate portfolio. This transfer equals the average
house price growth in the neighborhoods where households of that income lived in the previous
period, which is then scaled by the share of households who were homeowners according to the
2000 IPUMS data. Empirically, this share of home ownership increases systematically with labor
income.

4.2    Second Stage: Method of Moments
Armed with estimates for the key elasticities of the model, we conclude the calibration of the model
using a method of moments. We set the remaining parameters that govern neighborhood rents and
attractiveness to levels which, conditional on the model elasticities, minimize the distance between
the model moments and their empirical counterparts.
    This method of moments allows us to estimate two key vectors of composite model parameters:
                                                           ~nj }nj , and (ii) the price of housing
(i) the relative attractiveness of each neighborhood type {B
in each neighborhood type {ph
                            nj }nj , which together pin down the calibrated values for location
choices {nj (w)}nj at all levels of income w in the baseline equilibrium. The procedure does not
separately identify all of the structural parameters of the model that shape these composites. But
these composite parameters are just sufficient to compute any counterfactual equilibrium of the
model, as we explain below.
    We target two sets of moments that summarize the key economic concepts we aim to capture:
(i) the 1990 distribution, by income level, of the share of workers living downtown (i.e., the U-shape
presented in the introduction), and (ii) the median 1990 house price by neighborhood type (as used
in the estimation of ). To accurately capture the location choices of higher-income households, we
target the downtown share of households at a finer income grid than the Census income brackets
represented in the introduction. To this end, we construct the same plot as Figure 1 but for finer
$5,000 income brackets (in 1999 dollars) using the micro IPUMS data. The additional detail in the


                                                          28
income dimension comes at the expense of precision in the spatial dimension and, as a result, we are
limited to studying 27 CBSAs of our original 100 in the calibration and counterfactual exercises.31
We perform this calibration and counterfactuals for a representative city that is an average of these
27 CBSAs. The U-shape patterns of residential sorting for these 27 CBSAs are very similar to the
U-shape patterns documented in Figure 1.
    The identification of the model in this second stage is quite straightforward. First, it is clear
how the house price moments directly inform the calibration of ph
                                                                n,j . Then, conditional on prices,
                                                                                           ~nj of
the U-shape pattern of the location choice data helps identify the relative attractiveness B
different types of neighborhoods. This is a quite intuitive revealed preference approach, applied
to our non-homothetic demand function: the same level of price and quality of a neighborhood
generates different demand patterns at different levels of income. Concretely, the identification
relies on the set of location choice equations for all income levels w:
                                                                                      
                                                       ~         h
                                D (w)           j =L,H BD,j w - pD,j /(1 - D )
                                      =                                              
                                S (w)                    ~  w - ph /(1 - S )
                                                         B
                                                j =L,H    S,j    S,j


    Given n and w, the calibration backs out the B      ~n,j and ph that allow to best match the
                                                                    n,j
                                                          ~n,j are pinned down up to a normalization
distribution of location choices in the data. The vectors B
level, whose value does not impact the counterfactuals done in the following section.

Moment Fit. The moment fit is presented in Figure 5. Since the model is over-identified,
the price moment cannot be matched perfectly. Depending on the weight put on the price and
location choice moments, the procedure trades-off a better fit of the U-shape for location choices
against a better fit for housing prices. Despite a sparse specification, the calibrated model is able to
match the rich non-monotonic U-shape patterns of location choice by households of various incomes
remarkably well. The model also matches the relative housing prices in the suburbs quite well. In
1990, both the model and data have house prices in low quality downtown neighborhoods being
roughly equal to low quality suburban neighborhoods. Likewise, both the model and data have
high quality suburban neighborhoods having housing prices being about 40 percent higher than
low quality neighborhoods. The model has a harder time matching the high quality housing prices
downtown, and calls for higher prices in high quality downtown neighborhoods than those in the
data. Both in the model and the data though, the highest price option is a downtown high quality
neighborhood.32
  31
     The IPUMS data identifies the locations of respondents at the PUMA (Public Use Microdata Area), each of
which contains approximately 100,000 individuals, relative to the 4,000 contained in each Census tract. To replicate
the urban share for each fine income brackets, we first construct a cross-walk between PUMAs and our tract-based
downtown areas. There are 27 CBSAs in which PUMAs are small enough relative to the downtown definition so as
to allow for useful inference here. See Appendix C for more details.
  32
     A calibration of the model with three quality layers produces similar welfare effects, without significant improve-
ments in the fit of either the U-shape or relative price moments. The high predicted cost of DH neighborhoods
relative to the cost of housing in the data might reflect that having a high quality standard of living downtown
requires paying for housing as well as private schooling (whereas a similar standard of schooling in the suburbs is


                                                          29
                Figure 5: Calibration to 1990 Urban Shares and Neighborhood Prices




Notes: These figures show the fit of the calibrated model to the two targeted moments. The left-hand plot shows
the share of households in each $5,000 income bracket that reside downtown in 1990. The dashed line shows the
data, while the solid line shows the prediction of the calibrated model. The data are constructed from micro IPUMS
data and reflect the propensity to reside downtown by income in the 27 CBSAs in which PUMAs (the finest spatial
unit the IPUMS data) are small enough relative to the downtown definition to make useful inference here. The
curve is interpolated to address top-coding in the IPUMS data. See Appendix C for more details. The clear bars in
the right-hand plot shows the average Zillow 2 Bedroom Home Value Index in tracts of each location-quality type,
normalized by the average index in low-quality tracts downtown, in 1996. The solid red bars show the predicted
relative housing costs predicted by the calibrated model.


    Figure 6 shows that the Engel curve in housing, a non-targeted moment implied by the calibrated
model, does quite well at matching the relationship between housing expenditure and income in the
2014 CEX. In the model, the unit housing requirement means that, within-neighborhood type, all
households spend the same amount on housing regardless of income, so the income share of housing
expenditure is mechanically downward sloping in income. This slope is mitigated by non-homothetic
sorting across neighborhoods: higher incomes sort into the more expensive neighborhood types so
their income share of housing does not fall proportionally with income. See Appendix B.1 for
additional discussion. With only four neighborhood types in the quantified model, this sorting goes
a long way in replicating the income share of housing in the data.


5    Income Growth and Changing Spatial Sorting
Armed with our quantified model, we now turn to our main question of interest. Using counterfac-
tual analysis, we gauge the extent to which a change in the income distribution in the city (L(w))
can help rationalize the observed changes in spatial sorting within the city. We start by analyzing
the 1990-2014 period before turning to 1970-1990. In the next section, we investigate the welfare
consequences of this spatial sorting.

often part of the public amenities and covered by property taxes and housing costs).




                                                        30
                            Figure 6: Housing Expenditure Share by Income

                                              Housing Expenditure/Income
                            0.7
                                                       2014 CEX Data
                                                       Model Calibration

                            0.6



                            0.5



                            0.4



                            0.3



                            0.2



                            0.1
                                   40    60     80   100        120   140   160   180   200
                                                 Income (1999 $1,000s)
Notes: This figure shows both the model implied relationship between share of income allocated to housing (solid
line) and the corresponding data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey in 2014 (dashed line). In published tables,
the CEX reports average household income and average expenditure on shelter for each household income decile.
The earliest year that the CEX reported average expenditures by income decile was 2014. The CEX line includes
only eight data points, one for each decile where decile income exceeded $25,000.


5.1    Computing Counterfactuals
To compute the counterfactual equilibria of the model that we are interested in, we use a logic
similar to Dekle et al. (2007). Given the structure of the model, any counterfactual equilibrium
­ for instance one that is based on a different distribution of incomes L(w) in the city ­ can
be computed with the following parameters on hand: (i) the model elasticities {, ,                  n , , , n },
and (ii) the initial equilibrium values for population in each neighborhood type, house prices, and
amenity trip shares ({n,j (w), ph      mk
                                n,j , Snj }) as calibrated above. Details of the procedure as well as
the corresponding set of equations are given in Appendix B.

5.2    Baseline counterfactual: 1990-2014 change in income distribution
Between 1990 and 2014, the income distribution of the largest CBSAs became more unequal,
mirroring the patterns documented for the economy as a whole. Panel A of Figure 7 summarizes
this change plotting the percentage change in income between 1990 and 2014 for each income decile
in the representative city made of 27 large CBSAs that we used to calibrate the model above.
Income per capita grew on average by 10%. For the bottom decile, however, income actually fell
slightly by approximately 1 percent, while for the top decile, income increased by about 18 percent.
Overall, the 90-10 income gap widened by 19 percentage points.
    How much did this change in income distribution, in isolation, contribute to changes in spatial
sorting within cities? We use the quantified model to answer this question. We compute the coun-

                                                           31
                                Figure 7: Counterfactual change in sorting from shift in income distribution

                           Panel A: Change in Income                            Panel B: Change in Share
                                 Distribution                                      Living Downtown
                      18

                      16

                      14

                      12
  Income Growth (%)




                      10

                      8

                      6

                      4

                      2

                      0

                      -2
                            1    2   3   4    5    6     7    8   9   10
                                         1990 Income Decile


Notes: Panel A shows income growth between 1990 and 2014 by income decile for the 27 CBSAs used to calibrate
our model. This panel summarizes the shift in the income distribution that we feed into the model. Panel B shows
the change in the propensity to live downtown resulting from the change in the income distribution by income decile
(solid red bars). The clear bars show the change in the propensity to live downtown between 1990 and 2014 by income
decile in the data.


terfactual spatial equilibrium that corresponds to the 2014 income distribution, without changing
any other parameters of the model. We then compare sorting in this model-based counterfactual to
that in the actual spatial equilibrium in 2014. In Panel B of Figure 7, the clear wide bars show the
actual change in the propensity to live in downtown areas between 1990 and 2014 for each decile of
the income distribution, summarizing the shift in the U-shape of Figure 1. The skinnier solid red
bars show the changes implied by the model.
                 In the model, the 1990-2014 change in the income distribution generates a shift in location
choices that matches the general trend we observe in the data. High income households move
downtown, while low income households move out of downtown. The predictive power of the
income shock alone is substantive: it explains about 60 percent of the suburbanization of the
bottom decile of the income distribution, and about half of the urbanization of the top income
decile. The income shock does less well at explaining the changing location choices of individuals
in middle income deciles. This suggests that factors aside from the changing income distribution
are also quantitatively important in determining the changing location choices of residents of large
cities.33
  33
    Note that the predicted urbanization of the highest income decile reflects both a shift along the calibrated U-
shape of Figure 5 as well as an endogenous uptick in the U-shape, generated by the change in the income distribution.
Appendix Figure E.6 shows that the model also explains a significant portion of the observed uptick itself.




                                                                           32
5.3      Tests of Model Predictions
Before analyzing how changes in spatial sorting patterns affect the welfare of different income
groups, it is worth exploring whether our model predicts changes in spatial sorting in other settings
beyond our baseline exercise. We perform two such validation exercises. First, we go further
back in time from 1990 to 1970 and ask whether shifts in the income distribution can speak to
changes in spatial sorting patterns during this earlier period, as it does in our 1990-2014 baseline
counterfactual. Second, we replicate our baseline calibration and 1990-2014 counterfactual one-by-
one for each of the CBSAs that make up the representative city in our baseline analysis and use
the results to study whether the model can reproduce salient differences in spatial sorting across
CBSAs from 1990 to 2014.

5.3.1      Predictions Going Backwards in Time: 1970 Counterfactual

In this exercise, we feed the 1970 income distribution into the baseline model, originally calibrated
to 1990. The top panel of Figure 8 shows that incomes unambiguously grew between 1970 and
1990. The lower panel of Figure 8, meanwhile, shows that this income growth generated very little
change in sorting through the lens of the model. This result reflects that income growth is not a
sufficient condition to cause high income households to disproportionately move downtown. What
generates the change in sorting patterns in response to the income growth between 1990 and 2014
is specifically the increase in the number of households with very high income, far to the right of
the bottom of our U-shape.
       The 1970-1990 shift in the income distribution was much less skewed towards the very rich
than the 1990-2014 shift. In fact, the largest income growth corresponded to income deciles around
the bottom of the U-shape (around $100,000), i.e., households that tend to be over-represented in
the suburbs. In this income range, the model predicts that households move along their residential
Engel curve by moving from low to high quality neighborhoods within the suburbs, barely impacting
the relative share of households downtown.
       The lower panel of Figure 8 shows that the lack of re-sorting predicted by the model in response
to the income changes between 1970 and 1990 mimics the stability of the U-shape pattern over
this period in the data (also depicted in Figure 1).34 If anything, the model correctly predicts the
reverse of what we observed between 1990 and 2014: relative to the average household, those at the
very right tail of the income distribution surburbanized between 1970 and 1990, while those at the
left tail urbanized. These results show that the model can successfully predict different dynamics of
changes in spatial sorting patterns, depending on where in the income distribution income growth
takes place.
  34
     The lower panel of Figure 8 displays normalized U-shape patterns - the propensity of a given income group to
reside downtown relative to the average person. Between 1970 and 1990, all income groups became more suburbanized
meaning there was a level shift up in the non-normalized U-shape in 1970. While our model misses the general
suburbanization trend which is likely due to population growth (which we are holding fixed), it matches the differences
across income groups very well.




                                                          33
                                                                             Figure 8: 1970 Counterfactual

                                                                                  Shift in Income Distribution
                                                           1
                                                                                                                   1970 to 1990
                                                          0.5                                                      1990 to 2014




                           Population Share
                                                           0

                                                      -0.5

                                                           -1

                                                      -1.5

                                                           -2

                                                      -2.5
                                                                0           50    100     150      200       250     300          350
                                                                                        Income ($1,000s)

                                                                             Normalized Share Downtown ( D(w)/ D)
                                                           2
                        Norm. Share Downtown ( D(w)/ D)




                                                                                           1970 Counterfactual
                                                          1.8                              1970 Data
                                                                                           1990 Calibration
                                                          1.6                              1990 Data


                                                          1.4

                                                          1.2

                                                           1

                                                          0.8

                                                          0.6
                                                                0           50    100     150      200       250     300          350
                                                     Income ($1,000s)
Notes: The top panel shows the percent change in the population share at each $5,000 income bracket in the 27
CBSAs modeled in our calibration between 1970 and 1990 (solid) and 1990 and 2014 (dashed). The lower panel
shows the share of each income bracket that resides downtown relative to the mean propensity to reside downtown in
these CBSAs. The dotted curves show the data for 1970 (green) and 1990 (orange), while the dashed curve shows the
predicted sorting in the 1970 counterfactual and the solid curve shows the predicted sorting in the 1990 calibration.


5.3.2    Cross-CBSA Predictions

As a second validation exercise, we assess whether the model can match the salient heterogeneity
in the changes in residential sorting patterns across cities. To that end, we re-calibrate the model
separately for individual CBSAs (rather than for a representative city as in the baseline). We allow
CBSAs to differ from each other in their initial 1990 income distribution and initial spatial sorting
patterns, in the change in their income distribution between 1990 and 2014, and in their land
supply elasticities (   D                         and               S ).   The other parameters in Table 2 are assumed to be identical across
CBSAs. For each CBSA, we calibrate the model by targeting the 1990 distribution of location
choice by income within the CBSA, and then compute the model's prediction for how the CBSA's


                                                                                            34
spatial sorting patterns change in response to the actual change in the CBSA income distribution.
We then compare the predictions of the model to the empirical changes in residential sorting within
each city.
         Figure 9 compares the cross-CBSA heterogeneity in spatial sorting predicted by the model with
that observed in the data using a simple summary statistic: the propensity of households with
incomes higher than $100, 000 to reside downtown relative to the average household. The left hand
panel of Figure 9 compares this statistic in the model to that in the data for each CBSA in 1990.35
Given that we target the U-shape in 1990 city by city, it is not surprising that our model matches the
1990 data so well. Our key result is shown in the right-hand panel of Figure 9. The plot compares
the change in the share of households with incomes above $100, 000 that reside downtown between
1990 and 2014 in the data to the corresponding change predicted by the model in response to the
CBSA-specific shock to the income distribution over the same time period. The results show that,
through the lens of the model, CBSA-level changes in the income distribution explain CBSA-level
changes in spatial sorting of high income individuals quite well. The CBSAs predicted by the model
to have a large relative increase in high income individuals residing downtown are actually the ones
where we observe such an increase empirically.

     Figure 9: Urban Share of Households Earning Above $70,000 Less the Average Urban Share

                                       1990                                                                1990 to 2014 Change
               0.04                                                               0.06
                                                                                                                                                          SF

               0.02
                                                                                  0.04                                         DC

                                                                                                                              NY
                                                                                                                                                 Denver
  Calibrated




                                                                                                                          Chicago
                                                                      Predicted




                   0
                                                                                  0.02
                                                   CBSA Points
               -0.02                               Linear Fit                                                       Pittsburgh
                                                   45 degree                                                  LA
                                                                                                                              Miami
                                                                                                                                     Cleveland
                                                                                     0           Providence               Minneapolis
               -0.04                                                                     Philadelphia
                                                                                                  Albany
                                                                                                                                            Kansas City
                                                                                                                       New Haven
                                                                                                                                        Nashville
                                                                                                                   Charlotte
               -0.06                                                              -0.02                                                Dallas

                   -0.06   -0.04   -0.02       0     0.02    0.04                      -0.02                  0                     0.02             0.04
                                      Actual                                                                             Actual
Notes: The left-hand panel plots the share of households earning above $100,000 (in 1999 dollars) that reside downtown
as predicted by the 1990 calibration for each CBSA vs. as observed in the 1990 data for each CBSA. The right-hand
panel compares the change in this variable between the 1990 calibration and as predicted in the 2014 counterfactual
for each CBSA vs. the CBSA-level change observed in the data over the same period.


         We conclude from these out of sample analyses that the model does quite well at matching
time series changes for a representative CBSA as well as cross-CBSA heterogeneity. We view
this as a strong test of the model's implications linking the growth in income at the top of the
  35
    For this analysis, we can only use 18 of 27 CBSAs. These are the CBSAs for which there is sufficient coverage
above the state-specific IPUMS income topcodes to implement the generalized Pareto interpolation procedure that
we use to measure CBSA-level income distributions and U-shapes, as described in Appendix C.


                                                                 35
income distribution with the influx of the rich into downtown neighborhoods within a CBSA.
Many national stories that could be confounding our baseline results get differenced out in this
cross-CBSA analysis. Likewise, the fact that the model also does well in explaining the lack of
changing spatial sorting responses by income between 1970 and 1990 in response to the 1970-1990
income change also gives us confidence that the calibrated model can capture salient features from
the data.


6     Welfare and Policy Implications
Having established the model's ability to reproduce salient empirical sorting patterns, we turn
to using the model to analyze the normative implications of changes in urban spatial sorting.
We first use the model to assess the well-being consequences, for different income groups, of the
neighborhood change and spatial re-sorting triggered by top income growth between 1990 and 2014.
In doing so, we highlight the economic forces within the model that drive welfare differences across
groups. We end this section by discussing the effectiveness of policies aimed at mitigating these
changes in spatial sorting.

6.1   Changes in Welfare Inequality
The framework in section 2 delivers the following function for the representative utility of a house-
hold with income w:                                             1/
                                                         
                                     V (w) =            Vn ,j (w )
                                                                      .                             (25)
                                                 n ,j

    where Vnj is the inclusive value of all neighborhoods of type (n, j ) defined above in (4). We use
a related dollar-denominated measure to quantify the change in welfare between 1990 and 2014 by
income decile, using compensating variation as follows:

                              CV (i) = m2 (i) - m2 V2-1 (V1 (m1 (i))) ,

where mt (i) is income of percentile i in equilibrium t. CV (i) reflects changes in well-being associated
with not only changing income, but also changing housing costs and changing endogenous amenity
quality. To isolate the welfare gains due to changing housing costs and amenity quality alone, we
simply subtract the income growth of a given percentile i from their welfare (i.e., CV) growth:

                                            CV (i) - (m2 (i) - m1 (i))
                                W c (i) =                              .
                                                      m1 (i)

Whenever W c (i) > 0, income growth understates the increase in well-being at percentile i.

    Figure 10 reports our headline welfare results for each income decile. It shows the welfare
gains from within-city spatial sorting triggered by the 1990-2014 income shift. The left panel


                                                    36
averages results between homeowners and renters, while the right panel isolates the effects on
renters. Focusing first on the average results by decile, we find that the spatial sorting response
amplifies the differences in well-being between the rich and the poor during this time period. In
the top decile of the income distribution, well-being grew more than income, by an additional 1.4
percentage points. As high earners move downtown, the supply of high quality neighborhoods that
they value rises endogenously, making them better off. House prices increase as well, but for high
earners the amenity benefit of neighborhood change dominates the price effect. In contrast, at the
bottom of the income distribution, households' well-being is hurt by the same house price increases
without the same compensatory neighborhood variety benefits. As a result, well-being changes are
even lower than income changes, by an additional 0.3 percentage points. Overall, the well-being gap
between the top and bottom deciles of the income distribution grew by an additional 1.7 percentage
points, compared to the 19 percentage point growth in the nominal income gap. That is, within
city spatial sorting amplifies the growing welfare gap between the rich and the poor from rising
income inequality by almost 10 percent.
       Comparing the welfare results for all households in the left panel of Figure 10 with those for
renters only in the right panel, we see that capital gains from house price appreciation benefits
households at all income levels, to some extent. For example, about 30 percent of individuals from
the lowest income decile who resided downtown in 1990 owned their home, limiting the negative
welfare effects of spatial re-sorting. Without this effect ­ i.e., for renters only ­ welfare losses of
low income households are much larger. Renters in the bottom decile experienced a 0.5 percentage
point reduction in their welfare stemming from the changing spatial sorting that resulted from the
shift in the income distribution. At the top of the income distribution, the amenity benefit of
neighborhood change is strong enough that high income renters still gain from gentrification, in
spite of facing the full brunt of the housing cost growth. They see a 0.8 percentage point growth
in welfare.
       Before analyzing the main mechanisms at play behind these findings, it is worth commenting
on the magnitudes of these welfare effects. Figure 10 implies that a renter in the first decile of
the income distribution - earning on average $30,000 per year - is made roughly $150 worse off
per year in consumption equivalent terms. There are two reasons for this relatively small overall
welfare impact. First, the largest welfare losses from an influx of rich households are concentrated
on downtown residents, i.e., only 15 percent of individuals earning $30,000 per year live downtown.
If we isolate the most impacted group, low income renters who remain downtown, we find a welfare
loss that is three times larger, at $450.36 To put that number in perspective, it represents roughly
one month's rent for these households. Second, note that we isolate the effect of a change in the
income distribution, holding population constant. In reality, population grew a lot in these large
CBSAs between 1990 and 2014. Including this population growth along with the changes in the
income distribution further amplifies the welfare losses of low income renters by a factor of six, as
  36
    We only take into account changes in amenities and prices for these households, holding constant their idiosyn-
cratic preference shocks for location.



                                                        37
  Figure 10: Welfare Changes From Spatial Sorting Response to Changing Income Distribution
                                      All Households                                                       Renters Only
                     2                                                                    2
  (%)




                                                                       (%)
           1990




                                                                                1990
                   1.5                                                                  1.5
  Income)/Income




                                                                       Income)/Income
                     1                                                                    1

                   0.5                                                                  0.5

                     0                                                                    0
  (CV -




                                                                       (CV -
                   -0.5                                                                 -0.5

                    -1                                                                   -1
                          1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9 10                                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                  1990 Income Decile                                                   1990 Income Decile
Notes: This figure shows the percent welfare growth that households in each income decile are predicted to receive,
above and beyond income growth, between the 1990 and 2014 model equilibria. The left-hand panel shows results
averaged across homeowners and renters; the right-hand panel focuses on renters only.


discussed in Appendix E.4. This large magnitude is commensurate with the current policy interest
in alleviating the impact of downtown gentrification on this group.

6.2                Mechanisms
Two main mechanisms drive our sorting and welfare results. The first is the price mechanism that
operates through land markets. As the rich get richer, they move downtown to live in high quality
neighborhoods, and to enjoy consumption amenities there. This influx of rich households puts
upward pressure on downtown housing prices not only in high quality neighborhoods, but also in
low quality ones. The left-hand panel of Figure 11 shows theses house prices change, for different
neighborhood types. The model predicts that the shift in the income distribution alone generates a
6 percent increase in house prices in high quality downtown neighborhoods and a 3 percent increase
in house prices in low quality downtown neighborhoods. These predicted increases in downtown
house prices amount to about 20 percent of the actual increases observed in the data, which again
suggest that other factors (like general CBSA population growth) contribute to house price growth.
Housing supply is more elastic in the suburbs than downtown, so the model predicts that house
prices increase more in low quality areas downtown than in low quality areas in the suburbs (3%
vs 1%). This matches the data qualitatively where house price growth between 1990 and 2014 was
higher in low quality downtown neighborhoods than in low quality suburban neighborhoods. House
price growth in low-quality neighborhoods downtown contributes importantly to the welfare losses
of the poor renters who remain downtown.
            The second key mechanism behind our results is endogenous supply responses and neighbor-
hood change. As the rich move downtown and demand for high quality neighborhoods increases,


                                                                  38
                                            Figure 11: Mechanisms




Notes: This figure shows the change in housing costs (on the left) and neighborhood variety (on the right) in each of
the four neighborhood types between 1990 and 2014. Red bars are model and wide clear bars are data. Consistent
with the model, the change in housing costs are measured in the data for the subset of tracts that maintain the same
quality assignment between 1990 and 2014.


developers supply more high quality neighborhoods. Some of this entry is at the cost of exit of
lower quality neighborhoods, so that gentrification takes place. The right-hand panel of Figure 11
shows the growth in supply of neighborhoods in each area and quality level. The model predicts a
large proportion of the downtown neighborhood change observed in the data (measured as changes
in the number of constant geography Census tracts classified as low and high quality, respectively).
Given love of variety preferences, the additional entry of high quality neighborhoods downtown
makes high income households better off. Poorer households benefit from this entry as well, but
this effect is quantitatively limited, because in the data residents of low quality neighborhoods
rarely consume amenities in high quality neighborhoods (see Table 3). Overall, the contraction in
the number of low quality neighborhoods ­ the gentrification that we also observe in the data ­
makes low income households worse off. Finally, we note that the predicted supply of high quality
neighborhoods also expands in the suburbs, but at a much smaller rate than downtown.
    We can use the model to separately quantify the contribution of the price and amenity mech-
anisms to our welfare results. To that end, we compute a counterfactual that shuts down love of
variety effects across neighborhoods by setting the two between-neighborhood substitution elastic-
ities,  and  , to infinity. In this counterfactual, prices respond to changes in the income distri-
bution, but the sorting and welfare effects of these price responses are not amplified by responses
in neighborhood (or associated consumption amenity) variety. Welfare results are shown in Figure
12 (solid red bars) and contrasted with our baseline quantification (clear bars). The welfare gap
across income groups is mitigated substantially when the love of variety effects are shut down, from
1.7 percentage point in the baseline to 0.55 percentage points without love of variety effects. About
two-thirds of the welfare gap in our base results stems from the endogenous private amenities re-


                                                         39
sponse. Interestingly, the absolute welfare losses for the bottom decile gets worse, from -0.25 to -0.5
percentage points, as price increases are not compensated by the gains in consumption amenities
that accompany the influx of the rich. Shutting down love of variety effects almost completely
eliminates the welfare gains of the rich but increases the welfare losses experienced by the poor.

                                  Figure 12: Shutting Down Amplification




Notes: This figure shows the percent welfare growth that households in each income decile are predicted to receive,
above and beyond income growth, between the 1990 and 2014 model equilibria. The left-hand panel shows results
averaged across homeowners and renters; the right-hand panel focuses on renters only. The clear bars show the results
from the baseline calibration and counterfactual where the neighborhood and amenity love of variety parameters (
and  ) are equal 6.5. The red bars show the welfare results from an alternative calibration and counterfactual where
love of variety is shut down by setting these parameters to both equal infinity.



6.3    Robustness
To assess the robustness of our results, we perform a series of additional quantitative exercises.
Appendix Table E.12 shows the change in welfare and change in propensity to live downtown for
the top and bottom income deciles predicted by our model for a range of alternate parameter values.
We summarize the key findings here.
    Consistent with the underlying economics, spatial sorting and welfare inequality growth pre-
dicted by the model in response to growing income inequality are increasing in  (which governs
the extent of sorting by income), declining in  (which is an inverse measure of love of variety)
and declining in     n   (which measures the elasticity of housing supply). Over plausible alternate
values for these parameters, however, the quantitative magnitudes generated by our counterfactual
exercises are relatively robust. For example, for values of  between 2 and 4 and values of  between
5 and 8, the growth in the downtown share of the top income decile predicted by the model ranges
between 40 and 80 percent of that observed in the data, relative to our baseline prediction of 50
percent. Similarly, over these parameter values, the associated growth in the welfare gap between

                                                         40
the top and bottom deciles ranges between an additional 1.5 and 2 percentage points relative to
our baseline of an additional 1.7 percentage points.
   Changing  also has small quantitative effects on our counterfactuals.  governs the elasticity
of substitution for amenity consumption across neighborhoods. Part of the reason for the relative
insensitivity of our results to  is that the amenity share out of non-housing consumption is small
( = 0.15 in our baseline). Higher values of  amplifies the in-migration of high income individuals
into downtown high quality neighborhoods in response to an increase in the incomes of the rich.
Higher values of  also make our counterfactual results more sensitive to  . Other potential
mitigators that we included in our extended model ­ such as endogenous public amenities ­ have
even smaller effects on our baseline quantitative results.

6.4   Gentrification Curbing Policies
Changes in spatial sorting in large US cities have led to a new policy debate on gentrification and
housing affordability. In this final section, we use our model to analyze the potential impact of
policies that aim to shape the spatial sorting of heterogeneous households within the city.

Taxing developments        We first model a stylized "anti-gentrification" policy, which systemati-
cally taxes high quality housing downtown, and uses the proceeds to subsidize rents in low quality
neighborhoods downtown (the policy is budget neutral). It aims to limit the development of high
quality neighborhoods downtown while helping poorer households to remain located downtown.
We compute the counterfactual 2014 spatial equilibrium with a tax on high quality housing down-
town of t = 5%. Figure 13 reports the results and contrasts them with our baseline 1990-2014
counterfactual, in order to evaluate how much such a policy would have curbed the gentrification
triggered by changes in the income distribution. The left panel shows that the policy stems part
of the gentrification of downtown neighborhoods: the inflow of high income households downtown
is curbed, as is the outflow of low income families, compared to baseline. The policy is also effec-
tive at stemming part of the land price increase downtown, and limiting quality changes. To the
extent that governments intrinsically value social diversity within their downtowns, this simulation
suggests that such an anti-gentrification policy can help achieve such target.
   The well-being effects of this policy, shown in the right panel of Figure 13 are, however, much
more muted. The policy attenuates the welfare gains of high income households and welfare losses of
low income households, but both effects are small. The policy fails to significantly reduce the losses
of low income households because taxing high quality development downtown shifts gentrification
­ i.e., neighborhood quality and price growth ­ from downtown to the suburbs. As a result, low
income households living in the suburbs experience greater welfare losses relative to baseline. On
net, the welfare losses are simply transferred from residents of low quality downtown neighborhoods
to residents of low quality suburban neighborhoods.
   Appendix Figure E.8 shows that the results of this policy are very similar to those we obtain
when directly modeling zoning regulations; i.e., a policy that imposes a constant relative number


                                                 41
of high to low quality neighborhoods. The impact on social mixing downtown is significant, but
the welfare effects are again very small, as price and quality growth are pushed to the suburbs.

          Figure 13: Location Choices and Well-Being under "Anti-Gentrification" Policy




Notes: This figure shows the percent change in the propensity to live downtown (on the left) and change welfare
(on the right) that result from the change in the income distribution by income decile. The clear bars show the
results from the baseline counterfactual. The blue bars show the results from the alternative counterfactual in
which development of high quality neighborhoods downtown is taxed at 5 percent and the proceeds of the tax are
redistributed to subsidize housing costs in low quality neighborhoods downtown.



Regulatory constraints on housing supply                   Finally, we shed light on a policy that has been
widely proposed by economists to address the regressive welfare impacts of rising housing costs:
relieving regulatory housing supply constraints. Housing regulations do not feature directly into
our model, they are instead indirectly captured by the housing supply elasticities that we use in
calibration. We now report the effect of doubling the elasticity of housing supply both downtown
and in the suburbs. Figure 14 shows that doing so does little to stem neighborhood change down-
town (in the left panel) but it mitigates the associated welfare losses on the poor (in the right
panel). House price growth is reduced by approximately 1 percentage point in all neighborhoods,
and effectively shut down in the suburbs. The benefits of this slowed house price growth mostly
accrue to the poor ­ the lowest income decile's welfare loss drops by over two-thirds, from 0.25 to
0.08 percentage points. Welfare inequality continues to grow, however, because the rich gain from
increased neighborhood variety that persists with the increased elasticity of housing supply.




                                                      42
                            Figure 14: Effects of Increasing Supply Elasticity




Notes: This figure shows the percent change in the propensity to live downtown (on the left) and change welfare
(on the right) that result from the change in the income distribution by income decile. The clear bars show the
results from the baseline counterfactual. The blue bars show the results from the alternative counterfactual where
the elasticity of housing supply is double its baseline level in both the suburbs and downtown.


7    Conclusion
We set out to explore the link between rising incomes at the top of the income distribution and
changes in the urban landscape of U.S. cities in the past few decades: high income households
have been moving into downtowns, where housing prices have gone up and neighborhoods have
been changing dramatically. These changes have lead to anti-gentrification protests and a renewed
interest in policy circles for maintaining social diversity in urban neighborhoods. To study this
phenomenon, we develop a spatial model of a city with heterogeneous agents, neighborhoods of
different qualities, and non-homothetic preferences. We quantify the model and use it to tease out
how much of the change in spatial sorting patterns by income over time can be plausibly traced
back to changes in the income distribution, tilted towards higher incomes.
    Our estimates suggest that rising incomes at the top of the distribution were a substantive
contributor to increased urban neighborhood change during the last 25 years within the U.S. The
analysis also suggests that neighborhood change resulting from the increased incomes of the rich
did make poorer residents worse off. Accounting for the spatial sorting response resulting from the
change in income distribution between 1990 and 2014 exacerbates the growing inequality between
the top and bottom income decile by an additional 1.7 percentage points.
    We explore possible policy responses to mitigate these distributional impacts of neighborhood
change. We find that policies that contain gentrification seem to only lead to a very modest
mitigation of the increase in well-being inequality, which could arguably be targeted more efficiently
by direct redistribution. On the other hand, these policies are effective at maintaining social
diversity in urban neighborhoods, arguably one of the goals of such policies.
    In this paper, we have focused on the within-city consequences of a rise in top incomes. By
doing so, we have highlighted one mechanism that has contributed to shape neighborhood change in


                                                       43
the past twenty five years: the rising incomes of the rich coupled with non-homothetic preferences
for location across income groups. In order to conduct this analysis, we have developed a model
that is stylized in some dimensions, but is very flexible. It is in particular amenable to study other
sources of changes in within-city spatial sorting that are potentially empirically relevant. Using our
framework to study other potential causes of neighborhood change is a natural avenue for future
research.




                                                 44
References
Agarwal, Sumit, J Bradford Jensen, and Ferdinando Monte, "The geography of consump-
  tion," 2019.

Aguiar, Mark and Mark Bils, "Has consumption inequality mirrored income inequality?,"
  American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (9), 2725­56.

Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M, Stephen J Redding, Daniel M Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf, "The
  economics of density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall," Econometrica, 2015, 83 (6), 2127­2189.

Allen, Treb, Costas Arkolakis, and Xiangliang Li, "Optimal city structure," Yale University,
  mimeograph, 2015.

Almagro, Milena and Tomas Dominguez-Iino, "Location Sorting and Endogenous Amenities:
  Evidence from Amsterdam," 2019.

ao, Rodrigo Ad Michal Kolesr, and Eduardo Morales, "Shift-share designs: Theory and
  inference," Working Paper 24944, National Bureau of Economic Research August 2018.

Armour, Philip, Richard V Burkhauser, and Jeff Larrimore, "Using the Pareto distribution
  to improve estimates of topcoded earnings," Economic Inquiry, 2016, 54 (2), 1263­1273.

Athey, Susan, David Blei, Robert Donnelly, Francisco Ruiz, and Tobias Schmidt, "Esti-
  mating heterogeneous consumer preferences for restaurants and travel time using mobile location
  data," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2018, 108, 64­67.

Atkin, David, Benjamin Faber, and Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, "Retail globalization and
  household welfare: Evidence from Mexico," Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126 (1), 1­73.

Autor, David H., Christopher J. Palmer, and Parag A. Pathak, "Gentrification and the
  amenity value of crime reductions: Evidence from rent deregulation," 2017, (23914).

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel and Daniel Hartley, "Accounting for central neighborhood change,
  1980-2010," 2018, (2016-09).

  and Justin Marion, "The effects of low income housing tax credit developments on neighbor-
  hoods," Journal of Public Economics, 2009, 93 (5-6), 654­666.

  and Lu Han, "The Microgeography of Housing Supply," 2019.

Berkes, Enrico and Ruben Gaetani, "Income segregation and rise of the knowledge economy,"
  Ohio State University Mimeo, 2018.

Borusyak, Kirill, Peter Hull, and Xavier Jaravel, "Quasi-experimental shift-share research
  designs," Working Paper 24997, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.


                                               45
Brueckner, Jan K, Jacques-Fran¸
                              cois Thisse, and Yves Zenou, "Why is central Paris rich
  and downtown Detroit poor?: An amenity-based theory," European Economic Review, 1999, 43
  (1), 91 ­ 107.

Brummet, Quentin and Davin Reed, "The effects of gentrification on original neighborhood
  residents: Evidence from longitudinal Census microdata," Working Paper 19-30, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Philadelphia 2019.

Chen, M Keith and Ryne Rohla, "The effect of partisanship and political advertising on close
  family ties," Science, 2018, 360 (6392), 1020­1024.

Couture, Victor, "Valuing the Consumption Benefits of Urban Density," Technical Report, Uni-
  versity of California, Berkeley. Processed 2016.

      and Jessie Handbury, "Urban revival in America, 2000 to 2010," 2017, (24084).

  , Jonathan Dingel, Allison Green, and Jessie Handbury, "Quantifying social interactions
  using smartphone data," Work in Progress.

Davis, Donald R and Jonathan I Dingel, "The comparative advantage of cities," April 2019.

  ,     , Joan Monras, and Eduardo Morales, "How segregated is urban consumption?," Journal
  of Political Economy, Forthcoming.

Davis, Morris A and Francois Ortalo-Magne, "Household expenditures, wages, rents," Review
  of Economic Dynamics, 2011, 14 (2), 248­261.

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum, "Unbalanced trade," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2007, 97 (2), 351­355.

Diamond, Rebecca, "The determinants and welfare implications of US workers' diverging loca-
  tion choices by skill: 1980-2000," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (3), 479­524.

      and Tim McQuade, "Who wants affordable housing in their backyard? An equilibrium
  analysis of low-income property development," Journal of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (3),
  1063­1117.

  , Timothy McQuade, and Franklin Qian, "The effects of rent control expansion on ten-
  ants, landlords, and inequality: Evidence from San Francisco," American Economic Review,
  Forthcoming.

Ding, Lei, Jackelyn Hwang, and Eileen Divringi, "Gentrification and residential mobility in
  Philadelphia," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2016, 61, 38­51.

Dingel, Jonathan I, "The determinants of quality specialization," The Review of Economic
  Studies, 2016, 84 (4), 1551­1582.

                                                46
Disdier, Anne-C´
               elia and Keith Head, "The puzzling persistence of the distance effect on
  bilateral trade," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (1), 37­48.

Edlund, Lena, Cecilia Machado, and Michaela Sviatchi, "Bright minds, big rent: Gentrifi-
  cation and the rising returns to skill," 2019, (21729).

Einav, Liran, Peter J Klenow, Benjamin Klopack, Jonathan D Levin, Larry Levin,
  and Wayne Best, "Assessing the gains from e-commerce," 2019.

Ellen, Ingrid Gould and Katherine ORegan, "Crime and urban flight revisited: The effect of
  the 1990s drop in crime on cities," Journal of Urban Economics, 2010, 68 (3), 247­259.

  , Keren Mertens Horn, and David Reed, "Has falling crime invited gentrification?," 2019,
  (CES 17-27).

Eriksen, Michael D and Stuart S Rosenthal, "Crowd out effects of place-based subsidized
  rental housing: New evidence from the LIHTC program," Journal of Public Economics, 2010, 94
  (11-12), 953­966.

Faber, Benjamin, "Trade liberalization, the price of quality, and inequality: Evidence from
  mexican store prices," UC-Berkeley Working Paper, 2014.

   and Thibault Fally, "Firm heterogeneity in consumption baskets: Evidence from home and
  store scanner data," 2017.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo and Cecile Gaubert, "Optimal spatial policies, geography and sorting,"
  2018.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D and Amit K Khandelwal, "Measuring the unequal gains from trade,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (3), 1113­1180.

  , Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Su´
                                   arez Serrato, and Owen Zidar, "State taxes and
  spatial misallocation," The Review of Economic Studies, 2018, 86 (1), 333­376.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Gene M. Grossman, and Elhanan Helpman, "Income distribution,
  product quality, and international trade," Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (4), 721­765.

Fogli, Alessandra and Veronica Guerrieri, "The end of the American Dream? Inequality and
  segregation in US cities," University of Chicago Booth School of Business, 2019.

Gaigne, Carl, Hans Koster, Fabien Moizeau, and Jacques-Francois Thisse, "Ameni-
  ties and the social structure of cities," HSE Working paper WP BRP 162/EC/2017, National
  Research University Higher School of Economics 2017.

Glaeser, Edward, Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz, "Consumer city," Journal of Economic Geog-
  raphy, 2001, 1 (1), 27­50.

                                                 47
Guerrieri, Veronica, Daniel Hartley, and Erik Hurst, "Endogenous gentrification and hous-
  ing price dynamics," Journal of Public Economics, 2013, 100, 45­60.

Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai, "Superstar cities," American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5 (4), 167­199.

Handbury, Jessie, Ilya Rahkovsky, and Molly Schnell, "Is the focus on food deserts fruitless?
  Retail access and food purchases across the socioeconomic spectrum," 2015.

Hoelzlein, Mattias, "Two-Sided Sorting and Spatial Inequality in Cities," 2019.

Holian, Matthew J. and Matthew E. Kahn, "The impact of center city economic and cul-
  tural vibrancy on greenhouse gas emissions from transportation," MTI Report 11-13, Mineta
  Transportation Institute 2012.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Enrico Moretti, "Housing constraints and spatial misallocation," Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2019, 11 (2), 1­39.

Jaravel, Xavier, "The unequal gains from product innovations: Evidence from the US retail
  sector," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 134 (2), 715­783.

Lance Freeman, "Displacement or succession?: Residential mobility in gentrifying neighbor-
  hoods," Urban Affairs Review, 2005, 40 (4), 463­491.

Lester, T. William and Daniel A. Hartley, "The long term employment impacts of gentrifi-
  cation in the 1990s," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2014, 45 (1), 80­89.

McKinnish, Terra, Randall Walsh, and T. Kirk White, "Who gentrifies low-income neigh-
  borhoods?," Journal of Urban Economics, 2010, 67 (2), 180­193.

Meltzer, Rachel and Pooya Ghorbani, "Does gentrification increase employment opportunities
  in low-income neighborhoods?," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2017, 66 (C), 52­73.

Monte, Ferdinando, Stephen J Redding, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "Commuting, mi-
  gration and local employment elasticities," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (12), 38553890.

Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Brandon Wall, "Employment dynamics and business
  relocation: New evidence from the National Establishment Time Series," in "Aspects of worker
  well-being," Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2007, pp. 39­83.

Peters, Michael, Fabian Eckert et al., "Spatial structural change," in "2018 Meeting Papers"
  number 98 Society for Economic Dynamics 2018.

Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman, "Distributional national accounts:
  methods and estimates for the United States," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 133
  (2), 553­609.

                                               48
Redding, Stephen J and Daniel M Sturm, "Estimating neighborhood effects: evidence from
  war-time destruction in London," Princeton University, mimeograph, 2016.

Redding, Stephen J. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "Quantitative spatial economics," An-
  nual Review of Economics, 2017, 9 (1), 21­58.

Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas,
  and Matthew Sobek, "IPUMS-USA," 2018.

Saiz, Albert, "The geographic determinants of housing supply," The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2010, 125 (3), 1253­1296.

Small, Kenneth A, Erik T Verhoef, and Robin Lindsey, The economics of urban trans-
  portation, Routledge, 2007.

Su, Yichen, "Measuring the value of urban consumption amenities: A time-use approach," 2018.

  , "The rising value of time and the origin of urban gentrification," 2018.

Tsivanidis, Nick, "The aggregate and distributional effects of urban transit infrastructure: Ev-
  idence from Bogot´
                   as TransMilenio," Technical Report, University of Chicago Booth School of
  Business 2019.

Vigdor, Jacob L., Douglas S. Massey, and Alice M. Rivlin, "Does gentrification harm the
  poor?," Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 2002, pp. 133­182.




                                                49
