                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                               DEADLOCK ON THE BOARD

                                  Jason Roderick Donaldson
                                       Nadya Malenko
                                      Giorgia Piacentino

                                      Working Paper 26155
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26155


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019



For helpful comments, we thank Renée Adams, Ulf Axelson, Ilona Babenko, Patrick Bolton,
Archishman Chakraborty, Gilles Chemla, Francesca Cornelli, Alex Edmans, Daniel Ferreira,
Zsuzsanna Fluck, Slava Fos, Lorenzo Garlappi, Simon Gervais, Eitan Goldman, Armando
Gomes, Radha Gopalan, Todd Gormley, Martin Gregor, Denis Gromb, Dirk Jenter, Ali Lazrak,
Mark Leary, Mina Lee, Andrey Malenko, Ernst Maug, Dimitri Vayanos, Michael Weisbach, Ed
Van Wesep, Jeffrey Zwiebel, as well as seminar audiences at the 2018 ASU Sonoran Winter
Finance Conference, Boston College, Brandeis, the 2018 Cambridge Corporate Finance Theory
Symposium, Columbia, Duke, the ECGC 2018 International Workshop, the 2018 EFA Meeting,
the 2018 European Summer Symposium at Gerzensee, the 2017 FRA, the 2018 FSU SunTrust
Beach Conference, HBS, Imperial College, LBS, LSE, Michigan State, the Norwegian School of
Economics, Rochester, the 3rd Rome Junior Finance Conference at EIEF, the 2018 SFS
Cavalcade, the 2018 Summer Accounting and Finance Conference at the Hebrew University, the
University of Alberta, the 2018 UBC Winter Finance Conference, UCL, the University of Illinois
at Chicago, the University of Rochester, the University of Virginia, UT­Austin, the 2017
WAPFIN@Stern meeting, Washington University in St. Louis, and Wesleyan University. We
thank Xiaobo Yu and Jonathan Zandberg for research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Jason Roderick Donaldson, Nadya Malenko, and Giorgia Piacentino. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Deadlock on the Board
Jason Roderick Donaldson, Nadya Malenko, and Giorgia Piacentino
NBER Working Paper No. 26155
August 2019
JEL No. G3

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a dynamic model of board decision-making. We show that a board could retain a
policy all directors agree is worse than an available alternative. Thus, directors may retain a CEO
they agree is bad--a deadlocked board leads to an entrenched CEO. We explore how to compose
boards and appoint directors to mitigate deadlock. We find that board diversity and long director
tenure can exacerbate deadlock. Moreover, we rationalize why CEOs and incumbent directors
have power to appoint new directors: to avoid deadlock. Our model speaks to short-termism,
staggered boards, and proxy access.

Jason Roderick Donaldson                            Giorgia Piacentino
Olin Business School                                Columbia Business School
Washington University in St. Louis                  3022 Broadway
Simon Hall                                          Uris Hall 813
1 Olympian Way                                      New York, NY 10027
St Louis, MO 63130                                  and NBER
j.r.donaldson@wustl.edu                             g.piacentino@gsb.columbia.edu

Nadya Malenko
Boston College
Carroll School of Management
Finance Department, Fulton Hall 332
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
nadya.malenko@bc.edu
1         Introduction

The board of directors is the highest decision-making authority in a corporation. But some-
times boards struggle to make decisions. In surveys, 67% of directors report the inability
to decide about some issues in the boardroom. Moreover, 30% say they have encountered
a boardroom dispute threatening the very survival of the corporation (IFC (2014), p. 2).1

Such a "division among the directors" that "may render the board unable to take effective
management action"--such deadlock on the board--can even lead directors to "vote wholly
in disregard of the interests of the corporation" (Kim (2003), pp. 113, 120).2 Deadlock on the
board can be so costly to US corporations that most states have adopted deadlock statutes,

which often give courts the power to dissolve a deadlocked corporation, a power they rarely
have otherwise, except in the event of default or fraud. A substantial legal literature studies
how corporations can resolve deadlock ex post.3 In this paper, we study how deadlock arises
ex ante. And we ask whether it can, and should, be avoided. Can the right mix of direc-
tors ensure a board makes efficient decisions? And, if so, how should director elections be

structured to help achieve the right board composition? Should director tenure be limited?
And should shareholders have all the power to choose directors, or should executives and
incumbent directors have some power as well?
        To address these questions, we develop a dynamic model of board decision making. In

the model, some directors refuse to replace a current policy with a new one just because
    1
      Further, from 2004­2006, 166 directors experienced disputes so severe that they publicly resigned from
their boards at US public corporations, accepting potential damage to their careers (Marshall (2013); see
also Agrawal and Chen (2017)).
    2
      In the summer of 2017, deadlock on the board made it hard for Uber to appoint a CEO. According to
Shervin Pishevar, an early shareholder in the company, there was one director, a representative of blockholder
Benchmark Capital, who was "holding the company hostage and not allowing it to move forward in its
critical executive search.... Benchmark has threatened to block investments...by bargaining over board seats"
(Pishevar's letter to Benchmark, August 15, 2017). Moreover, deadlock on the board led one frontrunner for
the job, Meg Whitman, to withdraw her name from consideration, saying "it was becoming clear that the
board was still too fractured to make progress on the issues that were important to me" ("Inside Uber's Wild
Ride in a Search of a New C.E.O." New York Times, August 29, 2017). Whitman's description of Uber's
board traces the dictionary definition of deadlock: "a situation, typically one involving opposing parties, in
which no progress can be made" (New Oxford American Dictionary ).
    3
      See, e.g., Duke (1972), Howe (1967), Kim (2003), Landeo and Spier (2014a, 2014b), Lew (1980), and
McDonald (1979).


                                                      2
they fear that other directors will refuse to replace the new policy in the future. There is
complete deadlock: the board cannot move forward with any policy, even if all directors
prefer it to the incumbent. Shareholders suffer, since a deadlocked board cannot remove

low-quality policies or executives--a deadlocked board leads to an entrenched CEO.
       The model gives a new perspective on boardroom diversity and director tenure, two hotly
debated policy issues: more diverse opinions/preferences and longer tenures can exacerbate
deadlock (their benefits notwithstanding).4 It also allows us to ask how the anticipation
of deadlock can affect board composition via director elections. We find that shareholders

should not have all the power over the future of the board. Indeed, shareholders themselves
are better off if incumbent directors have some power over the election of new directors:
with more power, directors anticipate fewer disagreements in the future, and hence are less
likely to become deadlocked today. This result rationalizes why it is typically the CEO and

incumbent directors who nominate new directors in practice.
       Model preview. In the model, a board made up of multiple directors decides on a
corporate policy at each date. The model is based on two key assumptions, reflecting how
real-world boards operate. (i) The set of feasible policies changes over time. For example,

in the context of CEO turnover decisions, the alternative candidates available to replace the
incumbent CEO today may no longer be available in the future. (ii) Directors have different
preferences over policies. We refer to these different preferences as "biases," as they could
reflect private benefits or misspecified beliefs. However, they could also reflect reasonable
differences of opinion (see Section 6.1). For example, a director representing an activist

investor could be biased toward an outside candidate with a history of asset divestitures,
and an executive director could be biased toward an internal candidate with experience at
the firm. We refer to a board as "aligned" if there is a majority of directors with the same
bias, and as "diverse" otherwise.
   4
    See Ferreira (2010) for a survey of the literature on boardroom diversity. And see, e.g., "Big Investors
Question Corporate Board Tenures" (Wall Street Journal, March 23, 2016) and Katz and McIntosh (2014)
for discussions of director tenure.



                                                     3
       Results preview. Our first main result is that a diverse board can be deadlocked, in the
sense that it retains even Pareto dominated policies--directors choose not to put an available
policy in place, even when they all agree it is preferable to the incumbent. The reason is that

each director knows that if the new incumbent appeals to other directors, they will want to
keep it in place. Thus, she is worried that putting the new policy in place will prevent her
from putting her own preferred policies in place when they become available. Hence, she
votes down alternative policies just because they appeal to other directors, and so does the
rest of the board.5 For example, despite having diverse opinions on many candidates, an

activist representative and executive director could agree that an alternative CEO could run
the firm better than the incumbent. But the directors both know that, given he can run the
firm well, the alternative will be hard to replace in the future--it will be hard for the activist
representative to appoint a divestiture-oriented CEO and hard for the executive director to

appoint an internal candidate. As a result, they both want to keep the bad incumbent in
place. Overall, deadlock arises because directors want to keep policies in place that will be
easy to replace in the future.
       In the context of CEO turnover, this result implies that a CEO can be so severely

entrenched that he is not fired even if all directors prefer a replacement, and hence explains
what seems to be a major source of corporate inefficiency (Taylor (2010)). This explanation
of CEO entrenchment contrasts with those in the literature, which rely on a CEO's actively
entrenching himself (e.g., "invest[ing] in businesses related to their own background and
experience")6 or directors' direct utility costs of voting against a CEO.7 , 8 We find that

directors keep the bad incumbent CEO in place because they worry a good CEO will be too
hard to replace.
       This mechanism resonates with practice. For example, in 2017, Uber's executive search
   5
      If a good policy is in place today, this same mechanism can lead to what we call "anti-deadlock," in
which policies are replaced when they should not be (see Corollary 2).
   6
     Shleifer and Vishny (1989), p. 125. See also, e.g., Zwiebel (1996).
   7
     See, e.g., Chemmanur and Fedaseyeu (2018), Coles et al. (2014), Taylor (2010), and Warther (1998).
   8
     One other paper in which directors choose not to fire a bad CEO is Dow (2013). In that paper, directors
retain a bad CEO because they do not want to reveal that they made a mistake hiring him in the first place.


                                                     4
resulted in deadlock on the board, and the company stayed without a CEO for several
months. One director was pushing for a weak CEO who would be easy to replace in the
future. According to Bloomberg :


     The company hopes to lock in a CEO by early September. The big question
     is whether the board can get on the same page. Getting a majority of the
     eight-person group to support a single candidate is looking to be difficult....
     Some...have argued...that Kalanick [a current director and former CEO] would
     prefer a weak CEO just to increase his chance of making a comeback ("Behind
     Uber's Messy CEO Search Is a Divided Boardroom," Bloomberg Technology, July
     28, 2017, emphasis added).

   Since deadlock arises due to the dynamic linkage between present and future decisions, it
arises only when directors care enough about the future. It does not arise in the benchmark
in which directors vote only once, or, equivalently, if directors are myopic, in that they put

a lot of weight on current decisions. In this case, a diverse board always acts in the interest
of shareholders. Thus, our model provides a counterpoint to the broadly negative view of
corporate short-termism, and speaks to the current debate over director tenure (Section 3.1).
   To ask what board composition is best for shareholders, we explore how deadlock depends

on whether the board is diverse or aligned. On a diverse board, deadlock arises. This is
because, even if all directors agree on the best decision today, they anticipate disagreeing
in the future. On an aligned board, in contrast, deadlock does not arise. This is because
directors not only agree on the best decision today, they also know they will agree in the

future. Thus, they have no incentive to block policies to ensure they get their way in the
future--they will get their way anyway. Despite the absence of deadlock, an aligned board
is not necessarily good for shareholders. Indeed, directors on an aligned board will put their
preferred policies in place at shareholders' expense. Thus, board composition presents a
trade-off between the costs of deadlock on a diverse board and the tyranny of biases on an

aligned board.
   Our second main result is that a diverse board is better for shareholders if directors'
biases are small, but an aligned board is better if they are large. To see why, observe that

                                              5
a diverse board acts in shareholders' interest all of the time if biases are small, but none of
the time if they are large. The reason is that directors act against shareholders' interests
only to preserve their option to get their way in the future, and this option is valuable

enough to induce deadlock only if biases are large. In contrast, an aligned board acts against
shareholders' interest some of the time, whether biases are small or large. The reason is
that directors act against shareholders' interest only at times when their favorite policies are
available.
   Our third main result is an explanation of why shareholders should not have all the power

to choose new board appointments. In fact, their power is limited in practice. As corporate
governance advocate Adrian Cadbury puts it,


      The classical theory of the board is that shareholders elect the directors.... In
      practice, however, the shareholders of most public companies have little say in the
      appointment of directors, other than to nod through the nominations presented
      by the current board..... The legitimacy of the board as the appointee of the
      shareholders is something of a fiction (Cadbury (2002), p. 66).

Although Cadbury seems to think giving incumbent directors this power is a bad idea, we

argue that it can be optimal. The reason is that it can mitigate deadlock. If a director
knows she will become part of a majority on the board if she appoints new directors, then
she knows she will be able to put her favorite policies in place, regardless of the incumbent.
Thus, she does not have to block good policies today to ensure that the incumbent is easy

to replace in the future. However, shareholders should not cede all the power to appoint to
incumbent directors; otherwise, as on an aligned board, incumbent directors' bias can take
over the whole board. They should cede just enough power to prevent deadlock.
   This result rationalizes the real-world institution by which incumbent directors nomi-
nate new directors and shareholders vote on them, so neither has all the power to appoint

new directors. More generally, it points to a downside of full shareholder control, sug-
gesting a heretofore overlooked cost of reforms like "proxy access," the controversial pol-
icy that shareholders be able to place their own director nominees directly on the ballot

                                               6
(see, e.g., Akyol et al. (2012) and Bhandari et al. (2017)). The result also applies if there
is an executive director on the board, and hence explains why the CEO often has influ-
ence over the appointment of new board members in practice (e.g., Coles et al. (2014),

Hermalin and Weisbach (1998), and Shivdasani and Yermack (1999)).
   We also ask how the power to appoint new directors should be distributed among the
current directors. Should it be distributed equally among them? For example, should they
all have seats on the nominating committee? We find that the answer is no. To prevent
deadlock, it is enough to induce a majority of directors to vote to replace the incumbent.

   Related literature. Dziuda and Loeper (2016) study political gridlock in a model with
an endogenous status quo.9 In that paper, the same two policies are available at each date
and voters with changing preferences vote on which to put in place. To generate gridlock,
what matters is that the status quo stays in place when the voters cannot agree. In other

words, each voter has veto power, and thus wants to lock in her preferred kinds of policies
(e.g., left-wing policies) as the default outcome for voting in the future, even if she thinks
others (e.g., right-wing policies) could be beneficial in the short term. In contrast, our results
are unrelated to the default outcome. Indeed, voters in our model do not want to lock in a

policy. Rather, they want to make it easy to replace.
   Austen-Smith et al. (2019) build on Dziuda and Loeper's (2016) framework to include
three policies, and find that adding a mediocre policy can mitigate gridlock, preventing a
bad policy from staying in place. As they explain (p. 11), their mechanism hinges on veto
power, and is not at work in settings like ours in which multiple voters make decisions by

majority voting. Our mechanism, in contrast, hinges on new policies becoming available
over time. And, unlike theirs, it can generate too much policy change, not just too little
(Corollary 2; see also footnote 5). We discuss these differences further in Section 3 and
Section 5.

   Although our main questions pertain to corporate boards--how should they be composed,
   9
     Other papers in this literature include Duggan and Kalandrakis (2012), Dziuda and Loeper (2018), and
Z´
 apal (2012).


                                                   7
how should directors be appointed, and who should have power over the future of the board--
they may also have analogs in some political situations. Hence, our findings could contribute
to the political economy literature, which, to our knowledge, has yet to explore optimal

committee composition and member appointments within this class of models.
       A relatively small number of theory papers studies decision making by multiple directors
on a corporate board.10 We contribute to this literature by including dynamic interactions,
which are almost entirely absent from this literature, even though they alter behavior dra-
matically. Indeed, none of our results obtain with a one-shot decision since deadlock does

not arise (Proposition 1). The only other papers that include dynamic decision making with
multiple directors are Garlappi et al. (2017, 2019). In the 2017 paper, directors are not
strategic. However, group dynamics still generate inefficiencies, because directors pass up
an investment they all believe is good anticipating that it will not be managed the way they

want after new information arrives. In the 2019 paper, directors are strategic, and if there
is an even number of them, group dynamics generate inefficiencies because they anticipate
disagreeing about when to exercise a real option.
       We also add to the broader theory literature on boards.11 Our finding that board di-

versity can exacerbate deadlock complements existing work on the downsides of director
independence, since independent directors are likely to have different views than insiders on
the board.12
       Our result that it can be optimal to not give shareholders all of the control over director
appointments, but to give some of it to incumbent directors, resonates with Burkart et al.'s

(1997) idea that it can be optimal to not give shareholders complete control over a manager's
actions. In their model, limiting shareholder control encourages the manager to make firm-
specific investments today, since he anticipates capturing the rents in the future. In ours, it
  10
     See Chemmanur and Fedaseyeu (2018), Fluck and Khanna (2011), Harris and Raviv (2008),
Levit and Malenko (2016), Malenko (2014), and Warther (1998); see also Baranchuk and Dybvig (2009) for
a model with multiple directors, but not strategic decision making.
  11
     See Adams et al. (2010) for a survey.
  12
     See Adams and Ferreira (2007), Kumar and Sivaramakrishnan (2008), Laux (2008), and Malenko (2014).



                                                  8
discourages directors from deadlocking the board today, since they do not anticipate getting
deadlocked in the future. Overall, we give a new perspective on shareholder control based
on directors' desire to maintain flexibility rather than managers' desire to expropriate rents.

       Layout. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 describes the baseline mechanism of
deadlock on the board and entrenched policies. Section 4 studies optimal board composition.
Section 5 examines who should have the power to appoint directors. Section 6 discusses
robustness and presents several extensions. Section 7 discusses empirical implications and
how to test them. Section 8 concludes.



2        Setup

There is a board comprising N > 2 directors, indexed by i  {1, ..., N }, who decide on a
policy at each of two dates, t  {1, 2}.13 At date t, there is an incumbent policy x
                                                                                  ^t-1 in
place and a single alternative policy xt available.14 The board decides whether to replace the
incumbent with the alternative policy by strict majority voting: if (strictly) more than N/2

of the directors vote for the alternative xt , then xt becomes the incumbent policy, x
                                                                                     ^t = xt ;
otherwise, the incumbent policy stays in place, x
                                                ^t = x
                                                     ^t-1 .
       Policies differ in two dimensions: in how much value they create for shareholders and in
how much they appeal to biased directors. Specifically, a policy is characterized by its value

v and type  . And a director is characterized by her bias toward a preferred policy type  .
(So  indicates both a type of policy and the type of directors it appeals to.) Whereas all
directors get utility from v , a  -biased director also gets additional benefit b from policies
  13
    See Section 6.2 for an infinite-horizon extension.
  14
    Thus, in each period, the board makes a decision between only two alternatives. This captures many
issues for which boards choose between binary outcomes. Indeed, the most important board decisions are
arguably whether to retain executives and whether to make an acquisition/divestment. Both of these are
inherently binary. Other decisions are effectively binary, or close to it, because boards are unlikely to vote
on the entire spectrum of possible alternatives, but only on shortlists proposed by executives, advisors, or
one of the directors. Finally, many important board decisions can be meaningfully approximated by binary
choices. For example, the decision of how much cash to pay out can be approximated by whether or not to
cut a dividend. Moreover, restricting attention to binary decisions allows us to focus on a simple decision
rule (majority voting) without running into the paradoxes inherent in preference aggregation (e.g., Arrow
(1950), Gibbard (1973), and Satterthwaite (1975)).

                                                      9
that match her type: if a policy x of type x is in place, a director i of type i gets
                                                 
                                                  b
                                                 
                                                            if x = i ,
                                        bi (x) =                                                              (1)
                                                  0
                                                 
                                                            otherwise.


(We discuss different interpretations of directors' biases in Section 6.1.) Using the shorthand
v
^t  v (^
       xt ), a director's payoff is


                                       v
                                       ^1 + bi (^
                                                x1 ) +  v
                                                        ^2 + bi (^
                                                                 x2 ) ,


where  is directors' rate of time preference. (We allow  to be larger than one, since date 2
may represent more calendar time than date 1.) Shareholders care about v , but not  . Their

payoff is v      ^2 , where their rate of time preference s need not coincide with directors'.15
          ^1 + s v
       We assume that the alternative policies' value and type are i.i.d. at date 1 and date
2, and we make the following assumptions on distributions. At each date t, the value v
of alternative xt is drawn from a uniform distribution on [0, 1], with distribution function

F (v )  max{0, min{1, v }}. We assume that there are N + 1 bias types  , allowing for one
that appeals to each of the N directors and another that appeals to none of them. Those
that appeal to directors are equally likely, each occurring with probability p, and the one
that appeals to none thus occurs with probability 1 - Np.
       Solution concept. We solve for stage-undominated subgame perfect equilibria,16 char-

acterized by sequentially rational strategies for each director i to vote for/against xt at date
t  {1, 2} given consistent beliefs, such that no one plays a weakly dominated strategy at
any date.
  15
     v need not represent the common value of all shareholders, but could rather represent the average value of
shareholders with heterogeneous biases, e.g., half of the shareholders could value policy x above v (x) and half
below. Thus, directors' biases could also reflect heterogeneous biases/preferences of individual shareholders.
See Section 6.1 for further discussion.
  16
     This refinement implies that directors act as if they have a non-zero probability of being pivotal. It serves
just to rule out trivial equilibria. Without it, there would always be an equilibrium in which all directors
voted against, for example. In this case, each director knows she is not pivotal, and that the incumbent will
stay in place no matter how she votes. Hence, voting against and voting for are both weak best responses.


                                                       10
    Board composition. We define the composition of the board by the distribution of bias
types among its directors. Specifically, we refer to a board as aligned if there is a majority
of directors with the same bias type, as diverse if there is not, and as fully diverse if there

are no two directors who share the same bias (we use this stronger notion of diversity only
in Section 5). At first, we assume that board composition stays the same at each date; later
on, we allow it to change between date 1 and date 2.



3     Diversity and Deadlock

We begin by analyzing a diverse board. We solve the model backward. At the last date, the

model is just a one-shot voting game. In a one-shot game, a diverse board always acts in
the interest of shareholders, replacing x
                                        ^1 with x2 if and only if v
                                                                  ^1 < v2 :

Proposition 1. (One-shot benchmark.) Suppose the board is diverse. At the last date,
the incumbent policy x
                     ^1 is retained if and only if it has higher value than the alternative x2 ,
i.e., if and only if v
                     ^1  v2 .

Intuitively, even though directors may have substantial biases, only a minority of them is
biased toward x
              ^1 or x2 on a diverse board. Thus, the pivotal director is effectively unbiased,
bi (^
    x1 ) = bi (x2 ) = 0, and hence compares only v
                                                 ^1 with v2 . Thus, at the final date, she always
votes for the policy shareholders prefer. The same intuition applies if directors are myopic

( = 0), because, for example, they serve only single-period terms, and therefore do not care
about the future. Again, the pivotal director acts as if she is unbiased:

Corollary 1. Suppose directors are myopic ( = 0). At any date, the statement of Propo-
sition 1 applies.

    These results are useful benchmarks, emphasizing that if directors are not concerned
about the future, then a diverse board is always good for shareholders. They also provide
the first step in solving the dynamic model, in which we will see that a diverse board might

                                               11
not be good for shareholders, because directors might not act in shareholders' interest at
date 1.
   Given the outcome at date 2, we can calculate any director's payoff from replacing/not

replacing x
          ^0 with x1 at date 1. Again, on a diverse board, only a minority of directors can
be biased toward x
                 ^0 or x1 . So the pivotal director is not biased toward either policy that is
available at date 1. She anticipates, however, that she may be biased toward the alternative
policy that becomes available at date 2. Thus, when she votes to determine x
                                                                           ^1 , she takes
into account that if her preferred type becomes available tomorrow, it will be put in place

if and only if v2 > v
                    ^1 (Proposition 1). And between x
                                                    ^0 and x1 , she votes for the policy x
                                                                                         ^1
with the value v
               ^1 that maximizes her forward-looking expected payoff:


             i's payoff        =v
                                ^1 +           v1 ) E v2 + pb v2  v
                                                                  ^1 + F (^
                                        1 - F (^                          v1 ) v
                                                                               ^1 .         (2)
                          ^1
                          x


With this expression, we can already see that there is a trade-off in increasing v
                                                                                 ^1 . On the one
hand, high v
           ^1 is good: it increases the common-value part of her payoff both today and (in
expectation) tomorrow. On the other hand, high v1 is bad: it decreases the expected private

benefit part of her payoff tomorrow. The reason is that if v
                                                           ^1 is high, other directors will want
to keep x
        ^1 in place tomorrow. Thus, they are likely to block her preferred policy tomorrow,
decreasing her chance of getting her associated private benefits b. Intuitively, since other
directors do not care about her private benefits, she wants to make the incumbent policy

unattractive to them, so that they want to replace it with her preferred policy when it is
available.
   Every director thus has the incentive to keep a low-quality policy in place today to
preserve the option to get her way in the future, when her preferred policy could become
available. This incentive can be strong enough that all directors vote to keep x
                                                                               ^0 in place.

To see this, substitute in for the uniform distribution, F (^
                                                            v1 ) = v
                                                                   ^1 , and compare director i's




                                                12
payoff with v
            ^1 = v1 and with v
                             ^1 = v
                                  ^0 . She votes to keep x
                                                         ^0 if

                               2                                       2
                           1+v^0                                  1 + v1
                  v
                  ^0 +           + (1 - v
                                        ^0 )pb        v1 +               + (1 - v1 )pb .                  (3)
                            2                                       2

Under the assumption that v
                          ^0 < v1 , we can divide by v1 - v
                                                          ^0 to get our first main result:

Proposition 2. (Deadlock.) Suppose the board is diverse and v
                                                            ^0 < v1 . The board retains

x
^0 if and only if
                                                 1 1
                                          pb      + (^
                                                     v0 + v1 ).                                           (4)
                                                  2

This result captures what we refer to as deadlock: the board keeps a bad policy in place, even

though all directors individually could prefer the alternative (since v1 > v
                                                                           ^0 ). The reason is
that when the director votes at date 1, when her preferred policy is not available, she wants
to preserve the option to get her way at date 2, when her preferred policy might be available.
But she knows that at date 2, the majority of directors will not care that it is her preferred
policy, and thus will vote to put it in place only if its quality exceeds that of the incumbent,

or v2 > v
        ^1 . Thus, she has the incentive to keep v
                                                 ^1 low to preserve her option to get her way
in the future.17
       This incentive is strong enough to outweigh the benefits of having a higher quality policy
in place today, and thus a higher expected quality policy in place tomorrow, whenever

condition (4) is satisfied. That is, a director keeps the incumbent in place despite its low
value whenever she has a strong bias (b is large), she is likely to have the option to put her
policy in place (p is large), or she values the future highly relative to the present ( is large).
But she replaces it with the alternative whenever the value of the alternative is high enough

(v1 is large) or the value of the incumbent is close to that of the alternative (given v
                                                                                       ^0 < v1 ,
increasing v
           ^0 makes it closer to v1 ; this decreases the option value created by replacing it).
       Observe that if biases are negative, b < 0, condition (4) is never satisfied, and there is no
  17
    This extends the real options intuition that it can be optimal to delay decisions that are hard to undo
(see, e.g., Dixit and Pindyck (1994)). Here, decisions today determine the preferences of the pivotal director
tomorrow, creating an endogenous reason that they can be hard to undo.


                                                     13
deadlock. The reason is that for negative biases, a director no longer wants to preserve the
possibility that her favorite policy is put in place in the future. Rather, she wants to avoid
the possibility that her least favorite policy is put in place in the future. And the way to

do that is to make the incumbent policy as attractive as possible to other directors, i.e., to
maximize the common value of the incumbent--to vote in shareholders' interest.
   The same mechanism that leads to deadlock--keeping a bad incumbent policy in place
when a good one is available--can lead to what we refer to as "anti-deadlock"--replacing
a good incumbent with a bad one. The mechanism is the same: to make it easier to get

her preferred policy in place in the future, a director may prefer to replace a high-quality
incumbent with a low-quality alternative.

Corollary 2. (Anti-deadlock.) Suppose the board is diverse and v
                                                               ^0  v1 . The board
replaces x
         ^0 with x1 (inefficiently) if and only if condition (4) is satisfied.

This result contrasts with Dziuda and Loeper's (2016) political economy model, in which
dynamic incentives always lead to too little change, and never too much. "Anti-deadlock"
arises when keeping the incumbent in place would be efficient. Thus, our model suggests that
slow-moving institutions, which make policies hard to replace, could be good. They could

prevent directors from putting bad policies in place for purely strategic reasons. Thus, our
model provides a rationale for the checks and balances expressly intended to create so-called
structural gridlock, and slow down political reform (veto rules, super-majority rules, and
judicial review are examples of such policies; see, e.g., Gerhardt (2013)).


3.1    Director Tenure

In our model, deadlock is the result of directors' voting strategically to increase their chances
of implementing their preferred policies later on. As the one-shot and myopic-director bench-
marks illustrate, directors on a diverse board always act in the interest of shareholders if
they do not care about future periods. Indeed, if directors' rate of time preference,  , is


                                               14
sufficiently small, condition (4) is never satisfied, and directors always vote for shareholders'
preferred policies:

Corollary 3. (Tenure.) Suppose that b > 0 and the board is diverse. Directors always act
                                                                                     1
in the interest of shareholders if and only if  is sufficiently small,  <            pb
                                                                                        .

In some circumstances,  can be viewed as a measure of directors' remaining tenure, and thus
our model can speak to the current debate on tenure limits and director elections. Formally,
 captures how much directors care about what policies are put in place in the future relative
to the present. Thus, if directors care mainly about policies implemented while they are on

the board--e.g., with career-concerns they care about how a company performs before they
leave and enter the labor market for directors18 --then it captures their expected remaining
tenure.19 Thus, if directors' tenure is formally limited by regulation or company bylaws,
then  can be interpreted directly as the time to the end of their term; if their tenure is

determined by reelection (as studied in Section 5), then  can be interpreted as the time to
the next election or the probability of being reappointed in it. With either interpretation,
our analysis points to a positive side of shorter tenure, suggesting term limits and frequent
elections could be good things (notwithstanding the benefits of long-termism, such as the

potential to support cooperation; see, e.g., Fudenberg and Maskin (1986)).
       The suggestion that director tenure should be limited resonates with current market
sentiment. Deeming director tenures too long, a number of institutional investors are now
voting against reappointments,20 leading commentators to suggest that director tenure is
"the next boardroom battle" (Libit and Freier (2016), p. 5; Francis and Lublin (2016)). The
  18
     Indeed, evidence in Fos et al. (2018) suggests that directors' incentive to boost current performance is
strongest near the ends of their terms.
  19
     Note that directors may care about policies implemented even after they are not on the board. For
example, if a director wants to implement CSR policies only for the social good they create, she will still
value having them implemented after she is no longer on the board. In this case, the effect of tenure is
attenuated, but can still hold as long as she cares more about policies implemented during her tenure than
afterward.
  20
     For example, BlackRock and State Street have voted against reappointments " (Libit and Freier (2016),
p. 5; Francis and Lublin (2016)). Moreover, many countries, such as the UK, France, Spain, Hong Kong,
and Singapore, have adopted some form of term limits for independent directors.


                                                     15
argument for shorter tenures has centered around the idea that after a long tenure, a director
may become too close to management and may also lack fresh ideas about the business (e.g.,
Katz and McIntosh (2014)). Thus, our analysis offers a new, complementary perspective on

the downside of long tenures: in anticipation of a long tenure, directors behave strategically,
creating deadlock. More generally, our analysis uncovers a cost of long-termism: it can
incentivize strategic voting, exacerbating deadlock. This provides a counterpoint to the
broadly negative view of corporate short-termism; see, e.g., the former Vice President Joe
Biden's opinion that short-termism "saps the economy" ("How Short-Termism Saps the

Economy," Wall Street Journal, September 27, 2016).



4     Alignment and Optimal Board Composition

We now turn to an aligned board, one in which a majority of directors share the same bias.
Unlike on a diverse board, deadlock does not arise. Rather, the board retains the current

policy if and only if it is preferred by the majority of directors:

Proposition 3. (Aligned board.) Suppose the board is aligned with preferred policy   .

It retains an incumbent x
                        ^t-1 with type x
                                       ^t-1 rather than replaces it with an alternative xt

with type xt whenever
                             v
                             ^t-1 + 1{x         b  vt + 1{ =  } b.
                                      ^ t -1 =  }         xt                               (5)

This result captures the costs and benefits of alignment. On the one hand, an aligned
board always acts with bias. For example, it replaces high-quality policies that are not the
majority's preferred type with low-quality policies that are. On the other hand, unlike a
diverse board, it does not suffer from deadlock due to strategic voting (cf. Proposition 2).
The reason is that, as long as board composition does not change over time, directors that

are in the majority today know they will also be in the majority in the future. Thus, they
have no incentive to vote strategically to change the incentives of future pivotal directors,
given they know they will be pivotal themselves.

                                               16
   Given this trade-off, could shareholders be better off with an aligned board than a diverse
one? Could the bias be a small price to pay for avoiding deadlock? The next proposition
says that the answer is yes if and only if directors are sufficiently biased.

Proposition 4. (Shareholder optimal board composition.) For any initial in-
cumbent policy x
               ^0 , shareholders are better off with a diverse board if directors' biases are
sufficiently small and with an aligned board if they are sufficiently large (and x
                                                                                 ^0 is not the
preferred type of the majority of directors on the aligned board).

If biases are sufficiently small, then directors on a diverse board vote in shareholders' interest

(condition (4) is never satisfied). Intuitively, the option to get their way in the future cannot
be appealing enough to outweigh the cost of keeping a bad policy in place today. In contrast,
directors on an aligned board do not act in shareholders' interest even if biases are small.
Their choices are always somewhat distorted by their biases. Hence, for small biases, board

diversity is always a good thing.
   If biases are large, then directors on a diverse board vote against shareholders' interest
(condition (4) is satisfied). Intuitively, getting their way in the future is so appealing that
they are willing to pay a high cost to preserve the option to do so. Hence, they are willing to

keep even the lowest quality policies in place today, no matter what the alternative is. But
increasing directors' biases on an aligned board does not affect their behavior as severely.
The reason is that their behavior is distorted only if a policy of their preferred type is
available. Since they know they will always be able to get their way in the future, they do
not strategically manipulate other policies. Hence, for large biases, board diversity can be a

bad thing, and even be worse than completely biased alignment.
   The relative costs of diversity are greatest when directors on a diverse board have the
strongest incentive to vote strategically in anticipation of future votes, namely when they
care the most about the future, or  is high. Given  can be interpreted as director tenure

(subject to the caveats discussed above), we have our next result:



                                               17
Lemma 1. Increasing "director tenure"  increases the relative benefit of board alignment.

    Our analysis so far underscores the trade-off between diverse and aligned boards. On a
diverse board the pivotal director is not biased toward either the incumbent or alternative,

but she votes strategically in case she might be biased toward one or the other in the future.
In contrast, on an aligned board, directors are all biased, but do not vote strategically. Is
there a way to have the best of both worlds, and reduce both bias and strategic voting? In
the next section, we examine a practical institution that partially achieves this goal: giving
incumbent directors the power to appoint new directors.



5     Who Should Appoint Directors?

In practice, board composition is not constant. It changes as new directors join the board.
How does this affect how current directors vote? Does it mitigate or exacerbate deadlock?
Does the answer depend on how directors are appointed? In particular, does it depend on
who has the power to appoint new directors, shareholders or incumbent directors?

    With our model, we are poised to address these questions. We need only to incorporate
the possibility that some new directors join the board (with everything else identical to the
baseline model). To do so, we consider a fully diverse board after the date-1 vote on policies.
To capture the possibility of both shareholder and incumbent director power to appoint new

directors, we assume that, at date 2, the board acts in the interest of shareholders with
probability 1 -  (e.g., because it stays diverse; see Proposition 1) and acts in the interest of
some directors with probability  (e.g., because it becomes aligned; see Proposition 3). Thus,
we interpret   [0, 1] as directors' power to appoint new directors. If  is strictly between

zero and one, then shareholders and directors share power, as in the current institution in
which incumbent directors nominate new ones and shareholders vote on the nominations.
Finally, we assume that, when directors have power to appoint, new directors are aligned
                                                           N
with incumbent director i with probability i , where       i=1   i = 1. If all directors have the


                                              18
same power, then i = 1/N . But in practice, directors typically do not have the same power,
for example, because some are on the nominating committee that proposes new directors
and some are not, so i = j for i = j . In this case, suppose, without loss, that the ranking

of power coincides with the indexing of directors, i.e., 1  2  · · ·  N . We denote the
lower median by m :=  N +1  (which will be the power of the pivotal director).21
                                2

       To make our interpretation concrete, suppose, for a moment, that there are three direc-
tors, i  {1, 2, 3}, each of whom prefers a different type of policy. At date 1, they vote on
whether to replace x
                   ^0 with x1 . And then two new directors join the board. With probability

1 -  , shareholders choose these new directors, so the board stays diverse and maximizes
shareholders' interests at date 2. With probability  , the incumbent board chooses new di-
rectors. In this case, director i chooses new directors with probability i , and thus optimally
appoints directors of the same type as himself. Thus, with probability i a majority of

directors (three out of five) have the same preferences as director i, so the board is aligned
at date 2.
       We now proceed to analyze how deadlock depends on directors' power to appoint. We
then ask whether it is optimal for shareholders to cede power to appoint to directors. Finally,

we investigate how shareholders should optimally allocate power among directors.
       To begin, suppose that policy x
                                     ^0 is in place and x1 is available, where neither is any
director's preferred type, and x1 is better than x
                                                 ^0 in the sense that v1 > v
                                                                           ^0 . Does giving the
board power to appoint affect how directors vote? We find that the answer is yes. Giving
the board more power to appoint can mitigate deadlock, inducing directors to replace x
                                                                                     ^0 .

Specifically, given a fixed distribution of power among directors (i.e., given a fixed {i }i ),
giving more power to appoint to the board (i.e., increasing  ) can make x1 more attractive
for directors:

                                         1
                          ^0 and m - p + b
Lemma 2. Suppose b > v1 > v                > 0. Increasing power to appoint  reduces
deadlock.
  21
     x is the "floor" of x, i.e. greatest integer less than or equal to x. Likewise, x is the "ceiling" of x,
i.e. the least integer greater or equal to than x.

                                                     19
Intuitively, a director only deadlocks the board to make it easier to get her way in the future.
Thus, the intuition is akin to that in Proposition 3 and Proposition 4: knowing the board
could be aligned with her preference--knowing that she could get her way regardless of the

policy that is in place at date 2--weakens her incentive to keep an easily replaceable policy
in place. However, this comes with the cost of an aligned board, namely worse outcomes at
date 2. The next result summarizes how much power shareholders should optimally give to
the incumbent directors to manage the trade-off between avoiding deadlock at date 1 and
not getting their preferred policy at date 2, for a fixed distribution of director power: they

should either set  =   or  = 0.

                                                                             1
                                                    ^0 , m - p +
Proposition 5. (Power to appoint.) Suppose b > v1 > v                        b
                                                                                 > 0, and

                                                        1
                                  1        2b m - p + b
                            :=        1-                      (0, 1).                       (6)
                                  p        2 m b - v
                                                   ^0 - v1

It is optimal for shareholders to give incumbent directors positive power to appoint   when-
ever
                                 s                    s
                          v1 +                   2
                                   1 + (1 - p  )v1 v
                                                   ^0   1+v
                                                          ^02
                                                                                            (7)
                                 2                    2

and no power otherwise.

This result implies that (under the conditions of the proposition) shareholders should not
give incumbent directors full power over new appointments. Rather, shareholders should

give them just enough power over the future to prevent deadlock today, and still retain some
power to prevent incumbent directors from implementing low-quality policies in the future.
The reason is that, by ceding power to the incumbent director, shareholders can overcome a
commitment problem: they effectively commit not to block her preferred policies at date 2,
which can improve date 1 outcomes. As a result, they can enjoy the benefit of a fully biased

board without bearing all of the cost.
   Should the power to appoint be distributed among all directors? Or concentrated within
a subset of them? So far, we have taken the distribution of {i }i as given. Now, we show that

                                                20
if shareholders can choose  and i jointly, they want to concentrate the power to appoint
with half of the directors.

Proposition 6. (Director power.) Suppose the conditions of Proposition 5 are satisfied
               N +1   -1
with m =        2
                           . The optimal distribution of director power is to give no power to
                        -1
directors 1, . . . ,  N 2   and an equal amount of power to each of the others.

Intuitively, shareholders want to give directors just enough power to prevent them from

voting strategically. To do so, they do not need to incentivize all directors, but only a
majority of them. Hence, they optimally give half the directors enough power to induce
them not to deadlock the board, and no power to the others.
   Discussion. Overall, the results in this section provide a counterpoint to Adrian Cad-
bury's views quoted in the Introduction. They imply that the institution by which share-

holders cede some power to incumbent directors can be optimal in some circumstances, and
hence offer an explanation of why we see it in practice, even though Cadbury and others
seem to find it perverse.
   Still, granting directors the power to appoint could seem like a costly way to resolve

deadlock. For example, would it be cheaper for shareholders to use a compensation contract
to induce directors to do the right thing, rather than to give them the power to appoint new
directors, who could make value-destroying decisions? If shareholders knew that directors
would not act in their interest, then a compensation contract indeed might be preferable.

However, as we discuss in Section 6.1, directors' biases could reflect shareholders'. Thus,
although giving one director control over the board is bad for some shareholders, it could
still be good for others. More generally, if shareholders knew directors' preferences and
beliefs, they might not need to allocate control over policies to them in the first place.
They might be better off contracting over specific policy decisions. However, in reality,

directors have relatively simple compensation contracts (typically just cash and equity), and
make decisions by voting in board meetings. Presumably, directors are allocated control
rights precisely because frictions such as asymmetric information, unforeseen contingencies,

                                                21
imperfect contractual enforcement, legal uncertainty, and bounded rationality make efficient
contracting infeasible, i.e., the Coase theorem does not apply.
       Our results also give new perspectives on two important policy issues. The first is stag-

gered director elections. Our results could point to a possible benefit of this policy, which
prevents shareholders "from replacing a majority of the board of directors without the pas-
sage of at least two annual elections" (Bebchuk and Cohen (2005), p. 410). Since this is
a question about multiple strategic directors interacting over time, something that has not
been modeled, the literature has been largely silent on it.22 But, with fixed  , as in Lemma

2, our model may be able to say something about it. The reason is that we model incum-
bent directors who anticipate being joined on the board by new directors with uncertain
biases. This is analogous (and sometimes equivalent) to modeling the key feature of stag-
gered boards, namely that only part of a staggered board is up for election at a time. With

this interpretation, our findings imply that uncertainty about the future of the board can
mitigate deadlock on a diverse board, because directors who are not up for election are less
likely to block policies today if they anticipate being joined by others with common pref-
erences after the elections. The second relevant policy issue is proxy access. Our results

could point to a possible cost of this policy, which increases shareholder power over the
composition of the board (see, e.g., Akyol et al. (2012) and Bhandari et al. (2017)). Fur-
thermore, our results apply if there is an executive director on the board, and hence explain
why CEOs often exert influence over the appointment of new board members in practice
(e.g., Hermalin and Weisbach (1998), Shivdasani and Yermack (1999)).

       But, in practice, when the CEO chooses directors, he is effectively hiring someone who
could fire him in the future. If he vies for directors who will not fire him in the future, what
  22
    Much of the literature on staggered boards focuses on their effect of lengthening directors' terms, and
the associated costs and benefits. Notably, it emphasizes that, on the one hand, staggered boards can be
harmful, by preventing efficient takeovers and proxy fights and entrenching managers (e.g., Bebchuk et al.
(2002)). But, on the other hand, they can be beneficial, by allowing to extract a higher offer price from
potential bidders (e.g., Stulz (1988)) and by encouraging long-term investments by the firm's managers and
relationship-specific investments by the firm's stakeholders (e.g., Cremers et al. (2017)). We abstract from
this effect and zero in on a different, less-discussed aspect: whether the board is staggered or not affects
directors' strategic interaction over time.


                                                    22
board composition does he prefer? Does he always prefer directors who are biased toward
him? Our analysis suggests that a low-quality CEO might actually prefer directors who are
biased toward other types of CEOs. The reason is that adding such directors to the board

can make it more diverse, which can create deadlock and thus decrease the likelihood that
the low-quality CEO is replaced. Indeed, a board that is aligned toward his type would
unilaterally decide to replace him whenever the available alternative is better,23 whereas a
diverse board could keep him in place exactly because the alternative is better (Proposition
2).

       Finally, the results above provide a stark example of how our mechanism contrasts with
that in Austen-Smith et al. (2019) and Dziuda and Loeper (2016). To see why, suppose that
the board is diverse today, but there is one director, say i, who will be part of a majority
for sure in the future, and hence an effective dictator (i.e.,  = 1 and i = 1). In our

model, deadlock can occur, because the pivotal director today can manipulate director i's
alternatives in the future: by keeping a weak policy in place, today's pivotal director makes
future alternatives of her own preferred type relatively more attractive to director i. But in
Austen-Smith et al.'s and Dziuda and Loeper's models, deadlock cannot occur, because the

same policies are available at each date. Hence, the pivotal director today cannot manipulate
director i's alternatives in the future: no matter what policy is chosen today, the same choice
set is available to director i in the future (all the pivotal director can affect is the default
outcome in the event of a fifty-fifty split, which is irrelevant if i becomes a dictator).



6        Robustness and Extensions

6.1        Interpretation of Biases and Diversity

Heterogeneous biases and diversity. Heterogeneous director biases are the key driver
of our results. These biases capture realistic heterogeneity among directors. For example,
  23
       To be precise, "better" here means "preferred by the aligned board" in the sense of Proposition 3.


                                                       23
the interests of inside directors can be different from those of outside directors. In start-
ups, founding entrepreneurs often sit on boards beside capital providers like VCs, which
have different objectives for the corporation. Indeed, in 2017 deadlock was so severe on

the board of Applied Cleantech, a technology start-up, that the investors on the board
sued the founder for control. In mature firms, equity blockholders often sit on the board.
These could be heirs to family firms, with an interest in preserving their legacies, or activist
investors, with interests in preserving their reputations for fast value-enhancement. Other
kinds of director heterogeneity are common. For example, in Germany it is common for

directors to represent stakeholders such as bank creditors or employees/unions. Moreover,
even independent directors, those without a material relationship to the corporation, have
their own opinions and conflicts of interest, e.g., due to connections with the CEO24 or their
own career concerns.25

       Director heterogeneity can also reflect heterogeneity among shareholders themselves, who
can have different preferences, e.g., due to different beliefs and portfolio positions. In close
corporations, diverse shareholders sit directly on the board. And even in public corporations,
diverse shareholders appoint directors to represent their diverse interests. In this case, the

quality v (xt ) should not be interpreted as the value of the firm's shareholder equity. Rather,
it can be interpreted as the average value of all shareholders, including any private benefits
they might get, e.g., due to control or perks. For example, suppose one group of shareholders
values a policy x at 5 and another at 10. In this case, they could be represented by two
directors, i  {1, 2}, on an aligned board, each of whom has common value v (x) = 5 and

common bias bi (x) = 2.5.
       But, if shareholders themselves have heterogeneous valuations, there is another inter-
pretation of director preferences, in which director biases reflect shareholder biases. In this
  24
     Independent directors can be connected to the CEO because, for example, the CEO appointed them
(Coles et al. (2014)), they have overlapping social networks (Kramarz and Thesmar (2013)), or they serve
on interlocking boards with the CEO (Hallock (1997)).
  25
     Fos et al. (2018) show that time to re-election affects directors' decisions, implying they care about their
own careers, not just maximizing shareholder value.



                                                       24
case, the two groups of shareholders in the example above would be represented by two
directors on a diverse board, with biases corresponding to the shareholders', i.e. they could
have common value v (x) = 5 and heterogeneous biases b1 (x) = 0 and b2 (x) = 5. Our analy-

sis suggests that these two ways of representing shareholders are not equivalent. If they are
represented by an aligned board, there is no deadlock, whereas if they are represented by a
diverse board, there could be (see Section 4). This suggests that an aligned board can be
efficient if directors have the appropriate bias. But directors with this bias may not exist,
or be impossible to find. It may be easier to find directors with small, but different biases,

in which case a diverse board is efficient (Proposition 4).
   Overall, our results highlight novel costs and benefits of diversity, which shareholders and
policy makers can take into account when they determine how board composition should be
chosen or regulated. But our set-up, in which diversity represents heterogeneity in directors'

biases, could understate the benefits of diversity. Although Proposition 4 implies that diver-
sity helps to keep (small) biases in check in our model, it could have other benefits in reality.
For example, directors with diverse backgrounds, experience, and expertise could have more
innovative ideas for new proposals or better information about existing ones. Thus, diversity

could help boards implement better policies for reasons outside our model.
   Preferences vs. beliefs. We have described directors' biases as reflecting differences in
their preferences (i.e., tastes) over policies. But they can also reflect differences in beliefs.
To see why, consider the following setup, which is equivalent to ours. At the end of each
date, the policy xt either "succeeds," generating value V , or "fails," generating zero. If the

policy is type  , a director who is not  -biased believes it succeeds with probability 0 (xt ),
such that her value of the policy coincides with shareholder value, i.e., 0 (xt )V = v (xt ),
so 0 (xt ) = v (xt )/V . If the director is  -biased, she believes it succeeds with probability
 (xt ) > 0 (xt ), such that her value of the policy is v (xt ) + b, i.e.,  (xt )V = v (xt ) + b or

                                                           b
                                       (xt ) = 0 (xt ) +     .                                   (8)
                                                           V


                                                 25
6.2    Infinite Horizon

We now ask whether our results are specific to the two-date setup. We show that a version
of deadlock can arise even if there is no final date in which directors anticipate that their

preferred policies will probably get through. Even with an infinite horizon, directors do
strategic blocking, keeping Pareto-dominated policies in place, as long as it improves their
chances to get their way in the future.
   We focus on the special case of our baseline setup in which there are only two directors

and the initial incumbent x
                          ^0 is "very bad," in the sense that v
                                                              ^0 = 0 and it is neither of
the directors' preferred type. We also assume there are only two types of alternatives, one
appealing to each director, so that p = 1/2. Finally, we require   (0, 1) to ensure that
directors' value functions are well defined.
   We now show that, if biases are sufficiently large, a form of deadlock arises. Specifically,

there is no Markov equilibrium in which x
                                        ^0 is always replaced immediately, even though it
is Pareto dominated by any alternative:

Proposition 7. (Infinite horizon.) Suppose   (0, 1), there are two directors, two types
of alternatives, and x
                     ^0 is "very bad" as described above. If

                                                1
                                          b>      ,                                          (9)
                                               1-

                                                   ¯  (0, 1) such that
then any Markov equilibrium is defined by a cutoff V


  1. x                            ¯ , in which case it is replaced;
     ^0 stays in place until vt > V

  2. after x
           ^0 is replaced, policies are replaced if and only if the alternative is a higher value
      policy of the same type.




                                               26
7        Empirical Implications

Turning to our model's empirical content, we discuss empirical proxies for our model's key
quantities and empirical predictions corresponding to its main results.
       Proxies. Boards meet in the privacy of the boardroom without disclosing their minutes.
Hence, in most countries deadlock is rarely revealed publicly outside of extreme cases, such as

those that wind up in court or result in director resignations.26 One exception is China, where
firms must publicly disclose if their independent directors vote in dissent (e.g., Jiang et al.
(2016)).27
       Testing for deadlock directly requires the kind of detailed data available in China. But

even absent such data, our model suggests a way to test for deadlock indirectly: deadlock
is manifested in boards' retaining incumbent policies, even when superior alternatives are
available (Proposition 2). Applied to boards' key decisions, CEO turnover and corporate
strategy, deadlock can be measured/proxied for by the following:

    (i) longer CEO tenure;

 (ii) longer periods to appoint a new CEO after a CEO is terminated (as with Uber's
         deadlocked board);

 (iii) slow changes in strategy in response to a changing environment, even at the expense
         of the firm's competitiveness (as is common in corporations, Hannan and Freeman

         (1984), Hopkins et al. (2013));

 (iv) more persistent corporate policies.

       A number of our predictions require proxies not only for deadlock, but also for directors'
"biases" b representing their preferences/private benefits or beliefs (Subsection 6.1). Proxies
  26
     Translation company Transperfect and startup Applied Cleantech are examples of deadlock cases that
have gone all the way to court. Agrawal and Chen (2017) and Marshall (2013) analyze director resignations
resulting from board disputes, which US companies must disclose by a 2004 SEC law.
  27
     Of course, companies typically want to keep such disagreements private, so boards that disclose their
directors' voting in dissent should make up only a fraction of deadlocked boards.

                                                   27
for directors' preferences include the stakeholders they represent--directors could represent
employee unions, outside creditors, corporate executives, and a variety of equity blockholders,
such as VC investors, activists, and founding families; these diverse stakeholders are likely all

to have different preferences over/private benefits from different company policies. Proxies
for directors' beliefs include diversity in directors' experience, expertise, backgrounds, or
skills, all of which are likely to lead to different views on the best policy for a company.
      Predictions. Our main results correspond to testable predictions on the determinants
of deadlock. In our model, deadlock is entirely the result of dynamic interactions among

directors. It does not occur in a one-shot setting (cf. Proposition 1). Thus, deadlock is
relatively more likely to arise over policies with long durations, such as long-term investment
projects or employment contracts.

Prediction 1. All else equal, deadlock is more likely in decisions over longer-term policies.

      Similarly, deadlock can only arise when directors remaining tenures are sufficiently long,
so that they vote strategically in anticipation of future votes (cf. Corollary 3).

Prediction 2. All else equal, deadlock is more likely when directors' remaining tenures are
longer.

      In contrast to much of the literature, which focuses on directors' past tenure, this predic-
tion underscores the costs and benefits of directors' future tenure. Hence, our model predicts
that deadlock is less likely to arise if many directors are likely to leave the board soon, e.g.,
because they are nearing retirement or they are reaching the legal maximum tenure in ju-

risdictions where such a maximum exists, such as the UK, France, Spain, Hong Kong, and
Singapore (e.g., Katz and McIntosh (2014)).
      Our analysis also shows that deadlock is more likely to arise on a diverse board because
on an aligned board, directors do not have incentives to vote strategically (cf. Propositions
2 and 3). This result is consistent with the following empirical findings.28
 28
      In addition to the finance papers listed below, a number of papers in the management literature find


                                                    28
  (i) Bernile et al. (2018) construct a board diversity index and show that a high index is
      associated with persistent corporate policies.

 (ii) Goodstein et al. (1994) show that diversity in directors' occupational or professional
      backgrounds is associated with less strategic change, such as fewer divestitures and
      reorganizations.

 (iii) Knyazeva et al. (2013) and Adams et al. (2018) find that diversity in directors' skills,

      expertise, and incentives is associated with lower firm value.

 (iv) Volkova (2018) finds that blockholder diversity has a negative influence on company

      value and operations, since proposed policy changes receive little support (if blockhold-
      ers have their representatives on the board, diversity in blockholders' preferences will
      translate into diversity in directors' preferences).

    Some other models could be consistent with the above evidence as well. For example, in a
behavioral model, disagreement alone could lead directors to keep Pareto-dominated policies
in place--they might feel aggrieved if they do not get their way, and thus want to spite

other directors, analogously to the aggrieved contracting parties in Hart and Moore (2008).
In contrast, in our rational model, disagreement alone is not enough: directors are strategic
only because they might disagree (due to diversity) in the future. Hence, the distinguishing
prediction of our model is that it is the interaction of board composition and measures of

dynamic interactions between directors that gives rise to deadlock. Specifically:

Prediction 3. All else equal, board diversity makes deadlock more likely, and the effect
of diversity is stronger when directors' remaining tenures are longer and decisions involve
longer-term policies.

    In our model, directors strategically block policies preferred by other directors to improve

their future bargaining positions. Hence, given data on individual director voting (as is
that there are costs to diversity. See, e.g., Adams (2016), Knight et al. (1999), Lau and Murnighan (1998),
and Milliken and Martins (1996).

                                                    29
available for Chinese firms), we have the following testable prediction:

Prediction 4. All else equal, a director is more likely to vote against a policy if

  (i) there are other directors on the board who especially favor this alternative;

 (ii) these other directors have longer expected remaining tenure;

(iii) the director himself has longer expected remaining tenure.

This prediction reflects the real-options intuition at the core of our model: to preserve
the option to get their way in the future, directors want to ensure that other directors
are dissatisfied with the status quo. This prediction contrasts with other theory models of

boards, making it useful to distinguish our model from them.
      Practically, it suggests that a director is relatively likely to vote against a CEO candidate
nominated by an influential blockholder on the board, since the blockholder is likely to
nominate someone she is biased toward. For example, hedge fund activist campaigns are

increasingly likely to include the demand to replace the incumbent CEO. Our model suggests
that directors on the board are relatively likely to vote against the activist's candidate if
the activist has (or will get) board representation. Something like this happened at Uber
during its CEO search in the summer of 2017, when some directors were opposed to hiring
Meg Whitman because they viewed her as "potentially compromised by her strong affiliation

with Benchmark," a VC blockholder with a seat on the board.29
      Our model also speaks to when deadlock is most costly. Almost by definition, the costs
of deadlock--of keeping policy x
                               ^0 in place--are highest when the incumbent policy is the
worst. As a result, combatting deadlock by making the board less diverse should be most

beneficial when the value of replacing the incumbent x
                                                     ^0 is the highest. This could be when
firms have made poor decisions in the past, so x
                                               ^0 is a truly damaging policy for them, or
when competition is high, so firms need to respond quickly to environmental changes, since
having a bad policy x
                    ^0 in place can quickly decrease their market share.
 29
      "Inside Uber's Wild Ride in a Search of a New C.E.O." New York Times, August 29, 2017.

                                                   30
Prediction 5. All else equal, the more costly it is to keep the incumbent policy in place, the
more the adverse effect of diversity decreases firm value.

Two things that are useful to test this prediction are stock price reactions to director ap-

pointments and shareholder support in director elections. Indeed, Cai et al. (2019) find the
following consistent evidence: in more competitive environments, in which the cost of keeping
a bad x0 in place is especially high, prices react positively when new directors are connected
to the incumbent board and shareholders are more likely to support connected directors.
    Finally, a 2017 shake-up on General Electric's board also resonates with this prediction.

The company massively reshuffled its board to create an aligned group focused on its core
growth areas. In line with our model, its rationale was to streamline decision making to get
out of the trouble it was in. Indeed, according to the Wall Street Journal,


      A housecleaning at General Electric Co.'s board...aims to create a board that is
      more closely aligned with CEO John Flannery's strategy. [...] The unusual shake-
      out...shows the depths of the problems that developed on the board's watch...shares
      of the one-time industrial bellwether have plunged 42% this year. Last week, the
      company slashed profit targets and cut its dividend by half ("GE Housecleaning
      Will Alter Board's Makeup," Wall Street Journal, November 19, 2017).




8     Conclusion

We presented a model of a corporate board comprising multiple, heterogenous directors
interacting over time. Despite its realism, modeling such dynamic group decision making
is new to the literature on corporate boards. And it leads to new, empirically relevant

results. It generates deadlock on the board, which causes pervasive entrenchment, and
hence explains why corporations are often too slow to turn over their top management and
to adapt their strategies to a changing competitive environment. And it gives a new take
on board composition, director appointments, director tenure, staggered boards, and proxy

access.

                                             31
A      Proofs

A.1     Proof of Proposition 1

First, recall that the definition of a diverse board is that no majority is biased toward any

one policy.
    Now, the result follows from the fact that the majority of directors is not biased toward
either the incumbent x
                     ^1 or the alternative x2 . Thus, the majority, which controls the decision,
cares only about the common values v
                                   ^1 and v2 , and votes accordingly.


A.2     Proof of Corollary 1

Given  = 0, directors in any period act as if it is the last period. Hence, the result follows
immediately from Proposition 1.


A.3     Proof of Proposition 2

The derivation is in the text.


A.4     Proof of Corollary 2

The derivation coincides with that of Proposition 2. In this case, the board makes an

inefficient decision if (3) is violated. Dividing by v1 - v
                                                          ^0 < 0 gives (4).


A.5     Proof of Corollary 3

The result follows immediately from the condition of Proposition 2 with v
                                                                        ^0 = v1 = 0.


A.6     Proof of Proposition 3

On an aligned board, there is a majority of directors who know they will always be in the

majority. Thus, they act like a (biased) unitary decision maker maximizing her expected

                                               32
payoff at each date, as per the expression in the proposition.


A.7     Proof of Proposition 4

A.7.1    Aligned board

Consider an aligned board in which a majority of directors are  -biased. We consider two
cases, first that x1 is not type  and second that it is.
    Aligned board, case 1. x1 is not type  . In this case, x1 is put in place at Date 1 if
and only if v1  v
                ^0 . If x1 is put in place, v
                                            ^1 = v1 ; otherwise, v
                                                                 ^1 = v
                                                                      ^0 .

    Following the board's choice at Date 1, there are two possibilities at Date 2: (i) x2 is
type  , in which case x2 is put in place if and only if b + v2 > v
                                                                 ^1 . And, (ii) x2 is of another
type   , in which case x2 is put in place if and only if v2 > v
                                                              ^1 .
    Now we compute shareholders' expected payoff conditional on x1 not being type  .




E payoff x1 is type   = 1 - F (^
                               v0 ) E v1 + s (1 - p) 1 - F (v1 ) E v2 v2 > v1 + F (v1 )v1


                           + p 1 - F (v1 - b) E v2 v2 + b > v1 + F (v1 - b)v1       v1 > v
                                                                                         ^0


                           + F (^
                                v0 )E v                     v0 ) E v2 v2 > v
                                      ^0 + s (1 - p) 1 - F (^              ^0 + F (^
                                                                                   v0 )^
                                                                                       v0


                           + p 1 - F (^
                                      v0 - b) E v2 v2 + b > v
                                                            ^0 + F (^
                                                                    v0 - b)^
                                                                           v0       v1 < v
                                                                                         ^0

                                                                                           (10)




                                                33
Calculating, we get

                                
                                     2
                                 1+v^0   s
                                
                                                        3
                                       +   4 + 2(1 - p)^
                                                       v0  - pb2 (3 - 2b)            if v
                                                                                        ^0 < b
                                
                                  2      6
                                
                           
   E payoff x1 is type        =
                                
                                     2
                                 1+v^0   s
                                
                                       +   4 - 3pb2 + 2^
                                                       v03
                                                                                     if v
                                                                                        ^0 > b
                                  2      6
                                                                                                 (11)

   Aligned board, case 2. x1 is type  . In this case, x1 is put in place at Date 1 if and
only if v1 + b  v
                ^0 . If x1 is put in place, v
                                            ^1 = v1 ; otherwise, v
                                                                 ^1 = v
                                                                      ^0 .
   Following the board's choice at Date 1, there are four possibilities at Date 2: (i) x1 is
put in place and x2 is type  , in which case x2 is put in place if and only if v2 > v1 . (ii) x1 is
put in place and x2 is not type  , in which case x2 is put in place if and only if v2 > v1 + b.

(iii) x0 is retained and x2 is type  , in which case x2 is put in place if and only if v2 + b > v
                                                                                                ^0 .
And, (iv) x0 is retained and x2 is not type  , in which case x2 is put in place if and only if
v2 > v
     ^0 .
   Now we compute shareholders' expected payoff conditional on x1 being type  .




E payoff x1 is type  = 1 - F (^
                              v0 - b) E v1 + s p 1 - F (v1 ) E v2 v2 > v1 + F (v1 )v1


                           + (1 - p) 1 - F (v1 + b) E v2 v2 > v1 + b + F (v1 + b)v1          v1 > v
                                                                                                  ^0 - b


                           + F (^
                                v0 - b)E v               v0 - b) E v2 v2 > v
                                         ^0 + s p 1 - F (^                 ^0 - b + F (^
                                                                                       v0 - b)^
                                                                                              v0


                                            v0 ) E v2 v2 > v
                           + (1 - p) 1 - F (^              ^0 + F (^
                                                                   v0 )^
                                                                       v0        v1 < v
                                                                                      ^0 - b .

                                                                                                 (12)




                                                34
   Calculating, we get

                       
                       
                        1 s
                       
                                                    2
                        2 + 6 (4 - (1 - p)(3 - 2b)b )                                   if v
                                                                                           ^0 < b
                       
E payoff x1 is type  =
                       
                        1                  s
                       
                                 2
                        2 (1 + v
                               ^0  - b2 ) + (4 + 2^3
                                                  v0  + 4pb3 - 3b2 + 3pb2 - 6pb2 v
                                                                                 ^0 ) if v ^0 > b
                       
                                           6
                                                                                     (13)

   Now, we have to take the expectation over the two cases to get shareholders' ex ante
expected payoff:


 E [ payoff ] =(1 - p)E payoff x1 is type   + pE payoff x1 is type 
                
                                2
                   1 + (1 - p)^v0    s
                
                                  +     4 - 2p(1 - p)(3 - 2b)b2 + 2(1 - p)2 v   3
                                                                               ^0      if v
                                                                                          ^0 < b
                
                          2          6
                
              =
                
                        2
                   1+v ^0  - pb2 s
                
                                 +     4 + 4p2 b3 - 6pb2 + 6p2 b2 - 6p2 b2 v
                                                                           ^0 + 2^ 3
                                                                                  v0   if v
                                                                                          ^0 > b
                        2           6
                                                                                              (14)


A.7.2    Diverse board

Define
                                                      2
                                       v1 := 2pb -      -v
                                                         ^0 ,                                 (15)
                                                      

as the value of v1 that makes inequality (4) bind. Recall from Proposition 2 that if v1 -v
                                                                                         ^0  0,
                                            
then x0 is (inefficiently) retained if v1  v1 . Similarly, recall from Corollary 2 that if
                                                        
v1 - v
     ^0 < 0, then x0 is (efficiently) retained if v1 > v1 .
                                     
   Notice that this implies that if v1 is small, the board always acts in the interest of
                                                                               
shareholders, putting x1 in place if and only if v1 > v
                                                      ^0 and, in contrast, if v1 is large, the
board always acts against the interest of shareholders, putting x1 in place if and only if
                       
v1  v
    ^0 . Intuitively, v1 is high when directors' biases b are high, and when b is high, the

board is deadlocked or "anti-deadlocked."

                                                 35
   We proceed to calculate shareholders' ex ante payoff. The payoff depends on the region
      
that v1 is in. In particular, we have four cases:

      
 (1) v1 < 0,

      
 (2) v1  [0, v
             ^0 ),

      
 (3) v1  [^
          v0 , 1),

      
 (4) v1  1.

              
   Case (1): v1 < 0. In this case, Proposition 2 and Corollary 2 imply that the board
retains x
        ^0 if and only if it is optimal for shareholders, or v
                                                             ^0  v1 . The expected payoff is the
average over two subcases depending on whether x0 is retained or not at Date 1:

(1a) v1  v
         ^0 : In this case, x0 is retained. The expected shareholder payoff as of Date 1 is


                            E [ payoff ] =^
                                          v0 + s (1 - F (^
                                                         v0 )) E [v2 |v2  v
                                                                          ^0 ] + F (^
                                                                                    v0 )^
                                                                                        v0
                                                   2                                         (16)
                                               1+v^0
                                       =^
                                        v0 + s       .
                                                2

(1b) v1 > v
          ^0 : In this case, x1 is put in place. The expected payoff as of Date 1 is, similarly,
               1+v12
      v1 + s     2
                     .

   Taking the weighted average over these two cases gives the ex ante expected payoff:

                                            2                                  2
                                      1+v  ^0                             1 + v1
    E [ payoff ] = v
                   ^0 E v
                        ^0 + s                v1  v^0 + (1 - v
                                                             ^0 )E v1 + s        v1 > v
                                                                                      ^0
                                         2                                  2
                                                                                             (17)
                   1    2             s          3
                  = 1+v
                      ^0            +      4 + 2^
                                                v0 .
                   2                   6

                   
   Case (2): v
             ^0 > v1 > 0. In this case, the expected payoff is the average over three

subcases depending on whether x0 is retained or not at Date 1:

          
 2a) v1  v1 : In this case, v1 < v
                                 ^0 , so x1 is put in place. The expected payoff as of Date 1
                  1+v12
      is v1 + s     2
                        .

                                                       36
                                                                                                1+^ 2
                                                                                                   v0
           
(2b) v1  [v1 ,v
              ^0 ]: In this case, x0 is retained. The expected payoff as of Date 1 is v
                                                                                      ^0 + s      2
                                                                                                      .

                                   
(2c) v1 > v
          ^0 : In this case, v1 > v1 , so x1 is put in place. The expected payoff as of Date 1
                  1+v12
      is v1 + s     2
                        .

   Taking the weighted average over these three cases gives the ex ante expected payoff:

                                2                                       2
                          1 + v1                                    1+v^0  
 E [ payoff ] = v1 E v1 + s       v1 < v1   + (^v0 - v1  )E v^0 + s       v1  v1  v
                                                                                  ^0
                             2                                       2
                                        2
                                  1 + v1
              + (1 - v
                     ^0 )E v1 + s          v1 > v^0                                             (18)
                                     2
              1              2     s          3      2       3
             = 1 + (^ v0 - v1 ) +           v0
                                       4 + 2^   - 3^v0 v1 + v1   .
              2                    6

                   
   Case (3): v
             ^0 < v1 < 1. In this case, the expected payoff is the average over three
subcases depending on whether x0 is retained or not at Date 1:

                                   
(3a) v1 < v
          ^0 : In this case, v1 < v1 , so x1 is put in place. The expected payoff as of Date 1
                  1+v12
      is v1 + s     2
                        .

                                                                                                1+^ 2
                                                                                                   v0
                
(3b) v1  [^
          v0 , v1 ]: In this case, x0 is retained. The expected payoff as of Date 1 is v
                                                                                       ^0 + s     2
                                                                                                      .

           
(3c) v1 > v1 : In this case, v1 > v
                                  ^0 , so x1 is put in place. The expected payoff as of Date 1
                  1+v12
      is v1 + s     2
                        .

      Taking the weighted average over these three cases gives the ex ante expected payoff:

                                       2                                      2
                                 1 + v1                                   1+v^0          
                     ^0 E v1 + s
      E [ payoff ] = v                   v1 < v^0 + (v1   -v ^0 )E v
                                                                   ^0 + s       v
                                                                                ^0  v1  v1 +
                                     2                                     2
                                               2
                                         1 + v1          
                     + (1 - v1 )E v1 + s          v1 > v1
                                            2
                     1                   s                         3
                    = 1 - (v1    ^0 )2 +
                                -v            4 - 2^
                                                   v03
                                                       + 3^2 
                                                          v0 v1 - v1   .
                     2                    6
                                                                                        (19)


              
   Case (4): v1  1. In this case, the expected payoff is the average over two subcases
depending on whether x0 is retained or not at Date 1:

                                                37
                                   
(4a) v1 < v
          ^0 : In this case, v1 < v1 , so x1 is put in place. The expected payoff as of Date 1
                  1+v12
      is v1 + s     2
                        .

                                                                                         1+^2
                                                                                           v0
(4b) v1  v
         ^0 : In this case, x0 is retained. The expected payoff as of Date 1 is v
                                                                                ^0 + s    2
                                                                                              .


   Taking the weighted average over these two cases gives the ex ante expected payoff:

                                    2                                   2
                               1 + v1                               1+v^0
    E [ payoff ] = v
                   ^0 E v1 + s        v1 < v
                                           ^0 + (1 - v ^0 )E v
                                                             ^0 + s       v1  v
                                                                              ^0
                                  2                                  2
                                                                                           (20)
                   1                  s
                 = 1 - (1 - v^0 )2 +     3 - 2^
                                              v0
                                               3
                                                 + 3^2
                                                    v0   .
                   2                  6

A.7.3    Comparing aligned and diverse board

                                                                           2
Small biases. Suppose biases are small enough, such that v1  2pb -         
                                                                               -v
                                                                                ^0 < 0. Then,
a diverse board always acts in the interest of shareholders (Case (1) above), but an aligned
board does not (Proposition 3). Hence a diverse board is better for shareholders than an

aligned board.
                                                                  
   Large biases. Suppose that biases are large enough, such that v1  2pb - 2
                                                                           
                                                                             -v
                                                                              ^0  1, as
in Case (4) above. Then, shareholders' expected payoff with a diverse board is as in equation
                                               2
(20). In addition, v1  1 implies 2pb  1 +      
                                                   +v
                                                    ^0 > 2p (since p  1/3 by the assumption

that there are at least three directors), and hence b > 1  v
                                                           ^0 , so shareholders' expected
payoff with an aligned board is given by the case v
                                                  ^0 < b in equation (14). Comparing these
two equations, we find that shareholders prefer an aligned board if

                  2
    1 + (2 - p) v
                ^0  - 2^
                       v0 s
                         +   1 - 2p (1 - p) (3 - 2b) b2 + 2 (1 - p)2 v
                                                                     ^03
                                                                         + 2^3
                                                                            v0 - 3^2
                                                                                  v0 >0
             2             6

Note also that (3 - 2b) b2 is decreasing in b for b > 1, and since, as shown above, v1
                                                                                     
                                                                                       1

implies b > 1, it is sufficient to show that

                        2
          1 + (2 - p) v
                      ^0     v0 s
                          - 2^
                               +   1 - 2p (1 - p) + 2 (1 - p)2 v
                                                               ^03
                                                                   + 2^
                                                                      v0
                                                                       3
                                                                         - 3^2
                                                                            v0 > 0.        (21)
                   2             6


                                               38
To proceed, we rewrite this inequality, defining


                                                               2
                                     f1 (^
                                         v0 ) := 1 + (2 - p) v
                                                             ^0  - 2^
                                                                    v0                                  (22)


and
                             v0 ) := 1 - 2p (1 - p) + 2 (1 - p)2 v
                         f2 (^                                   ^03
                                                                     + 2^
                                                                        v0
                                                                         3
                                                                           - 3^2
                                                                              v0 .                      (23)

                           1           s
Now, equation (21) says      f1 (^
                                 v0 ) + f2 (^
                                            v0 ) > 0. We will show that both terms are positive.
                           2           6
   Starting with f1 , we first note that f1 is positive on the boundaries of [0,1]: f1 (0) > 0 and
f1 (1) = 1 - p > 0. Thus, given f1 is continuous, it is positive on all of [0,1] if it is positive

for any local extremum in [0,1]. This is the case. Indeed, it has a unique local extremum:
                                                                    1           1-p
f1 (^
    v0 ) = 0 if and only if v
                            ^0 = 1/(2 - p). And, indeed, f1        2-p
                                                                            =   2-p
                                                                                      > 0, as needed.
   Next, turn to f2 . As above, we first note that f2 is positive on the boundary of [0,1]. To
show this, we split up the argument in two steps:

      ·   f2 (0) = 1 - 2p(1 - p) > 0.

      ·   f2 (1)  f2 (1; p) = 2 (2p2 - 3p + 1). To see that f2 (1; p) is positive, it is enough to
          show that it is positive for all p  1/3 (given p  1/3 by the assumption that there
          are at least three directors). To show this, we show that f2 (1; p) is positive at p = 0
          and p = 1/2 and decreasing in between. Indeed:


            1. f2 (1; 1/2) = 2 and f2 (1; 1/2) = 0, and

                                                                 
            2. f2 (1; p) is decreasing for p  [0, 1/2] because    f
                                                                 p 2
                                                                         (1; p) = 2 (4p - 3) .


   Thus, given f2 is continuous, it is positive on all of [0,1] if it is positive for any local
                                                                                    
extremum in [0,1]. This is the case. Indeed, f2 (^
                                                 v0 ) has a unique local extremum: f2 (^
                                                                                       v0 ) = 0
                                1
if and only if v
               ^0  v
                   ^0 =      1+(1-p)2
                                      .   And, at the extremum,


                           1                                                          1
                 f2                    f2 (^
                                           v0 ; p) = 1 - 2p (1 - p) -                       2.          (24)
                      1 + (1 - p)2                                          1 + (1 - p)2

                                                    39
                                                                                        9 2
This function is decreasing on p  [0, 1
                                      3
                                                               1
                                        ]. In addition, at p = 3 , it equals   5
                                                                               9
                                                                                   -   13
                                                                                              > 0, and

hence it is positive for all p  [0, 1/3].
   Hence, both f1 and f2 are positive for all v
                                              ^0  [0, 1] . So shareholders prefer an aligned
board to a diverse board when biases are large.


A.8      Proof of Lemma 1

According to the proof of Proposition 4, shareholders' expected payoff with an aligned board

does not depend on  , but it does with a diverse board. It is thus sufficient to show that
shareholders' expected payoff with a diverse board is decreasing in  .
                                                                                        
   First, note that shareholders' expected payoff with a diverse board depends on  via v1 ,
                                                
                                               v1        2
which is defined in equation (15), and that    
                                                     =   2
                                                             > 0.

   As in the proof of Proposition 4, there are four cases:
              
   Case (1): v1 < 0. In this case, the board acts in shareholders' interest for all  , as
shown above. Hence, shareholders' payoff does not depend on  .
                  
   Case (2): 0 < v1 <v
                     ^0 . Shareholders' expected payoff is as in equation (18). Differenti-
ating this with respect to  , we get

                                                                         
                                         1             s 2 s 2          v1
                     E [ payoff ] =     - 2 (^
                                             v0 - v1 )- v
                                                        ^ + v1             ,                      (25)
                                         2             2 0 2            

                            v1
                             
                                                                       
which is negative because   
                                  > 0 and because, in this case, v
                                                                 ^0 > v1 > 0 by hypothesis.
                   
   Case (3): v
             ^0 < v1 < 1. Shareholders' expected payoff is as in equation (19). Differenti-
ating this with respect to  , we get

                                                                         
                                         1             s 2 s 2          v1
                     E [ payoff ] =     - 2 (v1 -v
                                                 ^0 ) + v
                                                        ^ - v1             ,                      (26)
                                         2             2 0 2            

                              
                             v1                                         
which is negative because    
                                   > 0 and because, in this case, v
                                                                  ^0 < v1 by hypothesis and

v
^0  0.
                                                                                
   Case (4): v1 > 1. By equation (20), shareholders' payoff does not depend on v1 (and

                                                40
hence on  ).


A.9     Proof of Lemma 2

To show that increasing power to appoint  decreases deadlock, we proceed in three steps.
First, we compute a director's payoff as a function of the date-2 incumbent value v
                                                                                  ^1 . Second,

we compare her payoff for v
                          ^1 = v
                               ^0 and v
                                      ^1 = v1 . We find that there is deadlock if v1 is below
                                                                            
a cutoff v1 , which depends on  . Finally, third, we show that this cutoff v1 is decreasing in
 , implying that the more power to appoint directors have, the more likely it is that new
high-quality policies are put in place, i.e., the less deadlock there is.


A.9.1    Expected payoff at date 1

When director i votes at date 1, she takes into account three cases at date 2. We refer to

these as Case (1), Case (2), and Case (3) below.
   Case (1): With probability i , she effectively controls the board at date 2. In this
case, there are two subcases to consider:


  1. The alternative x2 is director's i preferred type (this occurs with probability p). Recall

      that the incumbent policy x
                                ^1 is not any director's preferred type. Then, the director
      replaces the current policy if v2 + b > v
                                              ^1 and gets


                        1 - F (^
                               v1 - b) E v2 + b v2  v
                                                    ^1 - b + F (^
                                                                v1 - b) v
                                                                        ^1 .              (27)



  2. The alternative x2 is another type (this occurs with probability 1 - p). Then, she
      replaces the current policy if v2 > v
                                          ^1 and gets


                                1 - F (^
                                       v1 ) E v2 v2  v
                                                     ^1 + F (^
                                                             v1 ) v
                                                                  ^1 .                    (28)




                                               41
   Taking the expectation over these two cases, we get:

             (1)
           U2 (^
               v1 ) =p    1 - F (^
                                 v1 - b) E v2 + b v2  v
                                                      ^1 - b + F (^
                                                                  v1 - b) v
                                                                          ^1

                      + (1 - p) 1 - F (^ v1 ) E v2 v2  v    ^1 + F (^
                                                                    v1 ) v
                                                                         ^1
                      
                      
                                                                                        (29)
                                                       2
                            1                   1+v   ^1
                      
                         p    + b   + (1 -  p )          if v
                                                            ^1 < b
                      
                            2                       2
                      
                    =
                      
                              2
                         1+v ^1 + pb2
                      
                                      + (1 - v  ^1 )pb   if v
                                                            ^1 > b.
                              2


   Case (2): With probability  (1 - i ) another director effectively controls the board at
date 2. In this case, there are two subcases to consider:


  1. The alternative x2 is this other director's preferred type (this occurs with probability

     p). Then, the current policy is replaced if v2 + b > v
                                                          ^1 . Director i gets


                         1 - F (^
                                v1 - b) E v2 v2  v
                                                 ^1 - b + F (^
                                                             v1 - b) v
                                                                     ^1 .               (30)



  2. The alternative x2 is not this other director's preferred type (this occurs with proba-

     bility 1 - p). Then, she replaces the current policy if v2 > v
                                                                  ^1 and gets

                                               p
                         1 - F (^
                                v1 ) E v2 +       b v2  v
                                                        ^1 + F (^
                                                                v1 ) v
                                                                     ^1 .               (31)
                                              1-p




                                              42
   Taking the expectation over these two cases, we get:

            (2)
          U2 (^
              v1 ) =p      1 - F (^
                                  v1 - b) E v2 v2  v
                                                   ^1 - b + F (^       ^1 +
                                                               v1 - b) v
                                                          p
                     + (1 - p) 1 - F (^   v1 ) E v2 +         b v2  v
                                                                    ^1 + F (^
                                                                            v1 ) v
                                                                                 ^1
                                                        1-p
                     
                                                                                           (32)
                     
                                                      2
                     
                        1                  (1 - p)^ v1
                     
                          + bp (1 - ^
                                    v  ) +              if v^1 < b
                     
                                     1
                     
                      2
                     
                                                2
                   =
                     
                             2
                        1+v ^1 - pb2
                     
                                      + pb(1 - v ^1 )   if v^1 > b.
                             2


   Case (3): With probability 1 -  , the board is diverse at date 2 (this, it turns out, is like
a hypothetical unbiased director controlling the board at date 2). In this case, the current
policy is replaced if v2  v
                          ^1 , and director i gets

                     (3)
                    U2 (^             v1 ) E v2 + pb v2  v
                        v1 ) = 1 - F (^                  ^1 + F (^
                                                                 v1 ) v
                                                                      ^1
                                      2                                                    (33)
                                  1+v^1
                                =       + (1 - v
                                               ^1 ) pb.
                                   2

   Expected Payoff at Date 1: Since we assumed that neither x
                                                            ^0 nor x1 is the director's

preferred type, her expected payoff at date 1 is


                                    (1)                    (2)             (3)
            U (^
               v1 ) = v
                      ^1 +   i U2 (^
                                   v1 ) + (1 - i )U2 (^
                                                      v1 ) + (1 -  )U2 (^
                                                                        v1 ) ,             (34)


and she chooses to keep x0 in place if


                                          U (^
                                             v0 ) > U (v1 ).                               (35)




                                                 43
A.9.2    Comparison: Is x
                        ^0 replaced with x1 ?

Now, we use the assumption that b > v1 > v
                                         ^0 to simplify equation (34) to

                                         2
                                     1+v^1                 p (2i b - v
                                                                     ^1 )^
                                                                         v1
                  U (^
                     v1 ) = v
                            ^1 +           + (1 - v
                                                  ^1 )pb +                         .          (36)
                                      2                          2

Taking the difference of the expression above with v
                                                   ^1 = v
                                                        ^0 and v
                                                               ^1 = v1 gives

                                        (^
                                         v0 - v1 )(^
                                                   v0 + v1 )
         U (^
            v0 ) - U (v1 ) =  (1 - p)                        + (1 - (1 - i  )pb)(^
                                                                                 v0 - v1 ).   (37)
                                                 2

This is positive if
                                    2 (1 - i  )bp - 2 -  (1 - p )^
                                                                 v0
                             v1 <                                   .                         (38)
                                                (1 - p)

Note that the higher is i , the lower is this cutoff, suggesting that directors with higher 's
are more likely to vote to replace x
                                   ^0 than directors with lower 's.
   There can be deadlock if this condition holds for the median director, who is pivotal in
the date-1 vote. I.e., there is deadlock if

                                       2 (1 - i  )bp - 2 -  (1 - p )^
                                                                    v0
                      v1 < v1 :=median
                                                   (1 - p)                     i
                                      m
                                                                                              (39)
                               2 (1 -   )bp - 2 -  (1 - p )^
                                                           v0
                             =                                ,
                                          (1 - p)

where m is the power to appoint of the median director. (Formally, this is the lower median,
  +1
 N2  . If N is even, then the policy stays in place unless strict majority, i.e., N/2 + 1 of
the directors vote to replace it. Since directors with higher 's are more likely to vote to
replace, the pivotal director is the (N/2 + 1)st from the top, or the lower median.)




                                                  44
          
A.9.3    v1 is decreasing in 

                                                 
To see that deadlock, as captured by the cutoff v1 , is decreasing in power to appoint,  , we
               
differentiate v1 in equation (39) above:


                                        
                                       v1    2 1 -  (p -  m )b p
                                          =-                     .                                  (40)
                                                  (1 - p)2

This is negative if 1 -  (p - m )b > 0, which is the condition in the lemma.


A.10      Proof of Proposition 5

We identify sufficient conditions for there to be an interior-optimal power to appoint  for a

given v
      ^0 and v1 .
   We start with shareholders' payoff U S (^
                                           v1 ,  ) at date 1, given policy in place v
                                                                                    ^1 and power
to appoint  . At date 2, the board is either diverse (which occurs with probability 1 -  ) or
aligned (which occurs with probability  ), and shareholders' payoff in these two cases is

                                                                                      2
                                                                                  1+v^1
                    US             = (1 - F (^
                                             v1 ))E[v2 |v2 > v         v1 )^
                                                             ^1 ] + F (^   v1 =         ,           (41)
                         diverse                                                   2

and

                                                                                                2
                                                                                            1+v^1
  U S |aligned = p ((1 - F (^
                            v1 - b))E[v2 |v2 + b > v
                                                   ^1 ] + F (^
                                                             v1 - b)^
                                                                    v1 ) + (1 - p)
                                                                                             2
                                          2                   2
                                                                                                    (42)
                1                     1+v^1       1 + (1 - p)^
                                                             v1
             = p + (1 - p)                      =               .
                2                      2                2

Thus,


                         U S (^         ^1 + s (1 -  ) U S |diverse + U S |aligned
                              v1 ,  ) = v                                                           (43)
                                                                2
                                                   1 + (1 - p )^
                                                               v1
                                      =v
                                       ^1 + s                        .                              (44)
                                                          2




                                                      45
                                                                                            
  From condition (39), we know that the board retains x
                                                      ^0 (inefficiently) at date 1 if v1 < v1 .
                                                     1
  From Lemma 2, we know that if m > p -              b
                                                       ,   then higher  reduces deadlock. Thus,
  intuitively, there is a trade-off of increasing  : on the one hand, it increases the distortion

  at date 2, but, on the other hand, it reduces deadlock. Hence, the optimal power to appoint
  given to directors is either zero or the minimum positive  that prevents deadlock.
     To proceed, we compare the expected payoff to shareholders given  = 0 (so there is no
  distortion at date 2) with their payoff given the minimum  such that x1 is put in place, or
    that makes the deadlock condition in equation (39) hold with equality,

                                                          1
                                     1       2b m - p + b
                                  :=      1-                        .                       (45)
                                     p       2 m b - v
                                                     ^0 - v1

     If   > 1, there is deadlock even if directors have full power to appoint, so the optimal
   = 0. Similarly, if    0, there is no deadlock even if shareholders have full power to
  appoint, so the optimal  = 0. If    (0, 1), the optimal power to appoint is either   or 0,

  and setting  =   is better than setting  = 0 if

                                  1 + (1 - p  )v1
                                                2
                                                                   1+v 2
                                                                      ^0
                        v1 + s                         v
                                                       ^0 + s              ,                (46)
                                         2                          2

  which is the condition in the proposition.


  A.11     Proof of Proposition 6

  The structure of the proof is as follows.


Step 1. We show that if it is optimal to give directors positive power to appoint,  > 0, then

        the optimal power to appoint is the minimal  that prevents deadlock (no matter the
        distribution of power to appoint {i }i ).

Step 2. We show that for any interior optimum of power to appoint  , the optimum is decreas-
        ing in m . Thus, it is optimal to maximize m subject to preventing deadlock.

                                                46
                                                                                         N +1    -1
Step 3. We show that the maximal m that prevents deadlock is m =                          2
                                                                                                      .


      We now implement these steps.


Step 1. Immediately from the expression for shareholders' payoff in equation (44), i.e., U S (^
                                                                                              v1 ,  ) =
                  1+(1-p )^2
                          v1
        v
        ^1 + s        2
                                     , we see that shareholders are better off if  is smaller, and that
        their payoff does not depend on {i }i , i.e., how the power is distributed among direc-
        tors. (The reason is that all that matters to shareholders is the total power given to
                        N
        directors,      i=1   i =  .)

                                                                                          N +1    -1
Step 2. Given the conditions of Proposition 5 are satisfied with m =                       2
                                                                                                          , we know
                              N +1     -1
        that if m =            2
                                            , then the optimal   , as defined in equation (6), is interior.
        Thus, we can differentiate this optimal   with respect to m :


                                          (m )     2b  (2pb - v^0 - v1 ) - 2
                                               = -                                                             (47)
                                        m            p(2m b - v  ^0 - v1 )2
                                                      2b  (m )
                                               =- m                < 0,                                        (48)
                                                   2 b - v ^0 - v1

        because   (m ) > 0 and 2m b - v
                                      ^0 - v1 > 0, again by the conditions in Proposition 5
                                             1                                1
        (if 2m b - v
                   ^0 - v1 < 0, then m - p + b > 0 implies   >                p
                                                                                  > 1, i.e., a violation of the
        conditions in Proposition 5).

        In summary,   is a strictly decreasing function of m , whenever   is positive. Intu-
        itively, the higher is the power m allocated to the pivotal director, the lower is the 
        that is needed to prevent this pivotal director from deadlocking the board. Thus, to

        minimize   , we maximize m .

Step 3. Finally, because 1  2  ...   N -1    N +1  = m  · · ·  N , then to
                                       2      2

        maximize m , we set 1 = 2 = ... =  N -1  = 0 and m = · · · = N > 0, implying
                                             2

                 N +1     -1
        m =       2
                               .



                                                          47
A.12         Proof of Proposition 7

For the proof, we introduce some notation for directors' value functions as functions of the

policy in place (which is the Markov state):

    ·   Let U1 (v, 2 ) denote the value function of the 1 -director after the date-t vote that put
        (or kept) a policy with value v and type 2 in place, but before the realization of date-t
        flow utilities from this policy.

             ex
    ·   Let U 1
                (v, 2 ) denote U1 (v, 2 ) minus the current-period flow utility, i.e., the value

        function of the 1 -director after the date-t vote that put (or kept) a policy with value
        v and type 2 in place, but after the realization of date-t flow utilities from this policy.

             0
    ·   Let U  denote the value function of the  -director after the date-t vote that kept the
        initial policy x
                       ^0 in place, but before the realization of date-t flow utilities from this

        policy.

    ·   Let U (v ) denote the component of a director's value function reflecting only the v part
        (so not the b part) of her flow utilities, after the date-t vote that put (or kept) a policy
        different from x0 with value v in place, but before the realization of date-t flow utilities

        from this policy. (It turns out that this will not depend on a director's bias or the type
        of the policy.)


   Before we present the main proof, we formulate and prove an auxiliary lemma.

Lemma 3. Suppose the conditions of the proposition hold and a policy with type  is in

place. In any Markov equilibrium, a  -biased director votes against any policies that are not
of type  .

   Proof: Let v
              ^t denote the value of the policy in place and suppose (in anticipation of a
contradiction) that a  -biased director votes for an alternative with value vt and type   =  .



                                                 48
Given the definition of U ex above, we can write a condition for this vote to be profitable as


                              ^t + b + U ex (^
                              v              vt ,  )  vt + U ex (vt ,   )                  (49)


or
                             b  U ex (vt ,   ) - U ex (^
                                                       vt ,  ) + vt - v
                                                                      ^t .                 (50)

Given that the most a director can get in any period is 1 + b, it must be that U ex (vt ,   ) is
bounded above as follows:

                                           
                            ex                                  
                           U (vt ,  )            t (1 + b) =      (1 + b).                 (51)
                                          t=1
                                                               1-

And, given that the  -director has the option of keeping the incumbent policy with value

v
^t and type  in place forever and getting v
                                          ^t + b in every period (by voting against any
alternatives), it must be that U ex (^
                                     vt ,  ) is bounded below as follows:

                                          
                            ex                                  
                          U (^
                             vt ,  )            t (^
                                                   vt + b) =      (^
                                                                   vt + b).                (52)
                                         t=1
                                                               1-

We also know that v
                  ^t  0 and vt  1. Together, substituting these bounds into equation
(50), we get the following necessary condition on b:

                                                        1
                            b       (1 + b) -    b+1 =    .                                (53)
                                 1-           1-       1-

This contradicts the assumption in equation (9).

     Given our focus on stage-undominated equilibria, the lemma implies that once a  -type
policy is in place, it is replaced if and only if an alternative policy has a higher quality and
is of the same type.
     Next, suppose that the incumbent policy x
                                             ^0 is in place. Since x
                                                                   ^0 is "very bad," it follows

immediately that directors vote for policies of their preferred type. In the remainder of the


                                                   49
proof, we show that directors vote for policies that are not of their preferred type if and only
                                               ¯.
if their values are above a threshold, denoted V
   The "only if" part is immediate: if a  -biased director wants to put a   -policy in place

with value v1 , she also wants to put one in place with value v2 > v1 .
   We prove the "if" part by showing no-deviation conditions under these strategies.
   Given the lemma, after (^
                           v, ^) is chosen, it will only be replaced by a policy of the same
type ^ and only if its value is higher than v
                                            ^. Hence, the value component U (^
                                                                             v ) is the same
for both directors, only depends on v
                                    ^, and satisfies


       v) = v
    U (^    ^ +  Pr ( = ^, v > v                 ^] + (1 - Pr ( = 
                               ^) E [U (v ) |v > v                ^, v > v
                                                                         ^)) U (^
                                                                                v)         (54)

          =v
           ^ +  p (1 - v
                       ^) E [U (v ) |v > v
                                         ^] + (1 - p (1 - v
                                                          ^)) U (^
                                                                 v) .                      (55)


Given that a director gets b in each period if and only if a policy of her preferred type is put
in place, we have the following value functions given that the initial incumbent is replaced:

                                                          b
                                   U (^
                                      v ,  ) = U (^
                                                  v) +                                     (56)
                                                         1-
                                     v ,   ) = U (^
                                  U (^            v) .                                     (57)


Now we turn to directors' value functions given the initial incumbent is still in place.


              U0           ¯ U 0 +  Pr v > V
                 =  Pr v < V               ¯                          ¯ +p b
                                                       E U (v ) | v > V                    (58)
                              
                                                                          1-
                  ¯ U0 +  1 - V
                = V           ¯                        ¯ +p b
                                        E U (v ) | v > V                                   (59)
                     
                                                              1-

and, hence,
                               1-V¯
                       U0
                          =                              ¯ +p b
                                          E U (v ) | v > V                .                (60)
                                  ¯
                              1 - V                          1-

   In order for the strategies described in the proposition to be an equilibrium, two condi-
tions must be satisfied:


                                              50
  1. It must be that a  -biased director prefers a   -policy to x
                                                                ^0 if its value v is greater than
                ¯:
     the cutoff V
                                       U0                ¯.
                                           U (v ) for v  V                                  (61)


                                                 ^0 to a   -policy if its value v is less than
  2. It must be that a  -biased director prefers x
                ¯:
     the cutoff V
                                       U0                 ¯.
                                           U (v ) for v < V                                 (62)


   Since the value functions are continuous and monotone in v , these conditions imply that
                                                                      ^0 and a   -policy with
a  -biased director must be indifferent between the initial incumbent x
                          ¯ , i.e., U 0 = U V
value equal to the cutoff V                 ¯ , or
                                     



                      1-V¯                                b
                                                  ¯ +p
                                   E U (v ) | v > V                  ¯ .
                                                                  =U V                      (63)
                         ¯
                     1 - V                               1-

   We now re-write the equation (55) evaluated at v ¯ as
                                                  ^=V

                                       ¯  ¯
                                 ¯ = U V -V - 1 1-p 1-V
                ¯ E U (v ) | v > V
              1-V                                     ¯                       ¯
                                                                            U V             (64)
                                        p     p

to substitute into the indifference condition in equation (63) and get


                    ¯ (1 -  ) 1 - 1
                  U V                      = p
                                                  b  ¯
                                                    -V        p
                                                                   b
                                                                     +
                                                                       1
                                                                             .              (65)
                                  p              1-               1- p

Recalling the assumption that there are only two types of alternatives, we can substitute
p = 1/2 to write this as


                  ¯ ) := V
                         ¯                       ¯ (1 -  ) -     
               G( V          2+             b -U V                     b = 0,
                                  2 (1 -  )                  2 (1 -  )

where G is a continuous function.
                 ¯  (0, 1), we show that G(0) < 0 and G(1) > 0, so the result follows from
   To prove that V


                                              51
the intermediate value theorem:

                                                            
                          G(0) = -U (0) (1 -  ) -                 b < 0,   (66)
                                                        2 (1 -  )

since U (v )  0, and
                                     G(1) = 2 - U (1) (1 -  ) > 0,         (67)

                               1
since U (1)  1 +  + · · · =   1-
                                 .




                                                  52
References

Adams, R., A. Akyol, and P. Verwijmeren (2018). Director skill sets. Journal of Financial
  Economics 130 (3), 641­662.

Adams, R. and D. Ferreira (2007). A theory of friendly boards. The Journal of Finance 62 (1),
  217­250.

Adams, R., B. Hermalin, and M. Weisbach (2010). The role of boards of directors in corporate
  governance: A conceptual framework and survey. Journal of Economic Literature 48 (1),
  58­107.

Adams, R. B. (2016). Women on boards: The superheroes of tomorrow? The Leadership

  Quarterly 27 (3), 371­386.

Agrawal, A. and M. A. Chen (2017). Boardroom brawls: An empirical analysis of disputes
  involving directors. Quarterly Journal of Finance 07 (03), 1­58.

Akyol, A. C., W. F. Lim, and P. Verwijmeren (2012). Shareholders in the boardroom: Wealth

  effects of the SEC's proposal to facilitate director nominations. Journal of Financial and
  Quantitative Analysis 47 (5), 1029­1057.

Arrow, K. J. (1950). A Difficulty in the Concept of Social Welfare. Journal of Political
  Economy 58, 328­328.

Austen-Smith, D., W. Dziuda, B. Harstad, and A. Loeper (2019). Gridlock and inefficient
  policy instruments. Theoretical Economics .

Baranchuk, N. and P. H. Dybvig (2009). Consensus in diverse corporate boards. The Review
  of Financial Studies 22 (2), 715­747.

Bebchuk, L., J. Coates, and G. Subramanian (2002). The powerful antitakeover force of
  staggered boards: Theory, evidence, and policy. Stanford Law Review 54 (5), 887­951.


                                             53
Bebchuk, L. and A. Cohen (2005). The costs of entrenched boards. Journal of Financial
  Economics 78 (2), 409­433.

Bernile, G., V. Bhagwat, and S. Yonker (2018). Board diversity, firm risk, and corporate

  policies. Journal of Financial Economics 127 (3), 588­612.

Bhandari, T., P. Iliev, and J. Kalodimos (2017). Governance changes through shareholder
  initiatives: The case of proxy access. Working paper, Securities and Exchange Commission.

Burkart, M., D. Gromb, and F. Panunzi (1997). Large shareholders, monitoring, and the
  value of the firm. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3), 693­728.

Cadbury, A. (2002). Corporate Governance and Chairmanship: A Personal View. Oxford
  University Press.

Cai, J., T. Nguyen, and R. A. Walkling (2019). Director appointments--it is who you know.
  Working paper, The LeBow College of Business, Drexel University.

Chemmanur, T. J. and V. Fedaseyeu (2018). A theory of corporate boards and forced CEO
  turnover. Management Science 64 (10), 4798­4817.

Coles, J. L., N. D. Daniel, and L. Naveen (2014). Co-opted boards. The Review of Financial
  Studies 27 (6), 1751­1796.

Cremers, K. M., L. P. Litov, and S. M. Sepe (2017). Staggered boards and long-term firm
  value, revisited. Journal of Financial Economics 126 (2), 422 ­ 444.

Dixit, A. K. and R. S. Pindyck (1994). Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton University
  Press.

Dow, J. (2013). Boards, CEO entrenchment, and the cost of capital. Journal of Financial
  Economics 110 (3), 680 ­ 695.




                                            54
Duggan, J. and T. Kalandrakis (2012). Dynamic legislative policy making. Journal of
  Economic Theory 147 (5), 1653 ­ 1688.

Duke (1972). Deadlock in a close corporation: A suggestion for protecting a dissident,

  co-equal shareholder. Duke Law Journal.

Dziuda, W. and A. Loeper (2016). Dynamic collective choice with endogenous status quo.
  Journal of Political Economy 124 (4), 1148­1186.

Dziuda, W. and A. Loeper (2018). Dynamic pivotal politics. American Political Science
  Review 112 (3), 580?601.

Ferreira, D. (2010). Board diversity. In H. K. Baker and R. Anderson (Eds.), Corporate
  Governance, Chapter 12, pp. 225­242. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Fluck, Z. and N. Khanna (2011). Making boards more effective: Independent directors, op-
  timal incentives, and shareholders' say-on-pay. Working paper, Michigan State University.

Fos, V., K. Li, and M. Tsoutsoura (2018). Do director elections matter? The Review of
  Financial Studies 31 (4), 1499­1531.

Francis, T. and J. Lublin (2016, March 23). Big investors question corporate board tenures.
  Wall Street Journal .

Fudenberg, D. and E. Maskin (1986). The folk theorem in repeated games with discounting
  or with incomplete information. Econometrica 54 (3), 533­554.

Garlappi, L., R. Giammarino, and A. Lazrak (2017). Ambiguity and the corporation: Group
  disagreement and underinvestment. Journal of Financial Economics 125 (3), 417 ­ 433.

Garlappi, L., R. Giammarino, and A. Lazrak (2019). Belief polarization and investment.
  Working paper, University of British Columbia.

Gerhardt, M. (2013). Why gridlock matters. Notre Dame Law Review (88).

                                            55
Gibbard, A. (1973). Manipulation of voting schemes: A general result. Econometrica 41 (4),
  587­601.

Goodstein, J., K. Gautam, and W. Boeker (1994). The effects of board size and diversity on
  strategic change. Strategic Management Journal 15 (3), 241­250.

Hallock, K. F. (1997). Reciprocally interlocking boards of directors and executive compen-

  sation. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 32 (3), 331­344.

Hannan, M. T. and J. Freeman (1984). Structural inertia and organizational change. Amer-
  ican Sociological Review 49 (2), 149­164.

Harris, M. and A. Raviv (2008). A theory of board control and size. The Review of Financial
  Studies 21 (4), 1797­1832.

Hart, O. and J. Moore (2008). Contracts as reference points. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 123 (1), 1­48.

Hermalin, B. and M. Weisbach (1998). Endogenously chosen boards of directors and their

  monitoring of the CEO. American Economic Review 88 (1), 96­118.

Hopkins, W., P. Mallette, and S. Hopkins (2013). Proposed factors influencing strategic iner-
  tia/strategic renewal in organizations. Academy of Strategic Management Journal 12 (2),
  79­94.

Howe, L. (1967). Corporate divorce: Deadlocks in the close corporation. The Business
  Lawyer 22 (2), 469­477.

IFC (2014). Conflicts in the boardroom survey. Corporate Governance Knowledge Publica-

  tion .

Jiang, W., H. Wan, and S. Zhao (2016). Reputation concerns of independent directors:
  Evidence from individual director voting. The Review of Financial Studies 29 (3), 655­
  696.

                                              56
Katz, D. and L. McIntosh (2014). Renewed focus on corporate director tenure. New York
  Law Journal .

Kim, S. (2003). The provisional director remedy for corporate deadlock: A proposed model
  statute. Washington and Lee Law Review 60, 111­181.

Knight, D., C. L. Pearce, K. G. Smith, J. D. Olian, H. P. Sims, K. A. Smith, and P. Flood

  (1999). Top management team diversity, group process, and strategic consensus. Strategic
  Management Journal 20 (5), 445­465.

Knyazeva, A., D. Knyazeva, and C. Raheja (2013). The benefits of focus vs. heterogeneity:
  Dissimilar directors and coordination within corporate boards. Working paper, University
  of Rochester.

Kramarz, F. and D. Thesmar (2013). Social networks in the boardroom. Journal of the
  European Economic Association 11 (4), 780­807.

Kumar, P. and K. Sivaramakrishnan (2008). Who monitors the monitor? The effect of
  board independence on executive compensation and firm value. The Review of Financial
  Studies 21 (3), 1371­1401.

Landeo, C. M. and K. E. Spier (2014a). Irreconcilable differences: Judicial resolution of
  business deadlock. The University of Chicago Law Review 81 (1), 203­227.

Landeo, C. M. and K. E. Spier (2014b). Shotguns and deadlocks. Yale Journal on Regula-
  tion 31 (1), 143­187.

Lau, D. C. and J. K. Murnighan (1998). Demographic diversity and faultlines: The compo-

  sitional dynamics of organizational groups. The Academy of Management Review 23 (2),
  325­340.

Laux, V. (2008). Board independence and CEO turnover. Journal of Accounting Re-
  search 46 (1), 137­171.

                                           57
Levit, D. and N. Malenko (2016). The labor market for directors and externalities in corpo-
  rate governance. The Journal of Finance 71 (2), 775­808.

Lew, C. J. (1979­1980). The custodian remedy for deadlocks in close corporations sympo-
  sium: Chapter two - close corporations. U.C. Davis Law Review 13, 498.

Libit, W. and T. Freier (2016). Director tenure: The next boardroom battle. The Corporate

  Board .

Malenko, N. (2014). Communication and decision-making in corporate boards. The Review
  of Financial Studies 27 (5), 1486­1532.

Marshall, C. D. (2013). Are dissenting directors rewarded? Working paper, University of
  Richmond.

McDonald, D. (1979). Deadlock and dissolution in the close corporation: Has the sacred
  cow been butchered? Nebraska Law Review 58 (3).

Milliken, F. J. and L. L. Martins (1996). Searching for common threads: Understanding

  the multiple effects of diversity in organizational groups. The Academy of Management
  Review 21 (2), 402­433.

Satterthwaite, M. A. (1975). Strategy-proofness and arrow's conditions: Existence and
  correspondence theorems for voting procedures and social welfare functions. Journal of
  Economic Theory 10 (2), 187 ­ 217.

Shivdasani, A. and D. Yermack (1999). CEO involvement in the selection of new board

  members: An empirical analysis. The Journal of Finance 54 (5), 1829­1853.

Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1989). Management entrenchment. Journal of Financial
  Economics 25 (1), 123­139.

Stulz, R. M. (1988). Managerial control of voting rights: Financing policies and the market
  for corporate control. Journal of Financial Economics 20, 25 ­ 54.

                                            58
Taylor, L. A. (2010). Why are CEOs rarely fired? Evidence from structural estimation. The
  Journal of Finance 65 (6), 2051­2087.

Volkova, E. (2018). Blockholders diversity: Effect of polyphony on the power of monitoring.

  Working paper, University of Melbourn.

Warther, V. A. (1998). Board effectiveness and board dissent: A model of the board's
  relationship to management and shareholders. Journal of Corporate Finance 4 (1), 53­70.

Z´
 apal, J. (2012). Explicit and implicit status-quo determination in dynamic bargaining:
  Theory and application to FOMC directive. Working paper, IAE-CSIC Barcelona.

Zwiebel, J. (1996). Dynamic capital structure under managerial entrenchment. The Ameri-
  can Economic Review 86 (5), 1197­1215.




                                            59
