                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          INSPECTING THE MECHANISM OF
                       QUANTITATIVE EASING IN THE EURO AREA

                                       Ralph S. J. Koijen
                                      Francois Koulischer
                                        Benoit Nguyen
                                        Motohiro Yogo

                                      Working Paper 26152
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26152


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019


Working papers reflect the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily express the views of the
Banque de France, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. For comments
and discussions, we thank Diana Bonfim, Francisco Gomes, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Christian
Lundblad, Angela Maddaloni, Gregor Matvos, Emanuel Moench, Benoit Mojon, Lubos Pastor,
Hélène Rey, Harald Uhlig, and conference and seminar participants at the Banque de France,
Berkeley, the European Central Bank, Chicago Booth, the 12th CSEFIGIER Symposium on
Economics and Institutions, Fric'16: Conference on Financial Frictions, the Toulouse School of
Economics, OFCE Workshop Empirical Monetary Economics 2016, the 2017 AEA Meetings, the
2018 AFA meetings, Luxembourg School of Finance, National Bank of Belgium, Benelux
Banking Research Day (Leuven), Annual conference of the Swiss Society for Financial Market
Research, 6th International Conference on Sovereign Bond Markets, FIRS annual conference
(Savannah), FEBS Conference (Prague), First CefES conference (Milan), and London Business
School. Ralph Koijen gratefully acknowledges support from the European Research Council
(ERC grant no. 338082) and from the Center for Research in Security Prices.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ralph S. J. Koijen, Francois Koulischer, Benoit Nguyen, and Motohiro Yogo. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inspecting the Mechanism of Quantitative Easing in the Euro Area
Ralph S. J. Koijen, Francois Koulischer, Benoit Nguyen, and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 26152
August 2019
JEL No. E52,F21,G11,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

Using new data on security-level portfolio holdings by investor type and across countries in the
euro area, we study portfolio rebalancing during the European Central Bank's (ECB) purchase
programme that started in March 2015. To quantify changes in risk concentration, we estimate
the evolution of the distribution of duration, government, and corporate credit risk exposures
across investor sectors and regions until the last quarter of 2017. Using these micro data, we show
that 60% of ECB purchases are sold by non-euro area investors, and we do not find evidence that
risks get concentrated in certain sectors or geographies. We estimate a sector-level asset demand
system using instrumental variables to connect the dynamics of portfolio rebalancing to asset
prices. Our estimates imply that government yields declined by 47bp, on average, but the
estimates range from -28bp to -57bp across countries.

Ralph S. J. Koijen                               Benoit Nguyen
University of Chicago                            Banque de France
Booth School of Business                         31 rue Croix des Petits Champs
5807 S Woodlawn Ave                              Paris 75001
Chicago, IL 60637                                France
and NBER                                         benoit.nguyen@banque-france.fr
Ralph.koijen@chicagobooth.edu
                                                 Motohiro Yogo
Francois Koulischer                              Department of Economics
Université du Luxembourg                         Princeton University
Luxembourg School of Finance                     Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
6, rue Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi                Princeton, NJ 08544
L-1359 Luxembourg                                and NBER
Francois.koulischer@uni.lu                       myogo@princeton.edu
    In response to growing concerns about a prolonged period of low inflation, the European
Central Bank (ECB) announced the expanded asset purchase programme on January 22,
2015. The objective is to increase inflation to a level close to, but below, 2%. The initially
announced size of the purchase programme was e60 billion per month until September 2016,
starting in March 2015. The programme has subsequently been expanded in various ways.
    Central banks in Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States, among others, have
implemented similar quantitative easing (QE) programmes when interest rates reached levels
close to zero. The recent literature has explored various channels through which unconven-
tional monetary policy can affect asset prices, inflation, and economic growth more broadly.
To quantify the importance of various channels, the standard approach is to use event studies
and to measure the response of various asset prices around key policy announcements. 1
    We extend this literature by looking at prices and portfolio rebalancing jointly using
new data on security-level portfolio holdings for all major investor sectors, including banks,
insurance companies and pension funds, and mutual funds, and for all countries in the euro
area. For each sector in a particular country, we observe the quarterly holdings of government
bonds, corporate bonds, asset-backed securities (including covered bonds), and equities, both
in and outside of the euro area. We link these portfolio holdings to detailed data on prices and
security characteristics. We also observe the ECB's security-level holdings and purchases,
both from the ongoing asset purchase programme as well as the legacy holdings from earlier
programmes. We use these data to quantify which investors sell to the ECB, how investors'
portfolio rebalancing impacts the distribution of financial risk exposures across investors and
geographies, how it impact government yields, and which investors, again differentiated by
investor type and geography, experience the largest appreciation of their asset portfolio.
    Our sample is from 2013Q4 to 2017Q4. To summarize the initial conditions, we first
document the portfolio holdings and risk exposures before the announcement of the asset
purchase programme using data from 2013Q4 to 2014Q4. 2 For all securities in an investor's
portfolio, we measure the euro-area duration, government and corporate credit, and equity
risk exposure.3 In addition, we summarize the holdings by euro-area investors of foreign,
that is, securities issued outside the euro area or securities issued in foreign currency. By
imposing market clearing, our framework measures how aggregate risks are shared across
investors before the programme was announced.
   1
      See for instance Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2011) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen
(2011) for the United States and Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Vissing-Jorgensen (2017) for Europe.
    2
      A summary of these facts is presented in Koijen, Koulischer, Nguyen, and Yogo (2017).
    3
      Begenau, Piazzesi, and Schneider (2015) study the dynamics of banks' risk exposures to interest rate
risk and credit risk. Our data allow us to also measure risk exposures to government and equity risk and we
can measure exposures for other institutions than banks, such as mutual funds, insurance companies, and
pension funds.


                                                    2
    We then measure how investors rebalance their portfolios during the programme. Our
security-level data allow us to measure which investors sell to the ECB for narrow groups of
securities that are differentiated by issuer country and maturity. We develop a simple regres-
sion framework, based on the market clearing condition in changes, to exactly decompose
how different investors sell in response to purchases by the ECB.
    We also use the same risk accounting framework, but now applied in changes, to un-
derstand how the programme affects the distribution of risk exposures across investors and
to explore whether risks get concentrated in certain sectors or geographies. To safeguard
the confidentiality of our data, we report our results at the level of two regions that we
classify as vulnerable countries (Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Cyprus, and Ireland) and
non-vulnerable countries (all other countries), following Altavilla, Pagano, and Simonelli
(2017), but the underlying estimates use our more granular country-level data.
    To relate investors' rebalancing to government bond yields, we estimate a sector-level
asset demand system in which we model the demand curves of investors as a function of
prices (or bond yields), bond characteristics, and latent demand that captures investors'
expectations or constraints beyond the characteristics included in the model. Koijen and
Yogo (2019) provide a micro foundation for this empirically-tractable model of asset demand
curves. In particular, they show that this specification is consistent with a model in which
investors have mean-variance preferences. In addition, investors assume that returns follow
a factor model and both expected returns and factor loadings are affine functions of a set of
characteristics.
    As prices are endogenous to latent demand, we develop an instrumental variables estima-
tor using a unique feature of the purchase programme. While we cannot use the aggregate
time variation, as it is correlated with economic conditions in the euro area, the allocation of
those purchases to different bond markets contains an exogenous component as the assign-
ment is based on the capital key. The capital key is a formula based on GDP and population
shares, both receiving equal weight. 4 Using heterogeneity in the size of the purchases relative
to the size of the bond market gives us exogenous cross-sectional variation in demand shocks
(or, equivalently, residual supply) across countries.
    Our approach complements the event study approach that has been explored extensively
in the literature to estimate the impact of purchase programmes. This approach estimates
price responses on a small number of important policy announcement days. A potential
drawback of this empirical strategy is that investors may anticipate (parts of) the purchase
   4
     It is important to note that the capital key uses the level of GDP and not GDP per capita. If one
would still be concerned about endogeneity of GDP shares, we could instead use population shares only to
construct the instrument as we have done in an earlier version of the paper.



                                                   3
programme and that expectations adjust gradually in response to the flow of macroeconomic
and financial news. Our empirical strategy does not require the selection of these days and
uses an instrument based on the capital key instead.
   Using our new security-level holdings and purchase data, we document five new insights:

   1. All institutions in vulnerable countries, including insurance companies, pension funds,
      and mutual funds, have a strong home bias in their fixed income portfolios compared to
      the same institutions in non-vulnerable countries. As such, the feedback loop between
      the financial sector and governments, which received a lot of attention among regu-
      lators, is not limited to banks, but extends to institutions that safeguard households'
      long-term savings.

   2. The foreign sector sells most in response to the programme (approximately e0.60 per
      euro purchased), followed by banks (approximately e0.30 per euro purchased) and
      mutual funds (approximately e0.10 per euro purchased). Long-term investors, such as
      insurance companies and pension funds, do not sell in response to the programme and,
      if anything, tend to buy some of the same securities as the ECB. The foreign sector
      sells bonds issued in vulnerable and non-vulnerable countries at roughly the same rate,
      and do not reinvest their proceeds elsewhere in the euro area.

   3. We do not find evidence of risk concentration or large-scale rebalancing across asset
      classes. For duration risk, if anything, the programme appears to reduce mismatch
      risk.

   4. Our first-stage estimates of the demand system imply that government yields declined
      by 47bp, on average, as a result of the programme, but the estimates range from
      -28bp to -57bp across countries. We connect these price responses to the demand
      curves of different sectors. The estimates imply to substantial heterogeneity across
      investors with the foreign sector's demand being most elastic with respect to prices.
      A recent generation of asset pricing models explicitly models intermediaries and how
      they may matter for purchase programmes. 5 Our results highlight the importance of
      investor heterogeneity in absorbing demand shocks. 6 As most models feature on a
      single class of intermediaries, an important direction for future research is to allow for
      more heterogeneity among intermediaries.
  5
     See for instance He and Krishnamurthy (2013), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), and Brunnermeier
and Sannikov (2016).
   6
     See Coimbra and Rey (2019), Koijen and Yogo (2019), and Greenwood, Hanson, and Liao (2018) for
models with richer heterogeneity across institutions.



                                                 4
   5. We conclude by using the price estimate, combined with the sensitivity of investors'
      portfolio to movements in the euro-area yield curve, to measure the valuation impact
      on investors' portfolios. 7 As institutions (banks, mutual funds, and insurance com-
      panies and pension funds) in non-vulnerable countries hold longer-duration portfolios
      compared to vulnerable countries and because they are larger, they benefit more. The
      total valuation effect equals e377 billion, of which e179 billion went to investors in
      non-vulnerable countries, e67 billion to investors in vulnerable countries, and the re-
      maining e131 billion to investors outside of the euro area.

       Theories of Quantitative Easing: The Dynamics of Risk Exposures and Asset Prices

   We group different theories to interpret our results into three categories. First, Wallace
(1981) and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) derive irrelevance results similar to Modigliani
and Miller (1958) for corporate capital structure. If markets are complete, households can
unwind any exposures coming from changes in the central bank's portfolio. As a result,
consumption, inflation, and asset prices are unaffected by the QE programme. The model
in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) features a representative household. In a model with
heterogeneous investors, the same economic mechanism suggests that only the investors that
are exposed to the trading gains and losses of the central bank (via taxation) adjust their
portfolios.8
   Second, QE can have a positive effect on asset prices and growth through various channels.
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) argue that QE programmes may be used to signal future
monetary policy.9 By buying long-term bonds, the central bank could have an incentive to
keep interest rates low until the bonds mature to avoid large mark-to-market losses. The
second channel through which prices and portfolios change is the "portfolio balance channel."
If the central bank purchases government bonds, it reduces the amount of duration and
government credit risk in the hands of investors, which lowers risk premia ( Vayanos and Vila
(2009)).10 In response to lower risk premia in government bond markets, investors optimally
rebalance their portfolios and increase prices (and lower risk premia) of other risky assets.
Depending on how investors substitute across various risk factors or characteristics (such as
maturity), other asset prices are affected (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2011)). We
   7
     As we do not have information on the structure of the liabilities, we cannot estimate the impact on the
overall funding positions of various intermediaries.
   8
     In the United States, Carpenter, Demiralp, Ihrig, and Klee (2015) show using data from the Flow of
Funds that the household sector (which includes hedge funds) is an important group selling to the Fed. In
Japan, Saito and Hogen (2014) document that the foreign sector sells in response to QE programme.
   9
     See also Mussa (1981) and Clouse, Henderson, Orphanides, Small, and Tinsley (2003).
  10
     See also Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) and Greenwood, Hanson, and Vayanos (2016).



                                                     5
use our risk accounting framework to measure directly how investors change their exposures
to key risk factors.
    Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2016) develop a model in which an increase in asset prices
can relax the financial constraints faced by institutions and increase their lending activity,
which in turn affects inflation and economic growth. We use our detailed holdings data to
show how eligible securities are distributed across investor sectors and geographically and
how much different investors benefit from QE.
    The third category of theories highlights potential financial stability concerns as a results
of QE. If successful, the yields of safe assets and the funding costs of intermediaries decrease.
In response, investors may decide to take on (excessive) levels of leverage, leading to financial
fragility (Woodford, 2011, Coimbra and Rey, 2019). In addition to leverage, investors may
take on additional forms of risk, such as liquidity and credit risks ( Stein, 2012). Of course,
in part, this is precisely the objective of QE. However, risks may get concentrated in certain
sectors, which may lead to financial instability. Although such risk shifting incentives are
perhaps best addressed through capital and risk regulation of banks and insurance companies,
regulation may be slow to adjust. Our risk accounting framework can be used to monitor the
dynamics of risk exposures and risk concentration across countries and institutional sectors.


                1.   Asset Purchase Programmes in the Euro Area

    We summarize the asset purchase programmes that the ECB implemented since the euro
crisis in the fall of 2009. The first covered bond purchase programme (CBPP1) of e60 billion
was implemented from July 2009 until June 2010. From November 2011 to October 2012, the
ECB implemented a second covered bond purchase programme (CBPP2) of e16.4 billion.
The securities markets programme (SMP) was implemented from May 2010 until September
2012 and was used to buy government bonds from vulnerable countries through secondary
markets. The size of the SMP portfolio at its peak was around e210 billion. The securities
purchased as part of these programmes will be held until maturity and we observe the legacy
holdings of the SMP. In September 2014, the ECB added a purchase programme for asset-
backed securities (ABSPP) and a third covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3).
    In January 2015, the ECB announced the extended asset purchase programme (EAPP),
which is the main focus of our paper. The EAPP has three components: it extends the
ABSPP and CBPP3 and adds the public sector purchase programme (PSPP). The PSPP
purchases bonds of euro-area governments, agencies, and European institutions. The PSPP
has been modified several times. We summarize the key dates, and subsequent modifications,
in Table I.


                                               6
 Table I: Expanded Asset Purchase Programme (EAPP): Key Policy Announcements. The
 table summarizes the key announcement dates and policy changes of the EAPP.

Date             Policy Announcement

Sep. 4, 2014     Deposit facility rate (DFR) decreased to -0.2% as of September 10, 2014.
Jan. 22, 2015    Announcement of the EAPP. Total monthly purchases of e60 billion from
                 March 9, 2015 until the end of September 2016. Eligible public sector assets
                 must have a remaining maturity between 2 and 30 years and a yield to maturity
                 above the DFR. Issuer limit and Issue limit set at 33% and 25% respectively.
Jul. 16, 2015    Expansion of the list of government agencies eligible for purchases.
Sep. 3, 2015     Issue share limit increased to 33% except for bonds with specific CACs. Effec-
                 tive as of November 10, 2015.
Dec. 3, 2015     (1) DFR decreased to -0.3% as of December 9, 2015. (2) EAPP is extended
                 until the end of March 2017. (3) Reinvestment of the principal payments from
                 the purchases. (4) List of eligible assets is enlarged to include euro-denominated
                 marketable debt instruments issued by regional and local governments located
                 in the euro area.
Mar. 10, 2016    (1) DFR decreased to -0.4% as of March 16, 2016. (2) Monthly purchases
                 under the EAPP to be expanded to e80 billion starting on April 1, 2016. (3)
                 ECB launches Corporate Sector Purchase Programme (CSPP). Purchases to be
                 included in the combined monthly purchases and will begin in late June 2016.
                 (4) The issuer and issue share limits for securities issued by eligible international
                 organizations and multilateral development banks is increased to 50%.
Apr. 21, 2016    Publication of technical details on CSPP purchases.
Dec. 8, 2016     (1) Purchases of e80 billion per month decreased to e60 billion as of April
                 2017. (2) EAPP is extended until the end of December 2017. (3) The min-
                 imum maturity threshold for eligibility is decreased to 1 year. (4) Purchases
                 of securities under the EAPP with a yield to maturity below the DFR will be
                 permitted to the extent necessary.
Jan. 19, 2017    Publication of technical detail on purchases below the DFR.
Oct. 26, 2017    (1) From January 2018 the net asset purchases are intended to continue at a
                 monthly pace of e30 billion until the end of September 2018. (2) ECB publishes
                 additional data on redemptions as well as information about reinvestments and
                 role of private sector purchase programmes.
Jun. 14, 2018    (1) After September 2018 the monthly purchases will be reduced to e15 billion
                 until the end of December 2018 and net purchases will then end.
Dec. 3, 2018     Five-yearly adjustment of capital key.
Dec. 13, 2018    The new capital key will guide the reinvestments.




                                               7
    The combined purchases were announced to be e60 billion per month starting in March
2015. The initial programme was supposed to end in September 2016. The programme
would lead to Eurosystem purchases of e1.14 trillion, which amounts to approximately 15%
of the euro area's GDP. The stated objective of the programme is to stimulate economic
activity by lowering the borrowing costs of firms and households in an environment where
the main policy rates are close to their effective lower bound. Ultimately, this should help
restoring inflation at a level close to, but below, 2%.
    Before the start of the PSPP, the purchases of the ABSPP and CBPP3 programmes
amount to e10 billion a month. In addition, the ECB announced that the PSPP was split
into purchasing bonds of supranational institutions 11 located in the euro area (12%) and
governments (88%). Assuming that the ABSPP and CBPP3 purchases continue at the same
pace, this corresponds to purchases of e6 billion of supranational bonds and e44 billion of
government bonds (Claeys, Leandro, and Mandra, 2015).
    These e44 billion of purchases are allocated to bonds issued by different euro-area gov-
ernments according to the "capital key," which is a country's share of the ECB's capital.
The capital key weight of a country is an equal-weighted average of its GDP and popula-
tion shares.12 The purchases are held by national central banks and the ECB. For 20% of
the purchases, losses are shared via the ECB according to the capital key. Throughout the
paper, we refer to ECB purchases as the sum of all purchases by Eurosystem central banks.
    The ECB specified a set of eligibility criteria for bonds that are purchased as part of
the PSPP. The bonds need to be investment grade (corresponding to a credit rating of at
least BBB), with additional criteria for countries operating under an EU/IMF Eligible Asset
Rating adjustment program. The bond maturities need to be between 2 and 30 years, and
up to 33% (25%) of an issuer (issue) can be purchased. 13 In addition, the yield to maturity
has to be above the deposit facility rate, which was equal to -20bp at the launch of the
programme. The deposit facility rate is the interest banks receive for depositing money with
the central bank overnight.
    Bonds issued by certain national agencies is also eligible, such as for instance the bonds
of the Landeskreditbank Baden-W¨    urttemberg Foerderbank. Across maturities, the ECB
intends to act as "market neutral" as possible, which we interpret as buying (approximately)
  11
      Supranational institutions in the euro area include the European Financial Stability Facility, the Eu-
ropean Investment Bank, the European Stability Mechanism, the European Union, the European Atomic
Energy Community, the Council of Europe Development Bank, and the Nordic Investment Bank.
   12
      The ECB adjusts the shares every five years and whenever a new country joins the EU. The adjustment
is made on the basis of data provided by the European Commission.
   13
      The issue-level limit may be raised on a case-by-case basis. The issuer limit of 33% is a means to
safeguard market functioning and price formation as well as to mitigate the risk of the ECB becoming a
dominant creditor of euro area governments.



                                                     8
in proportion to the outstanding maturity distribution between 2 and 30 years.


                                      2.   Data Description

                       2.1.   Portfolio Holdings and Asset Characteristics

    We use data on security-level portfolio holdings of euro-area investors from the Securities
Holding Statistics (SHS). 14 Securities in our sample are identified by a unique International
Securities Identification Number (ISIN). The data are collected on a quarterly basis from
custodian banks in the euro area since 2013Q4, which is the first quarter of our sample. The
last available quarter at the time of writing is 2017Q4.
    Investors in the SHS are defined by sector and by country of domicile. There are six
aggregate sectors: households, monetary and financial institutions (MFI), insurance compa-
nies and pension funds (ICPF), other financial institutions (OFI), general government, and
non-financial corporations. 15 OFI includes important intermediaries such as mutual funds
and hedge funds. We will refer to MFI as banks and to OFI as mutual funds, which are
the largest representatives of these groups. We group non-financial corporations and general
government as a sector labeled "Other" as we mostly focus on banks, mutual funds, insur-
ance companies and pension funds, the ECB, and the foreign sector. The countries are the
19 member states of the euro area. 16 The total holdings reported in the SHS correspond
to approximately e27 trillion during our sample. The assets covered include both govern-
ment and corporate bonds, equities, mutual fund shares, asset-backed securities (ABS), and
covered bonds.
    We merge the SHS with data on the securities held by the ECB as part of the SMP, the
CBPP3, and the PSPP. Holdings are observed at the same level of detail and frequency as
the SHS so that the combined data sources provide a unique overview of the portfolios of
public and private investors in the euro area.
    To protect the confidentiality of our data, we compute the duration risk held by the
ECB using publicly-available data. If the weighted-average maturity of the ECB's portfolio
is available, we select a sample of government bonds with maturities in a one-year window
around it and compute the weighted-average duration of these bonds. For covered bonds
and ABS, we take the duration of the market portfolio based on these securities.
    Our main data source for security characteristics is the Centralised Securities Database
(CSDB). The CSDB contains information on more than six million active debt securities,
  14
    We refer to EU Regulation 1011/2012 for more information on SHS.
  15
    The sector definitions follow the European System of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95) standard.
 16
    The list of countries is Belgium, Germany, Ireland, Greece, Spain, France, Italy, Cyprus, Luxembourg,
Malta, The Netherlands, Austria, Portugal, Slovenia, Slovakia, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.


                                                   9
equities, and mutual fund shares issued by companies globally. The data are from both
public and commercial sources and the database is managed by the ESCB ( ECB, 2010).
A key variable used in CSDB is price, which is the market price when available. For debt
securities for which prices are unavailable, for instance, when a bond does not trade, the
price is estimated using the reference information of the security.
    We complement the CSDB with data on credit ratings given by Standard and Poor's,
Moody's, Fitch, and DBRS. These are the four rating agencies recognized as "External
credit assessment institutions" by the Eurosystem, which publishes also a mapping between
the different rating scales. We use the long-term asset-level credit rating. If this rating is
unavailable, then we use, in order of priority, the short-term asset level credit rating, the
long-term issuer rating or the short-term issuer rating. In assigning ratings, we follow the
priority rule used by the Eurosystem. 17 When we have ratings from multiple agencies, we
apply the rules defined in the guidelines (first-best rating for non-ABS securities and the
second-best rating for ABS).

                                        2.2.   Security Types

    We study the direct holdings of debt instruments and equities. We account for all indirect
holdings of securities through mutual funds as part of the mutual fund sector. We group
securities into broad categories as summarized in Figure 1. We use the CSDB characteristics
to classify securities, unless mentioned otherwise.
    First, we distinguish "euro-area" and "non-euro-area" securities. Euro-area securities
are defined as euro-denominated securities issued in the euro area. It is useful to make
this distinction for some of our calculations as we do not always have data on the total
amount of debt outstanding for securities issued outside of the euro area (at both face and
market value). However, we always have accurate data on holdings of euro-area investors for
securities issued inside and outside of the euro area.
    For euro-area securities, we separate equity and fixed income securities and we consider
a finer breakdown of debt securities. We define government debt as debt issued by the
general, central, state or local government sectors. Non-government debt is issued by the
remaining issuer sectors. We divide government debt into "PSPP eligible" and "PSPP
ineligible," depending on whether a bond satisfies the eligibility criteria outlined in Section
1. In addition, we also classify a bond as PSPP eligible if the Eurosystem purchase data
show that a bond has been purchased as part of the PSPP.
  17
    Guideline 2015/510 of the ECB on the implementation of the Eurosystem monetary policy framework,
Art.82/83/84 "The Eurosystem shall consider ECAI issue ratings in priority to ECAI issuer or ECAI guar-
antor ratings."



                                                  10
                              Figure 1: Summary of security types.


    We split non-government debt into corporate bonds and collateralized debt, which in-
cludes ABS and covered bonds. To distinguish standard corporate bonds from ABS, covered
bonds, medium-term notes, and commercial paper, we use data on asset type from the
Eurosystem collateral database. If this information is missing, we rely on the CSDB to de-
termine the type of debt. 18 We omit commercial paper as we do not focus on the very short
end of the yield curve.
    We use data on credit ratings to group corporate bonds into investment grade and spec-
ulative grade. If bonds are unrated, we classify them as speculative grade. Panel A of Table
II summarizes the definitions of the asset categories.

                                        2.3.   Investor Types

    In addition to the investor sectors defined in Section 2.1, we construct the holdings of the
"foreign sector," which are all non-euro area investors, as the difference between the total
amount outstanding of a given security from the CSDB and the aggregate holdings of euro-
area investors. Combined with the holdings data from the SHS and the data on Eurosystem
purchases, we consider in total seven investor types as summarized in Panel B of Table II.
    Within the euro area, investors differ along two dimensions. First, several sectors are
subject to some form of risk regulation, such as banks and insurance companies. Second,
investors differ in terms of the maturity structure of their liabilities. For instance, banks have
  18
    Standard bonds are defined as debt types D.1, D.11, D.15, D.16, D.164, D.18. Covered bonds correspond
to asset types 9, 10, 12 and 13 in the ECB collateral database and debt types D.21, D.23 and D.233 in
CSDB. Medium term notes are asset types 02 in the collateral database or debt types D.3 and D.32 in
CSDB. Commercial paper is asset type 03 in the collateral database and debt types D.7, D.72, D.74 and
D.742 in CSDB.



                                                   11
                        Table II: Definitions of asset categories and investor sectors.


                                          Panel A: Definition asset categories
Category        Description

1               PSPP-eligible government bonds, e denominated, and euro-area issuer.
2               PSPP-ineligible government bonds, e denominated, and euro-area issuer.
3               High-grade corporate debt (incl. medium-term notes), e denominated, and euro-area issuer.
4               Low-grade corporate debt (incl. medium-term notes), e denominated, and euro-area issuer.
5               Asset backed securities (incl. covered bonds), e denominated, and euro-area issuer.
6               Equity, e denominated, and euro-area issuer.
7               Non-euro-area issuer or in a currency other than euros.

                                          Panel B: Definition investor sectors
Sector          Description

1               Household sector (HH).
2               Insurance companies and pension funds (ICPF).
3               Monetary financial institutions, such as banks (MFI).
4               Other financial institutions, such as mutual funds (OFI).
5               Foreign investors.
6               Other (General government and Non-Financial Corporations).
7               Eurosystem holdings in the framework of the PSPP, CBPP, and the SMP.


    short-term liabilities that may be subject to runs, while insurance companies have long-term
    liabilities that cannot be withdrawn easily in most countries. 19 The combination of long-
    term liabilities and risk regulation leads to fairly inelastic demand by insurance companies
    and pension funds for long-term bonds.
        For some of the calculations, we separate countries into two groups based on their ex-
    posure to the European sovereign debt crisis following Altavilla et al. (2017). The first
    group includes the vulnerable countries: Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Cyprus, and Ire-
    land. The second group consists of the non-vulnerable countries: Austria, Germany, France,
    the Netherlands, Estonia, Luxembourg, Latvia, Slovakia, Finland, Malta, Slovenia, Belgium,
    and Lithuania.

                                   2.4.   Potential Shortcomings of the Data

        We are aware of two potential shortcomings of our data. First, as is typically the case
    in measuring cross-border holdings, we cannot measure securities positions of euro-area in-
    stitutions that are held through offshore institutions, and institutions located outside of the
     19
          France is an exception in the euro area where insurance liabilities are more similar to demand deposits.


                                                          12
euro area (see Milesi-Ferretti, Strobbe, and Tamirisa (2010) and Zucman (2013) for further
discussions). Second, we have accurate holdings of cash securities, but we do not observe
derivatives positions. Abad, Aldasoro, Aymanns, D'Errico, Rousova, Hoffmann, Langfield,
and Roukny (2016) use new data on OTC derivatives in the euro area that can potentially
be merged with our data to get a comprehensive view based on both cash and derivatives
positions.


  3.   Institutional Portfolio Holdings Before the Purchase Programme

  We summarize in this section the heterogeneity in portfolio holdings before the announce-
ment and implementation of the PSPP as a point of reference.

                                   3.1.   Securities Holdings

    In Table III, we report the holdings by sector and geography for each asset category. We
compute the average market value of portfolio holdings from 2013Q4 to 2014Q4, which is
before the PSPP was announced.
    The top panel summarizes the holdings by sector for investors in non-vulnerable countries,
the middle panel for investors in vulnerable countries, and the bottom panel presents the
holdings of the ECB and the foreign sector. Each of the columns corresponds to an asset
category and the final column summarizes the total holdings. The final column indicates
that, as measured by assets under management, investors in non-vulnerable countries are
are more than twice as large as investors in vulnerable countries.
    Insurance companies and pension funds invest a large fraction of their portfolios in fixed-
income instruments and in particular in eligible government bonds. In terms of corporate
bonds, their portfolios are tilted towards investment-grade corporate bonds. These alloca-
tions are consistent with standard asset-liability management.
    Banks also invest a large share of their portfolios in eligible government debt. Also, they
are the largest investor in ABS and covered bonds. The corporate bond portfolios in non-
vulnerable countries are tilted towards investment-grade corporate bonds, while the opposite
is true in vulnerable countries. We explore this fact in more detail below.
    Mutual funds invest a large fraction of their assets in equity and notably foreign securities.
This implies that mutual funds play an important role in providing global diversification ben-
efits for euro-area households and institutions. The foreign sector mostly holds government
bonds and euro-area equity. About a third of their allocation to government bonds is invested
in ineligible bonds, which includes short-maturity bonds (residual maturities shorter than
two years) but also bonds with yields that are below the deposit facility rate (for instance,


                                               13
              Table III: Holdings by investor type, geography, and asset category.

The table reports the average market value of holdings, computed before the announcement of the PSPP, from
2013Q4 until 2014Q4. The asset categories are defined as: Eligible Govt. (i.e., PSPP eligible government
bonds), Ineligible Govt. (i.e., PSPP ineligible government bonds), IG-Corp. (i.e., Investment grade corporate
bonds), SG-Corp. (i.e., Speculative grade corporate bonds), ABS&CB (i.e., ABS and covered bonds), Equity
(i.e., euro-area equity), and Foreign (i.e., Non-euro area assets). The top panel reports the holdings for
investor sectors in non-vulnerable countries. the middle panel for vulnerable countries, and the bottom
panel for the ECB and the foreign sector. The classification of vulnerable and non-vulnerable countries
follows Altavilla et al. (2016). All figures are in billion of euros.



                                       Eligible   Ineligible      IG     SG      ABS
 Riskiness           Sector               Govt         Govt    Corp     Corp    & CB     Equity     Foreign      Total
                     Banks                 827          451      443     143      702       127         650      3,343
                     Mutual Funds          577          211      281     234      190       901       2,415      4,809
 Non-vulnerable      ICPF                  940          170      362     201      191       137         481      2,482
                     Household              19            16     100     146       12       466         146        905
                     Other                 126            82      34      45       26       768          87       1168
                     Total               2,489          930    1,220     770    1,122     2,398       3,780     12,709
                     Banks                 542          394      140     230      587        72         262      2,227
                     Mutual Funds          161          133       40      47       25       156         808      1,370
 Vulnerable          ICPF                  340            97      70      45       38        29          64        683
                     Household             174            73     120     237        5       199          70        878
                     Other                 113            44      11      23        2       257          38        488
                     Total               1,328          741      381     582      657       713       1,243      5,645
                     Foreign             2,298        1,499      278     539      359     2,853           -      7,826
                     ECB                   114            17       0       0       30         0           0        161


in the case of Germany).
    The ECB holds a small portfolio of government bonds and covered bonds due to the
earlier purchase programmes, namely the CBPP and the SMP, before the start of the PSPP.
During this period, the ECB does not invest in corporate bonds or equity. The holdings of
ineligible government bonds is a consequence of a bond's residual maturity dropping below
two years at some point or the yield falling below the deposit facility rate, rendering it
ineligible.
    The holdings of eligible government debt across institutions play a central role in theories
that show that asset purchase programmes can relax financial constraints of compromised
institutions (Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2016). We directly estimate the benefit of the
PSPP to different institutions and across geographies in Section 5.4.
    In addition, banks' holdings of government debt has been flagged as a potential concern
for financial stability as losses to the government impact the banking sector, which may feed
back into the fiscal position of the government (Altavilla et al., 2017). While the literature on

                                                     14
"doom loops" has focused on the banking sector, we show that the home bias in government
debt applies to other intermediaries as well.
    Table IV reports the holdings of PSPP-eligible debt by investor sector and geography. The
first column reports the market value of eligible debt held (in billions of euros). The second
column reports the share in percent of an investor's portfolio invested in eligible government
debt. The third column reports the share in percent of the investment in eligible debt for
which the holder and issuer country coincide, that is, the home bias PSPP-eligible debt.

    Table IV: Holdings of PSPP-eligible government debt by sector and country group.

The table reports for each investor sector and country group three statistics on the holdings of PSPP-eligible
debt. The first columns reports the market value of the holdings in billions of euros. The second column
reports the share of a sector's portfolio invested in PSPP-eligible government debt (in %). The third column
reports the share of a sector's PSPP-eligible debt portfolio invested in the same country (in %), which is
the home bias. Each statistic is an average from 2013Q4 until 2014Q4. The classification of vulnerable and
non-vulnerable countries follows Altavilla et al. (2016).

     Riskiness           Sector            Holdings (bn e)      Share eligible (%)     Home bias (%)
                         Banks                          827                     25                55
                         Mutual funds                   577                     12                19
     Non-vulnerable      ICPF                           940                     38                52
                         Household                       19                      2                68
                         Other                          126                     11                72
                         Total                        2,489                     20                47
                         Banks                          542                     24                84
                         Mutual funds                   161                     12                65
     Vulnerable          ICPF                           340                     50                85
                         Household                      174                     20                96
                         Other                          113                     23                97
                         Total                        1,328                     24                85
                         Foreign                      2,298                      -                 -
                         ECB                            114                     83                 -


    In both regions, insurance companies and pension funds invest a larger share of their
portfolios in eligible government debt than the other sectors. The main insight from Ta-
ble IV is, however, that all institutions in vulnerable countries have a stronger home bias,
compared to non-vulnerable countries. Banks invest 84% of their PSPP-eligible government
debt portfolio in their own country, insurance companies and pension funds 85%, and even
mutual funds 65%. This implies that concerns about doom loops apply to the financial sector
more broadly, and not just banks.
    Acharya and Steffen (2015) discuss various reasons why banks in vulnerable countries
invest heavily in own-country government debt. First, banks can borrow cheaply from the


                                                     15
ECB and invest in high-yielding government bonds, thereby earning the "carry." This trade
may be attractive to banks as it is considered to be riskless under the Basel regulations.
However, as any government bond has a zero risk weight, the carry trade does not imply
home bias. More importantly, mutual funds are not subject to the same risk weights, yet
their portfolios have a similar home bias as those of regulated institutions.
    Second, in the presence of limited liability, it may be optimal for financial institutions
to invest in own-country government bonds as the states of the world in which the bonds
default align with those in which the institutions fail as well ( Diamond and Rajan, 2011).
As mutual funds are all-equity firms, this argument does not explain the home bias for these
institutions.
    Financial repression provides a third possible explanation if financial institutions are
encouraged or forced to buy bonds of their own government to lower government borrowing
costs, see Becker and Ivashina (2017) and Ongena, Popov, and Horen (2019). While it may
appear at first sight that this theory cannot explain the home bias of mutual funds, it is
worth noting that most mutual funds in the euro area are offered via banks. The pressure on
banks may therefore motivate mutual funds to tilt their portfolios towards the government
debt of their own country.
    Our findings are important from a financial stability perspective. Policy discussions tend
to focus on the bank-government feedback loop. Given that insurance companies, pension
funds, and mutual funds play a central role in saving for retirement, the failure of a sovereign
would not only have an adverse effect on the banking sector, but also on the accumulation
of retirement savings.

                   3.2.   Risk Exposures of Investment Portfolios: Measurement

    In addition to holdings and flows, we also estimate the distribution and dynamics of risk
exposures to euro-area financial market risks across investors. We distinguish five dimensions
of risk: (i) euro-area duration risk, (ii) euro-area government credit risk, (iii) euro-area
corporate credit risk, (iv) euro-area equity risk, and (v) foreign risk.
    For each of these risks, we define (linear) risk measures to quantify exposures. For euro-
area interest rate risk, we use duration. We measure the duration of government bonds, both
eligible and ineligible, corporate bonds, ABS, and covered bonds. 20 To compute duration,
we need to know the yield-to-maturity, the coupon rate, and the payment frequency of the
coupons.
   For government credit risk, we measure the risk exposure using the credit rating of all gov-
ernment bonds. For each country, we use the ISIN-level rating when it exists, and otherwise
 20
      We assume that the duration of floating-rate bonds is zero.

                                                      16
the long-term debt rating of a country. We then map each rating to the 5-year cumulative
default probability using estimates in Moody's (2015) and take the average probability of
default as our risk measure.
    We measure corporate credit risk exposure analogously. We aggregate the holdings across
all corporate bonds, ABS, and covered bonds. We map the ratings to default frequencies
using estimates for 5-year cumulative corporate default probabilities reported in Moody's
(2015).21
    For equity risk, we report the total investment in equities as a share of the overall portfolio
value. This assumes that the equity exposure of fixed income securities, once we control for
rating and duration, is zero and that all stocks have a beta equal to one. For foreign risks,
we simply measure the portfolio share. In all cases, we report the average risk measures from
2013Q4 until 2014Q4.

                                    3.3.   Portfolio Risk Exposures

    We report the risk exposures by holder country group and sector in Table V. The first
column reports the duration based on all bonds, including bonds issued outside of the euro
area (i.e., based on asset category 1 to 5 and 7). The second column reports the euro-area
duration risk (i.e., based on asset category 1 to 5). By comparing both columns, we find
that these numbers generally coincide other than for mutual funds in vulnerable countries.
The difference for the foreign sector is consistent with euro-area firms issuing debt in, for
instance, U.S. dollars, which is held primarily by investors outside of the euro area.
    Across institutional sectors, we find that insurance companies and pension funds hold the
longest duration portfolios. The duration for insurers and pension funds is about twice as
large as for banks. The euro-area duration is lower for banks, mutual funds, and insurance
companies and pension funds in vulnerable countries compared to non-vulnerable countries,
which in part reflects the supply of bonds outstanding.
    Home bias combined with higher government risk exposures of debt in vulnerable coun-
tries explains the difference in government risk exposures across vulnerable and non-vulnerable
countries. Also, the ECB purchased debt of vulnerable countries as part of the SMP, which
leads to government exposure before the start of the PSPP.
    The exposure to corporate credit risk is also higher for institutions in vulnerable countries,
although the difference is less extreme than for government risk. The ECB's portfolio, which
   21
      In interpreting the numbers, it is important to keep in mind that a bond's rating can be low because of
its exposure to either aggregate or idiosyncratic risk (or both). As we do not have the information required
to decompose risk exposures, we assume that a bond's exposure to aggregate corporate credit risk is linear
in its default probability.



                                                     17
                        Table V: Risk Exposures of Investors' Portfolios.

The table reports the average risk characteristics from 2013Q4 until 2014Q4. Duration and euro-area duration
are expressed in years. The government credit risk exposure is measured by the 5-year cumulative probability
of default for either governments or firms as reported in Moody's (2015) and we use the ISIN-level rating
when it exists, and otherwise the long-term debt rating of a country. For euro-area equity and foreign risk
exposure, we report the fraction in percent of an investor's portfolio invested in either asset category. The
top panel reports the risk exposures for investor sectors in non-vulnerable countries and the middle panel
for investors in vulnerable countries. The bottom panel reports the risk exposures of the portfolios of the
foreign sector and the ECB (as so far as related to purchase programmes). ECB duration risk is imputed
from public data on maturity and duration data on representative bond portfolios. The classification of
vulnerable and non-vulnerable countries follows Altavilla et al. (2016).



 Riskiness            Sector       Dur. EA Dur. Government Corporate Equity Foreign
                      Banks         3.2     3.2        0.4       0.5      4      19
                      Mutual Funds  5.2     5.1        0.6       1.2     19      50
 Non-vulnerable       ICPF          6.8     7.2        0.3       1.0      6      19
                      Household     2.6     2.6        0.5       1.7     51      16
                      Other         4.1     4.2        0.2       1.2     66       7
                      Banks         2.4     2.4        1.5       1.5      3      12
                      Mutual Funds  5.7     3.8        1.3       1.9     11      59
 Vulnerable           ICPF          5.3     5.4        1.3       1.6      4       9
                      Household     3.6     3.6        1.3       2.2     23       8
                      Other         4.8     4.8        1.6       2.1     53       8
                      Foreign         -     4.9        0.5       1.3      -       -
                      ECB           3.5     3.5        1.5       0.6      0       0


only includes covered bonds during our sample, and the portfolio of banks in non-vulnerable
countries are the safest before the start of the PSPP.

                             3.4.   The Distribution of Risk Exposures

    In Table VI we report how the total risk is distributed across the different investor sectors
for each of the risk factors. By definition, each of the columns (excluding the subtotals)
aggregates to 100.
    Insurance companies and pension funds bear 26% of all euro-area duration risk, the
foreign sector 31%, and banks 20%. The banks' risk exposure is surprisingly high given
the relatively short duration of their liabilities. Vulnerable countries are most exposed to
government risk, which is a direct consequence of the home bias in their government debt
portfolios, see Table IV. Banks in vulnerable countries bear 23% of all government credit
risk, while they only bear 7% of the duration risk. Compared to banks in non-vulnerable


                                                     18
                          Table VI: The Distribution of Risk Exposures.

The table shows the distribution of risks across investors, normalized to 100 for the total risk outstanding.
We report the average from 2013Q4 until 2014Q4. The top panel reports the risks for investor sectors in non-
vulnerable countries and the middle panel for investors in vulnerable countries. The bottom panel reports
the risks of the portfolios of the foreign sector and the ECB. ECB duration risk is imputed from public
data on maturity and duration data on representative bond portfolios. The classification of vulnerable and
non-vulnerable countries follows Altavilla et al. (2016).

    Riskiness           Sector             EA Dur.     Government      Corporate     Equity     Foreign
                        Banks                  13               7             14          2          13
                        Mutual Funds           12               7             13         15          48
    Non-vulnerable      ICPF                   21               6             13          2           9
                        Household               1               0              5          8           3
                        Other                   2               1              2         13           2
                        Total                  49              21             47         40          75
                        Banks                   7              23             22          1           5
                        Mutual Funds            2               6              3          3          16
    Vulnerable          ICPF                    5               9              4          1           2
                        Household               4               5              7          3           2
                        Other                   2               4              1          4           0
                        Total                  20              47             37         12          25
                        Foreign                31              28             18         48           0
                        ECB                     1               3              0          0           0


countries, which are more than 50% larger than banks in vulnerable countries, banks in
vulnerable countries bear almost four times the government risk. We estimate that the ECB
only bears 1% of the euro-area duration risk and 3% of all government credit risk as a result
of the earlier SMP.
    The exposure to corporate credit risk is more equally split across country groups, with
sectors in non-vulnerable countries bearing 47% of all risk and sectors in vulnerable countries
bearing 37%. The foreign sector bears 18% of all euro-area credit risk. However, the risk
exposures in vulnerable countries are concentrated in the banking sector (22% of 37%),
while the risk exposures are almost equally split among banks, mutual funds, and insurance
companies and pension funds in non-vulnerable countries. Hence, in vulnerable countries,
both government and corporate credit risks are concentrated in the banking sector.
    The picture is quite different in terms of exposures to euro-area equity risk and foreign
risk. The foreign sector bears almost half of all euro-area equity risk and institutions in non-
vulnerable countries bear another 40%, where mutual funds account for the largest share
(15% of 40%). For foreign risk, we normalize the overall holdings to 100% for all euro-area
investors as we do not observe the holdings of foreign investors in securities issued outside of


                                                     19
the euro area. As expected, non-vulnerable countries are most exposed to foreign risk (75%
versus 25%) and in both country groups, most of the risk is concentrated in the mutual fund
sector.

       4.    Portfolio Rebalancing and the Dynamics of Risk Exposures

    We study portfolio flows and the dynamics of risk exposures during the PSPP from
2015Q2 until 2017Q4. In addition to broad portfolio flows, our main contribution in this
section is to use our detailed micro data to establish a close connection between the securities
purchased by the ECB and the investors, differentiated by geography and institutional type,
who sell those same securities.

                     4.1.   Portfolio Rebalancing Across Asset Categories

   We first compute how investors rebalance their portfolios for each of the asset categories.
For investor i and security n, we measure rebalancing at time t, Tint , as

(1)                               Tint = (Qint - Qin,t-1 ) Pnt ,

where Qint denotes the number of securities and Pnt the price. This definition measures
active rebalancing and is not impacted by price effects. We then aggregate the overall
rebalancing activity by asset category in a given quarter. In Table VII, we report the
cumulative rebalancing in billions of euros from 2015Q2 to 2017Q4. As a point of reference,
Table B.1 summarizes the average rebalancing during the quarters before the PSPP from
2013Q4 until 2014Q4.
    From 2015Q2 to 2017Q4, the ECB purchases e1,878 billion. The total supply of gov-
ernment debt increases by e539 billion, implying that investors need to sell e1,349 billion
for markets to clear. Quite strikingly, the majority, namely e-917 billion, was sold by the
foreign sector. In the period leading up to the programme, the foreign sector was a net
buyer of euro-area government debt. This finding is surprising from the perspective of the
neutrality theorems, which imply that sectors that are affected by changes in the timing or
risk exposures of the central bank's portfolio (through taxation or adjustments in subsidies)
should rebalance their portfolios. 22 It seems unlikely that the foreign sector is most exposed
to the gains and losses in the central bank's portfolio. However, our finding is consistent with
estimates from Japan based on aggregate statistics from the Flow of Funds, see Saito and
Hogen (2014). One possible interpretation is that the foreign sector's demand is more elastic
  22
    Since the consumption plans are unaffected by asset purchase programmes if the neutrality theorems
apply, the exchange rate should not be affected either.

                                                 20
                       Table VII: Portfolio Rebalancing During the PSPP.

The table shows the cumulative rebalancing from 2015Q2 to 2017Q4 by asset category (EUR billion). The
holdings are the euro-area government debt holdings as measured in terms of market value as of 2015Q2.
The share sold is the rebalancing in government debt relative to the holdings (in percentage points). The
top panel reports the rebalancing for investor sectors in non-vulnerable countries and the second panel for
investors in vulnerable countries. The third panel reports the rebalancing of the foreign sector and the
ECB. The bottom panel reports net issuances. The flows are reported in billions of euros. The classification
of vulnerable and non-vulnerable countries follows Altavilla et al. (2016).



 Riskiness          Sector            Govt     Corp    ABS & CB       Equity    Foreign    Holdings    Share sold (%)
                    Banks              -275    -139         -178         -15       -292        1259                -22
                    Mutual funds        -76      55          -51        178         175         826                 -9
 Non-vulnerable     ICPF                 92      -7          -33          -1        126        1169                  8
                    Household           -14     -68           -4           1          -1         28                -50
                    Other                15      -6           -7          67           9        208                  7
                    Banks              -192     -98          -40          11        -14         927                -21
                    Mutual funds        -58      32           -9          22        303         302                -19
 Vulnerable         ICPF                177      47           -9          15        110         471                 38
                    Household           -62    -183           -3          21        -28         208                -30
                    Other               -29     -13           -4         -11         13         148                -20
                    Foreign            -917    -122         -140           -           -       3715                -25
                    ECB               1,878     130          184           0           0          -                  -
                    Total               539    -371         -294           -           -          -                  -




                                                      21
      Table VIII: Foreign sector rebalancing by asset class and issuer country riskiness

The table shows the cumulative rebalancing from 2015Q2 to 2017Q4 by asset category (EUR billion) for
the foreign sector. The holdings pre-QE are measured in terms of the average market value from 2013Q4
to 2014Q4. The share sold is the rebalancing in government debt relative to the holdings (in percentage
points). The flows are reported in billions of euros. The classification of vulnerable and non-vulnerable
countries follows Altavilla et al. (2016).


    Issuer risk        Asset type             Prior holdings    PSPP rebalancing      Share sold %
                       Government bonds                2,995                -690                -23
    Non-vulnerable     Corporate bonds                   669                -108                -16
                       ABS & CB                          198                 -70                -35
                       Government bonds                  803                -227                -28
    Vulnerable         Corporate bonds                   147                 -14                 -9
                       ABS & CB                          161                 -69                -43


with respect to price. As yields decline in response to the PSPP, they reallocate capital
to other regions or asset classes that offer more attractive risk-return tradeoffs. Euro-area
investors, by contrast, have euro-denominated liabilities that result in more inelastic demand
for securities in the euro area, even though they may have elastic demand across countries
within the euro area.
    We split the sales of the foreign sector by bonds issued by governments in vulnerable
and non-vulnerable countries. To put their rebalancing behavior into perspective, we scale
the sales by their holdings right before the start of the programme in 2015Q2. As shown in
Table VIII, the foreign sector sells across both geographies approximately in proportion to
their prior holdings. The same is true in the other fixed-income asset classes.
    The banking sector sells e-467 billion and mutual funds e-134 billion of government
bonds. Insurance companies and pension funds in fact buy e269 billion of government
bonds with a larger share purchased by long-term investors in vulnerable countries. Inelastic
demand, or even upward-sloping demand curves, of insurance companies and pension funds
may be due to their desire to hedge the interest rate risk associated with their long-dated
liabilities in a low-rate environment (Domanski, Shin, and Sushko, 2017).
    For corporate bonds, net issuances are large and negative both before and during the
PSPP. Beyond households, this reduction is primarily absorbed by banks and the foreign
sector. To understand the supply-side dynamics of the corporate bond market in the euro
area, we use data from the ECB's Statistical Data Warehouse. In Figure 2, we plot the total
amounts outstanding for corporate bonds issued by non-financial firms, financial firms ex-
cluding banks, and banks. Although these data also include bonds issued in foreign currency,
which is a broader definition than what we use, the broad trends are comparable.


                                                   22
    Following the government debt crisis in the euro area in 2012, banks have reduced the
amount of debt outstanding dramatically. The timing suggests that this deleveraging of the
banking sector is unrelated to the PSPP (although the programme may have helped). The
debt dynamics for banks is strikingly different than for other financial firms, for which the
total debt outstanding has been stable since the financial crisis, and for non-financial firms,
for which the total debt outstanding gradually increased over time.

                                                     Figure 2: Corporate Debt Dynamics.
The figure displays the total face value of debt outstanding from January 1990 until December 2017 for
non-financial firms (dashed line), financial firms excluding banks (dotted line), and banks (solid line).
                                   6
                  Bonds outstanding (EUR trillion)
                         2         0   4




                                           1990m1               2000m1              2010m1                     2020m1

                                                         Banks                      Non-bank financial firms
                                                         Non-financial firms




    Third, the ECB also purchases e184 billion of covered bonds. Like for corporate bonds,
net issuances are negative as well and the flows come primarily from banks (in vulnerable
and non-vulnerable countries) and the foreign sector. Again, these flows are similar to the
flows before the PSPP and may be due to banks deleveraging instead of being caused by the
PSPP.
    Lastly, equity and foreign asset flows are relatively small compared to the flows in fixed
income markets, other than for mutual funds. Hence, most of the rebalancing, in euro terms,
happens within fixed income markets. 23
   See also Di Maggio, Kermani, and Palmer (2019) for evidence of limited rebalancing in U.S. mortgage
  23

markets in response to the QE programmes in the U.S.




                                                                               23
              4.2.   Which Sectors Sell to the ECB? Evidence from Micro Data

    The results in the previous section rely on time-series information only and may therefore
be impacted by broader trends in flows to various investors during our sample period. In
this section, we extend these results by using cross-sectional information, in addition to
time-series information, by estimating which investors sell the securities purchased by the
ECB.
    To fix ideas, we start from the market clearing condition in changes for security n at
time t

(2)                               Tint + TF oreign,nt + TECB,nt = Int ,
                              i


where TF oreign,nt and TECB,nt denotes the rebalancing of the foreign sector and the ECB,
which are defined analogously to Tint in (1). Int corresponds to net issuances, which are
defined as

(3)                                  Int = (Snt - Sn,t-1 )Pnt ,

where Snt denotes the total supply of security n at time t.
     To measure portfolio rebalancing, we compute a variance decomposition of ( 2) by regress-
ing each of the terms on TECB,nt across securities and time. To avoid lots of zeroes in these
regressions, we aggregate the securities by issuer country and maturity brackets, where the
residual maturity is in [2 , 5], [5, 7.5], [7.5, 10], [10, 15] or [15, 30]. We estimate the coefficient
separately by investor sector and investor country.
     Alternatively, we can compute how much an investor's rebalancing deviates from simply
scaling their position in proportion to the ECB's purchases. To motivate our alternative
measure of rebalancing, consider two countries that differ in size, say, Germany and Malta,
and that are perfectly home biased (German investors hold all German debt and Maltese in-
vestors hold all Maltese debt). The ECB follows the capital key to buy debt across countries,
which implies that the ECB buys, in terms of euros, more German debt than Maltese debt.
If German and Maltese investors sell the same share of their portfolios to accommodate the
ECB's purchases, then the regression of TGerman on TECB results in a slope coefficient larger
than one, while a regression of TM alta on TECB leads to a coefficient that is negative. After
all, Maltese investors sell no German debt, of which the ECB buys a lot, and do sell Maltese
debt, of which the ECB buys very little. Appendix A formalizes this intuition in a 2-country
model.
     Given the differences in initial portfolios that we have documented, we therefore compute


                                                   24
whether investors deviate from selling the same fraction of their initial portfolios, which
we will label "abnormal rebalancing." We first compute the aggregate holdings across all
investor sectors, excluding the ECB, Snt ,

(4)                               Sn,t-1 =            Qin,t-1 + QF oreign,n,t-1 .
                                                  i


If investors sell in proportion to their initial portfolios, then the sales per sector would be
Qin,t-1
 S
        TECB,nt and similarly for the foreign sector. Abnormal rebalancing is then defined as
  n,t-1



                                                           Qin,t-1
(5)                                   Tint = Tint +                TECB,nt ,
                                                           Sn,t-1

where we note that Tint is negative for most sector as they sell in response to the programme.
The market clearing condition in changes now can be written as

(6)                                           Tint + TF oreign,nt = Int .
                                         i


We regress each of the terms on TECB,nt across issuer countries, maturity brackets, and
quarters.24 Due to the accounting identity in (6), it also holds for these regression coefficients

(7)                                               i + F oreign = I .
                                              i


If all investors rebalance in proportion to their initial holdings and if supply does not respond
to the asset purchase programme, then we have i = I = 0, i. Economically, if investor
sector i sells more than proportionally in response to the programme, then i < 0, and vice
versa. We rewrite (5) to

                                  Qin,t-1                           Qin,t-1
(8)               Tint = Tint -           TECB,nt =           i -                 TECB,nt +   int ,
                                  Sn,t-1                            Sn,t-1

where int is the regression error from regressing Tint on TECB,nt and E( int TECB,nt ) = 0.
    We aggregate the right-hand side for a given investor and divide by total ECB purchases
to assess which investors sell in response to a e1 of assets purchases. We compute the average
response across the seven quarters for which we have purchases, 2015Q2 until 2017Q4.
  24
       This regression assumes that the rate of rebalancing is constant across issuer countries and maturities,

                                             Tint = i + i TECB,nt +       int .




                                                             25
                 Figure 3: Portfolio Rebalancing in Response to ECB Purchases.
The figure reports the rebalancing by different investor sectors in response to ECB purchases. The first
bar for each sector corresponds to abnormal rebalancing ( i ). It measures how investors rebalance beyond
simply scaling back their initial holdings in proportion to ECB purchases. The sum of these bars equals zero.
The second bar for each sector measures total rebalancing, which subtracts the rebalancing due to initial
holdings. The sum of these bars equals one. The coefficients are estimated from 2015Q2 until 2017Q4.
           .2
           0
           -.2
           -.4
           -.6




                   Banks      Foreign Household       ICPF      Issuer MutualFunds Other

                                  Abnormal rebalancing                 Total rebalancing




    Figure 3 reports the results. The first bar for each sector corresponds to abnormal
rebalancing, i . The sum of these bars equals zero. The second bar for each sector measures
total rebalancing, see (8). The sum of these bars equals minus one.
    The first set of bars shows that the foreign sector sells to the ECB, while insurance
companies and pension funds tend to buy bonds with similar maturities and geographies as
the ECB. Long-term investors therefore amplify the asset purchase programme.
    The second set of bars allows us to answer the question how a e1 purchase of assets is
accommodated by different investors. We find that the foreign sector sells close to e0.60,
banks sell around e0.30, and mutual funds sell e0.10. Insurance companies and pension
funds buy a small fraction.
    In summary, based on the time-series analysis in the previous section and using panel
data in this section, we conclude that most of the purchases are accommodated by the foreign
sector. Within the euro area, banks sell the largest amount, while long-term investors instead
purchase government bonds.


                                                     26
                             4.3.   The Dynamics of Risk Exposures

    The theories discussed in the introduction typically have implications for risk exposures
in addition to portfolio flows. In Table IX, we report the evolution of the distribution of
risk exposures. We normalize the total to 100 in 2014Q4. This implies that totals above 100
correspond to an increase in, for instance, euro duration risk. Panel A reports duration risk,
Panel B government credit risk, and Panel C corporate credit risk. In terms of total risk,
we find that duration risk increases as a result of the decline in yields. Government credit
risk is hump-shaped. This is driven in part by the decline in yields, but also due to changes
in credit ratings of some countries, for instance, the upgrade of Greece in late 2013 and
early 2014 and the downgrade of France in 2015. 25 Corporate credit risk declines rapidly, as
discussed before, which is due to the decline in bank debt.
    The increase in duration risk is more than offset by ECB purchases. The total increases
to 119% in 2017Q4, but the ECB owns 26%. Most other sectors remain stable or slightly
increase in case of insurance companies and pension funds in vulnerable countries. This
increase in duration risk by long-term investors may help to reduce the duration mismatch
with their liabilities.
    The increase in government credit risk in 2016 is held by the ECB (from 3% in 2014Q4
to 12% in 2016Q2) and by institutions in vulnerable countries (from 47% in 2014Q4 to 63%
in 2016Q2). The total amount of government credit risk declines to 116% by the end of the
sample. The share of the ECB by then increased to 19% and the share held by the foreign
sector declined from 26% in 2014Q4 to 22% in 2017Q4. As a result, the overall exposure
to government credit risk of euro-area investors did not change much over our sample. The
only trend worth noting is that long-term investors in vulnerable countries increased their
share from 10% in 2014Q4 to 15% in 2017Q4.
    The reduction in corporate credit risk to 74% in 2017Q4 is moving of the balance sheets
of banks (-13%) and the foreign sector (-9%). The ECB's share increases to 7% implying
that the amount of credit risk on the balance sheet of investors increased even more. Perhaps
surprisingly, we find the largest reduction in exposure to corporate credit risk for banks in
vulnerable countries. The results suggest that banks reduce their holdings of debt issued by
other financial institutions and the supply of their own bonds. This points to cross-holdings
of corporate debt in the banking sector. To make this point more precise, we report the
home bias in the holdings of financial firms in Figure 4. Consistent with the dynamics of
risk exposures, we find that banks in vulnerable countries have a strong home bias in their
holdings of corporate bonds issued by banks. These cross holdings further complicate the
  25
    The total amount of government risk is more volatile, as a result of changes in ratings. As we use
security-level ratings, there is more volatility compared to the aggregate country-level ratings.


                                                 27
                  Table IX: The Distribution and Dynamics of Risk Exposures.

The table reports the distribution and dynamics of duration exposures (Panel A), government (Panel B),
and corporate credit (Panel C) risk exposures. The distribution of risk exposures is normalized to 100 in
2014Q4. The classification of vulnerable and non-vulnerable countries follows Altavilla et al. (2016).


                                                   Panel A: Duration risk
      Sector       2013          2014                    2015                     2016                    2017
                    Q4    Q1    Q2   Q3     Q4    Q1   Q2    Q3     Q4    Q1     Q2   Q3     Q4    Q1    Q2   Q3     Q4

      Banks         12    12    12    12     12    12    11     11    11    12    12    12    11    11    10    11    11
      Mut.Funds      9    10    11    11     12    13    12     12    12    13    13    13    12    12    12    13    12
 NV   ICPF          18    18    19    20     21    23    21     21    20    23    24    24    22    22    23    23    23
      Household      1     1     1     1      1     1     1      1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1
      Other          2     2     2     2      2     2     2      2     2     2     2     2     2     2     2     2     2
      Banks          6     7     7     7      7     7     7      7     6     7     8     8     8     8     8     7     7
      Mut.Funds      2     2     2     2      2     3     2      2     2     2     2     2     2     2     2     2     2
 V    ICPF           4     5     5     5      5     6     5      5     6     7     8     8     8     8     8     8     8
      Household      3     3     3     3      3     3     3      3     3     3     3     2     2     2     2     2     2
      Other          1     1     1     1      2     2     1      1     1     2     2     2     1     1     1     1     1
      Foreign       26    28    30    30     32    34    30     30    29    30    30    28    25    23    24    24    24
      ECB            1     1     1     1      1     2     3      5     7     9    12    15    17    20    23    24    26
      Total         85    90    94    95    100   108    98    100   100   111   117   117   111   112   116   118   119

                                               Panel B: Government credit risk
      Sector       2013          2014                    2015                     2016                    2017
                    Q4    Q1    Q2   Q3     Q4   Q1     Q2    Q3   Q4      Q1    Q2   Q3     Q4    Q1    Q2   Q3     Q4

      Banks           7     7    7      8     7     8      8     8     8     8     8     8     7     7     7     6     6
      Mut.Funds       6     7    8      8     8     9      9     9     9    10    10    10     8     8     9     9     8
 NV   ICPF            6     6    6      7     7     8      7     8     8     8     9     9     7     7     8     8     8
      Household       0     0    0      0     0     0      0     0     0     0     0     0     0     0     0     0     0
      Other           1     1    1      1     1     1      1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1
      Banks          25    26   22     22    22    22     21    22    21    25    29    24    21    22    20    20    19
      Mut.Funds       6     6    6      6     6     7      6     6     6     6     6     6     6     6     5     6     6
 V    ICPF            9     9    9     10    10    11     10    11    12    13    15    15    14    15    15    15    15
      Household       5     5    5      5     5     5      4     4     4     4     4     4     4     4     4     4     4
      Other           4     4    4      4     4     4      4     4     4     7     9     8     7     7     7     6     8
      Foreign        28    31   28     28    26    33     29    34    32    29    30    28    23    23    23    23    22
      ECB             3     3    3      3     3     4      5     7     8    10    12    14    14    16    18    19    19
      Total         100   105   99    102   100   112    104   114   113   121   133   127   112   116   117   117   116

                                               Panel C: Corporate credit risk
      Sector       2013          2014                    2015                     2016                    2017
                    Q4    Q1    Q2   Q3     Q4  Q1    Q2     Q3    Q4      Q1    Q2   Q3     Q4    Q1    Q2   Q3     Q4

      Banks          15    14    15    15    14   13     13    13    12    13    12    12    11    11    11    10    10
      Mut.Funds      14    14    15    15    15   14     13    13    12    13    13    13    13    13    13    13    13
 NV   ICPF           14    14    14    14    14   14     13    13    12    14    14    14    14    13    13    13    13
      Household       5     5     5     5     5    4      4     4     4     4     3     3     3     3     3     3     2
      Other           2     2     2     2     2    2      2     2     1     2     1     1     1     1     1     1     1
      Banks          30    25    23    22    18   16     14    14    13    14    24    16    14    12    11    10     9
      Mut.Funds       3     3     3     3     3    3      3     3     3     3     3     3     3     3     3     3     3
 V    ICPF            4     4     4     4     4    4      4     4     4     4     4     5     5     5     5     5     5
      Household       8     8     7     6     6    6      6     6     4     4     4     4     4     3     3     3     2
      Other           1     1     1     1     1    1      1     1     1     1     1     1     1     1     0     0     0
      Foreign        20    20    18    18    18   17     15    14    11    12    12    10     9    10     9     9     9
      ECB             0     0     0     0     0    1      1     1     1     1     2     3     3     4     5     6     7
      Total         116   110   107   105   100   95     89    88    78    85    93    85    81    79    77    76    74




                                                        28
feedback loop between banks and governments.

          Figure 4: Home Bias in Bonds of Financial Firms across Institutions.


                 100
                 80
              Home bias
            40   20
                 0  60




                          Banks               ICPF           MutualFunds

                                   Non-vulnerable        Vulnerable




                                            29
           5.   Connecting Portfolio Rebalancing and Asset Prices

    In this section, we connect investors' portfolio rebalancing to asset prices using an asset
demand system as in Koijen and Yogo (2019). We specify the model in Section 5.1. As asset
prices are endogenous to demand shocks, we propose an instrument to identify exogenous
variation in prices using some of the unique features of the PSPP in Section 5.2. In addition
to estimating the slope of demand curves, it also provides a low-frequency estimate of the
impact of the PSPP on government bond yields. In Section 5.3, we estimate the asset
demand system and compute the implied elasticities to connect portfolio rebalancing and its
impact on asset prices.

                      5.1.   Specification of the Asset Demand System

   We denote investor's country by h, the issuer's country by n, and quarter by t. We group
investors by institutional type across investor countries. The euro investment in government
bonds issued by country n of a sector located in holder country h is denoted by Bht (n).
The investment in all other securities in the euro area is denoted by Oht (n). We use as the
outside asset all non-government debt fixed income securities in the euro area (that is, asset
categories 3 to 5).
   The portfolio weight is defined by

                                                 Bht (n)
(9)                           wht (n) =                       ,
                                          Oht (n) + n Bht (n)

and wht (0) = 1 - n wht (n) for the outside asset.
    We model the demand for government debt as a function of prices, expressed in terms of
yields, and characteristics

                                                ht (n)
(10)                             wht (n) =                ,
                                             1 + n ht (n)

where

(11)            ln ht (n) = 0h yt (n) + 1h xt (n) + 2h bht (n) + ht +   ht (n).


Koijen and Yogo (2019) provide a micro foundation for this empirically-tractable model of
asset demand curves. In particular, they show that this specification is consistent with a
model in which investors have mean-variance preferences. In addition, investors assume
that returns follow a factor model and both expected returns and factor loadings are affine


                                                30
functions of a set of characteristics. Hence, xt (n) includes characteristics that capture the
risk-return tradeoff faced by investors.
    For government debt, expected returns and risk are largely driven by maturity (capturing
the exposure to the so-called "level factor") and government credit risk. The vector of
issuer country characteristics, xt (n), therefore includes the probability of default (which is a
function of a country's rating), the logarithm of the total face value outstanding to capture
size, the logarithm of GDP per capita, and the average maturity.
    In addition, we include a characteristic, bht (n), which equals one if n equals h and zero
otherwise, which captures home bias. We also include holder country - quarter fixed effects.
In this way, we identify the demand elasticity with respect to price and other characteristics
based on cross-sectional variation across inside assets. We refer to the variation in demand
that cannot be accounted for by prices and characteristics, ht (n), as latent demand. In
structural models, latent demand captures investors' private information and views about
risk and expected returns as well as investors' constraints.

5.2.   Estimating the Asset Demand System and The Impact of QE on Government Yields

     To estimate the demand curve in (10) and (11), we assume that characteristics are ex-
ogenous to latent demand, that is, E[ ht (n) | xt (n), zht (n)] = 0. However, we cannot assume
that yields are exogenous with respect to demand shocks as, in equilibrium, positive latent
demand will result in higher prices and lower yields.
     We therefore estimate the demand system using instrumental variables. To construct an
instrument for government bond yields, we use a unique feature of the PSPP. We use the
announced purchases of the ECB, scaled by the size of a country's government bond market,
as an instrument for yield changes.
     Formally, denote the sum of past and announced purchases of the PSPP in quarter t as
At , where announced purchases are the product of the announced monthly purchases and the
length of the programme. The time-series variation that we use are summarized in Table X.

                Table X: PSPP announcement and subsequent adjustments.

 Announcement                  PSPP   Extension  Extension Extension  Extension
 Date                      1/22/2015 12/03/2015 03/10/2016 1/19/2017 10/26/2017
 Start                        Mar-15     Sep-16     Apr-16    Apr-17     Dec-17
 End                          Sep-16     Mar-17     Mar-17    Dec-17     Sep-18
 Number of months                 19          6         12         9          9
 Purchases (bn/month)             60         60         80        60         30

   The time-series variation in At is naturally correlated with economic conditions and

                                               31
cannot be used as a source of exogenous variation. However, purchases across countries are
allocated according to the capital key. The weight of a country n in the capital key is given
by
                                   1    GDPn           P opn
                            Kn =                 +              ,
                                   2    m GDPm         m P opm

where GDPn denotes a country's GDP and P opn a country's population. The capital key is
revised infrequently and we use the capital key in 2014Q4.
    Our instrumental variable is zt (n) = min{At Kn /Mt (n), 0.33}, where Mt (n) is the size
of the bond market in 2014Q2. We pick it well before the start of the programme so that
supply-side responses to the programme do not impact our instrument. For a few countries
with small debt markets, our measure sometimes exceeds the 33% purchase ceiling and we
cap it at 33% in those cases. Figure 5 plots the instrument for Germany.
    The first-stage regression of our instrumental variables estimator is then

(12)                                                 y t ( n ) =  0 +  1 z t ( n ) +  2 x t ( n ) + t + t ( n ) .

As our specification includes time fixed effects, 1 is not identified using time-series varia-
tion. Instead, 1 is identified using changes in the amounts purchased across countries in
consecutive quarters. In particular, 1 measures how much more yields decline in country A
relative to country B if the ECB purchases a larger fraction of the residual supply. Hence,
the key assumption is that the capital key, which depends on population size and the level
of GDP, is exogenous with respect to the PSPP.

                    Figure 5: Evolution of the instrument for Germany.
                                                            .25
                    Final purchases/2014q2 debt outstanding
                       .05       .1      .15
                                           0        .2




                                                       2014q1        2015q1          2016q1          2017q1         2018q1
                                                                                     quarter




                                                                                    32
                                                     Table XI: Estimation Asset Demand System.
     We estimate the demand system ln( wht (n)/wht (0)) = 0h yt (n) + 1h xt (n) + 2h bht (n) + ht + ht (n) in (10) and (11) using instrumental variables.
     Column (1) reports the first stage and columns (2) to (7) the second-stage demand curves for insurance companies and pension funds (ICPF), banks,
     mutual funds, Other, the household sector, and foreign investors. The sample is from 2014q2 to 2017q4. The explanatory variable is the (face value)
     weighted average yield of government debt from country n in percentage points. GDP is the GDP of country n in 2014 in EUR trillion. PD is the
     probability of default of country n as of 2014q4. Maturity is the face value weighted average maturity of debt from country n in quarter t. We include
     all euro-area countries except Cyprus, Estonia, Greece, Luxembourg, and Malta.
                                                   (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)
                                                  First        ICPF          Bank       MutFunds        Other          HH         Foreign
                  Yield (p.p.)                                  .236          .100        .057        1.480                        .532 
                                                               (.316)        (.404)      (.342)         (.493)                     (.311)

                  Zt ( n)                       -1.724 
                                                  (.424)

                  Probability of default        50.803       -54.440         -9.785       12.593     -98.641        29.349       -59.496 
                                                 (3.035)      (16.311)      (20.575)     (17.648)     (24.327)       (4.427)      (16.068)
33




                  Log GDP per capita               -.068      -.215           -.109       -.179          -.021       .853         .486 
                                                  (.071)       (.091)        (.115)       (.096)        (.139)        (.112)       (.090)

                  Log face value outstanding       -.005      .588          .830         .844          .662          .442         .991 
                                                  (.016)       (.020)        (.024)       (.021)        (.029)        (.019)       (.020)

                  Maturity                       .051         .125            -.010        -.007         -.017      -.256         -.162 
                                                  (.019)       (.034)        (.043)       (.036)        (.052)        (.028)        (.033)

                  Home bias                                  3.789         4.915         2.932        5.049         5.439 
                                                               (.099)        (.111)        (.096)       (.122)        (.106)

                  Constant                         .473     -18.747       -25.355       -24.447       -24.440      -22.196       -29.277 
                                                  (.559)       (.551)       (.652)        (.565)        (.780)       (.645)        (.591)

                  Quarter                          Yes          No            No            No           No            No            Yes

                  Holder country - Quarter       No             Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           No
                  R2                             0.78           0.61          0.71          0.65         0.65          0.68         0.97
                  Observations                   210           3,791         3,243         3,198        2,571         2,931         210
                  Standard errors in parentheses
                  
                    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
    As we use a Bartik estimator, we cannot identify the programme's impact on yields that is
identical across countries and that does not vary with the capital key, as follows immediately
from (12).
    The estimation results are reported in the first column of Table XI. The estimate of 1
is -1.72 with a standard error of 0.42, suggesting that the instrument is not weak. The
coefficient of -1.72 implies that when the ECB purchases 10% of the overall supply, yields
decline by -17.2bp.

                        Table XII: Yield impact implied by the first stage.

We report the value of the instrument in the second column as of 2017Q4. We estimate the impact of
government bond yields, as implied by the first stage, of the PSPP. We include all euro-area countries except
Cyprus, Estonia, Greece, Luxembourg, and Malta.
                           Issuer country      Instrument    Yield impact (in %)
                           Austria                 0.20              -0.34
                           Belgium                 0.16              -0.28
                           Germany                 0.26              -0.45
                           Estonia                 0.23              -0.40
                           Finland                 0.33              -0.57
                           France                  0.20              -0.34
                           Ireland                 0.33              -0.57
                           Italy                   0.18              -0.31
                           Lithuania               0.33              -0.57
                           Latvia                  0.33              -0.57
                           The Netherlands         0.22              -0.38
                           Portugal                0.33              -0.57
                           Slovenia                0.33              -0.57
                           Slovakia                0.33              -0.57
                           Mean                    0.27              -0.47


   To estimate the overall impact of the PSPP, we multiply this estimate by the value of
the instrument as of 2017Q4, the end of our sample, in Table Table XII. There is significant
heterogeneity in the impact on yields, ranging from -28bp in Belgium to -57bp in countries
that reach the 33% purchase limit (Finland, Ireland, Lithuania, Latvia, Portugal, Slovenia,
and Slovakia). We estimate the average impact to be 47bp. This estimate is close to the
event study estimate reported in Andrade, Breckenfelder, De Fiore, Karadi, and Tristani
(2016), who estimate the impact on 10-year yields to be 45bp.

                            5.3.   Estimating the Asset Demand System

   We report the estimation results of the demand curves for different investor sectors in
Table XI in columns (2) to (7). To ensure that the demand system has a unique equilibrium,
we impose the constraint derived in Koijen and Yogo (2019) that the demand curve of each
investor is downward sloping. In our specification, this implies that we impose that 0h  0.

                                                     34
This constraint binds only for the household sector, pointing to inelastic demand for this
group of investors.
    The way characteristics impact demand is intuitive in most cases: conditional on price,
institutions tend to prefer bonds issued by larger and safer countries and the estimates point
to a significant home bias for all sectors. In addition, insurance companies and pension funds
prefer to hold long-maturity bonds, while the opposite is true for the foreign sector.
    We use the demand system to connect the price effects in column (1) to the elasticity of
demand with respect to price for various investors. The demand elasticity is a function of
0h , see Koijen and Yogo (2019),

                                 qht (n)            0h
(13)                         -           = 1 + 100     (1 - wht (n)).
                                 pht (n)           nt

where lowercase indicates log of variables, Qht (n) the quantity of bonds held, and nt the
average maturity.
    We report the average, standard deviation, the minimum, and maximum over time in
Table XIII. A coefficient of zero implies that demand is inelastic and larger values imply
that demand is more sensitive with respect to price. Hence, aside from the residual category
"Other," the foreign sector is most elastic. The demand elasticities are in all cases substan-
tially higher than the estimates for stock markets. For instance, Chang, Hong, and Liskovich
(2015), report an elasticity close to one. The higher elasticity for government bond markets
may reflect the fact that government bonds issued by different countries in the euro area are
closer substitutes than equities issued by different companies.
    For the other institutions, we find that the point estimates of insurance companies and
pension funds imply somewhat more elastic demand compared to mutual funds and banks,
but the estimates are quite imprecise. To relate this finding to our earlier rebalancing figures,
in which we show that insurance companies and pension funds actually bought long-term
bonds, it is important to recall that our demand estimates include investor - quarter fixed
effects. As a result, aggregate trends for a given sector do not impact our estimates and long-
term investors have slightly more elastic demand in allocating their capital to government
bonds across different countries in the euro area.
    To illustrate how the demand estimates relate to our evidence on price effects, we consider
a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation. The ECB purchased, and announced to purchase,
27% of outstanding government debt, see Table XII. The size-weighted average demand
elasticity equals 6, 26 which results in a price effect of 27% /6 = 4.5%. This implies for bonds
  26
    What matters for the aggregate elasticity is a size-weighted average of the estimates of the different
sectors.



                                                   35
with an average maturity around 10 years that the yields decline by -45bp, which is close to
our estimates in Table XII.

                        Table XIII: Summary statistics for price elasticity.
For each holder country h, quarter t and issuer country n we compute the price elasticity as in (13). We
report the average, standard deviation, the minimum, and maximum over time. The weight of each sector
is based on holdings of government debt in 2014Q2, and total elasticity is the weighted average elasticity.
                      Sector        Obs.   Mean     St.dev.   Min.    Max.    Weight
                      Banks         3243    2.45       0.34   1.16     3.73       23
                      Mut. Funds    3198    1.84       0.19   1.06     2.58       12
                      ICPF          3791    4.42       0.76   2.01     7.46       17
                      Other         2574   22.06       5.59   2.34    41.44        4
                      Foreign        210    8.65       1.65   6.19    15.51       42
                      Household     2931    1.00              1.00     1.00        3
                      Total                 5.98                                 100



               5.4.    The Gains and Losses by Institutional Type and Geography

    We conclude by computing which investors gain and lose from the PSPP. To this end,
we compute the total euro-area duration risk, in euros, by institutional type and geography
in Table XIV in 2015Q1. Assuming a parallel shift in the yield curve, we multiply the euro
duration by the estimate of the yield impact of -47bp, see Table XII, and report the total
gains in the final column of the table.
    The total valuation effect equals e377 billion, of which e179 billion went to investors in
non-vulnerable countries, e67 billion to investors in vulnerable countries, and the remaining
e131 billion to investors outside of the euro area.
    For banks, mutual funds, and insurance companies and pension funds in non-vulnerable
countries, the duration of their portfolios exceeds the duration of the same institutions in
vulnerable countries. These institutions in non-vulnerable countries, therefore, experience
larger valuation effects as a result of the PSPP-induced decline in yields. Among all institu-
tions in each region, insurance companies and pension funds experience the largest benefit
due to the long-duration assets that they hold. However, their liabilities also have long
durations, so the overall impact of the PSPP on the funding position of long-term investors
cannot be assessed without additional information on their liabilities.
    Lastly, in evaluating the benefit of the PSPP to different sectors, it is important to dis-
tinguish the short- and long-run benefits. In the short run, the valuation benefit (as so far
as the benefits are not more than offset by a commensurate increase in the value of the
liabilities) is positive and may relax financial constraints. Foreign investors, by liquidating


                                                    36
                                Table XIV: Who gained from QE?

The table reports the size of the euro area fixed income portfolio (categories 1 to 5, 2015Q1) the quantity
of duration risk and the duration of the bond portfolio held by each sector by country group. We compute
the impact of a shock of 47bps on the portfolio (EUR billion).



 Riskiness          Sector            Holding    Amount of duration risk      Duration     Impact (in bn)
                    Banks               2,515                     9,258            3.7                 44
                    Mutual funds        1,593                     9,791            6.1                 46
 Non-vulnerable     ICPF                2,041                    16,436            8.1                 77
                    Households            258                       758            2.9                  4
                    Other                 320                     1,669            5.2                  8
                    Total               6,727                    37,912                               179
                    Banks               1,766                     5,144              2.9               24
                    Mutual funds          454                     2,088              4.6               10
 Vulnerable         ICPF                  639                     3,884              6.1               18
                    Households            522                     2,049              3.9               10
                    Other                 197                     1,132              5.7                5
                    Total               3,578                    14,297                                67
                    Foreign             5,013                    27,972              5.6              131


part of their positions in response to the declining yields, realize their capital gains. How-
ever, if institutions hold the bonds until maturity and then roll them over to newly-issued
bonds, the yield on the new bonds will be lower and the long-run investment opportunities
deteriorate as a result.


                                          6.    Conclusions

    We use new data on security-level portfolio holdings of institutional investors and house-
holds in the euro area to evaluate the impact of the ongoing asset purchase programme of the
ECB on the dynamics of risk exposures and asset prices. We measure how investors adjust
their portfolios by studying portfolio flows as well as changes in risk exposures to euro-area
duration, government and corporate credit, and equity risk exposures as the programme
evolves. To connect the changes in portfolio holdings to price effects, we estimate an asset
demand system using an instrumental-variables estimator. To evaluate the impact of the
programme, we calculate how much different institutional types, both in non-vulnerable and
vulnerable countries, as well as the foreign sector gain as a result of the programme.
    We find that the foreign sector accommodates most of the purchases by the ECB thus
far. Consistent with this finding, we estimate their demand to be the most elastic and
their presence consequently dampens the impact of the PSPP on yields. Despite the large


                                                    37
flows, we do not find significant rebalancing to other asset class or evidence that risks get
concentrated in the portfolios of a small set of institutions.




                                             38
                                     References

Abad, J., I. Aldasoro, C. Aymanns, M. D'Errico, L. F. Rousova, P. Hoffmann,
 S. Langfield, and T. Roukny (2016): "Shedding Light on Dark Markets: First In-
 sights from the New EU-wide OTC Derivatives Dataset," Working paper No. 11, ESRB.

Acharya, V. V. and S. Steffen (2015): "The Greatest Carry Trade Ever? Understand-
 ing Eurozone Bank Risks," Journal of Financial Economics, 115, 215­236.

Altavilla, C., M. Pagano, and S. Simonelli (2017): "Bank Exposures and Sovereign
 Stress Transmission," Review of Finance, 21, 2103­2139.

Andrade, P., J. Breckenfelder, F. De Fiore, P. Karadi, and O. Tristani (2016):
 "The ECB's Asset Purchase Programme - An Early Assessment," Working Paper, ECB.

Becker, B. and V. Ivashina (2017): "Financial Repression in the European Sovereign
 Debt Crisis," Review of Finance, 22, 83­115.

Begenau, J., M. Piazzesi, and M. Schneider (2015): "Banks' Risk Exposures," Work-
 ing paper Stanford GSB.

Brunnermeier, M. K. and Y. Sannikov (2014): "A Macroeconomic Model with a
 Financial Sector," American Economic Review, 104, 379­421.

------ (2016): "The I Theory of Money," Working paper, Princeton University.

Carpenter, S., S. Demiralp, J. Ihrig, and E. Klee (2015): "Analyzing Federal
 Reserve Asset Purchases: From Whom Does the Fed Buy?" Journal of Banking and
 Finance, 52, 230 ­ 244.

Chang, Y.-C., H. Hong, and I. Liskovich (2015): "Regression Discontinuity and the
 Price Effects of Stock Market Indexing," Review of Financial Studies, 28, 212­246.

Claeys, G., A. Leandro, and A. Mandra (2015): "European Central Bank Quantita-
 tive Easing: The Detailed Manual," Bruegel Policy Contribution.

Clouse, J., D. Henderson, A. Orphanides, D. H. Small, and P. Tinsley (2003):
 "Monetary Policy When the Nominal Short-Term Interest Rate is Zero," The B.E. Journal
 of Macroeconomics, 3, 1­65.

Coimbra, N. and H. Rey (2019): "Financial Cycle with Heterogeneous Intermediaries,"
 Working paper, London Business School.

                                          39
Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and C. Palmer (2019): "How Quantitative Easing Works:
  Evidence on the Refinancing Channel," Working Paper.

Diamond, D. W. and R. G. Rajan (2011): "Fear of Fire Sales, Illiquidity Seeking, and
  Credit Freezes," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 557­591.

Domanski, D., H. S. Shin, and V. Sushko (2017): "The Hunt for Duration: Not Waving
 but Drowning?" IMF Economic Review, 65, 113­153.

ECB (2010): "The "Centralised Securities Database" in Brief," Technical Report.

Eggertsson, G. B. and M. Woodford (2003): "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
 Optimal Monetary Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 139­211.

Gagnon, J., M. Raskin, J. Remache, and B. Sack (2011): "The Financial Market
 Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases," International Journal of
 Central Banking, 7, 3­43.

Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson, and G. Y. Liao (2018): "Asset Price Dynamics in
 Partially Segmented Markets," The Review of Financial Studies, 31, 3307­3343.

Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson, and D. Vayanos (2016): "Forward Guidance in the
 Yield Curve: Short Rates versus Bond Supply," in Monetary Policy through Asset Markets:
 Lessons from Unconventional Measures and Implications for an Integrated World , ed. by
 E. Albagli, D. Saravia, and M. Woodford, Central Bank of Chile, vol. 24, chap. 02, 011­
 062, 1 ed.

Greenwood, R. and D. Vayanos (2014): "Bond Supply and Excess Bond Returns,"
 Review of Financial Studies, 27, 663­713.

He, Z. and A. Krishnamurthy (2013): "Intermediary Asset Pricing," American Eco-
 nomic Review, 103, 732­770.

Koijen, R. S., F. Koulischer, B. Nguyen, and M. Yogo (2017): "Euro-Area Quan-
 titative Easing and Portfolio Rebalancing," American Economic Review, 107, 621­627.

Koijen, R. S. and M. Yogo (2019): "A Demand System Approach to Asset Pricing,"
 Journal of Political Economy, 127.

Krishnamurthy, A., S. Nagel, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2017): "ECB Policies
 Involving Government Bond Purchases: Impact and Channels," Review of Finance, 22,
 1­44.

                                          40
Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jørgensen (2011): "The Effects of Quantitative
 Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy," Brookings Papers on
 Economic Activity, 2, 215­265.

Milesi-Ferretti, G. M., F. Strobbe, and N. Tamirisa (2010): "Bilateral Financial
 Linkages and Global Imbalances: a View on The Eve of the Financial Crisis," IMF Working
 Paper.

Modigliani, F. and M. H. Miller (1958): "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance
 and the Theory of Investment," American Economic Review, 48, 261­297.

Moody's (2015): "Sovereign Default and Recovery Rates, 1983-2014," Moody's Investors
 Service.

Mussa, M. (1981): "The Role of Official Intervention," Group of Thirty, New York.

Ongena, S., A. A. Popov, and N. V. Horen (2019): "The Invisible Hand of the
 Government: 'Moral Suasion' During the European Sovereign Debt Crisis," American
 Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

Saito, M. and Y. Hogen (2014): "Portfolio Rebalancing Following the Bank of Japan's
  Government Bond Purchases:," Working Paper Bank of Japan.

Stein, J. C. (2012): "Incorporating Financial Stability Considerations into a Monetary
  Policy Framework," Remarks at the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy.

Vayanos, D. and J.-L. Vila (2009): "A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure
  of Interest Rates," Working Paper London School of Economics.

Wallace, N. (1981): "A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open-Market Operations," Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 71, 267­274.

Woodford, M. (2011): "Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability," Working paper,
 Columbia University.

Zucman, G. (2013): "The Missing Wealth of Nations: Are Europe and the U.S. Net Debtors
  or Net Creditors?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 1321­1364.




                                          41
          A.   Home Bias, Country Size, and Measuring Rebalancing

   Consider two countries that are symmetric in terms of portfolios, other than that one
country is larger than the other country. Countries are indexed by c = 1, 2. Each country
has a single institution. The assets are denoted by Ac . We assume A1 = xA2 = xA, where
x > 1. The portfolio weights of country 1 are given by w1 = (, 1 -  ). The portfolio weight
of country 2 by (1 - ,  ), where   (0.5, 1). Hence, each country is home biased.
    Market clearing implies that supply satisfies

(14)                   S1 = A1 + (1 -  )A2 = (x + 1 -  )A,
(15)                   S2 = (1 -  )A1 + A2 = (x(1 -  ) +  )A,

implying that S1 > S2 . We normalize A = 1.
   Suppose the ECB buys a fraction   (0, 1 -  ) of each country's supply. Hence, TECB
can be computed as

                                        (x + 1 -  )
(16)                         TECB =                    .
                                        (x(1 -  ) +  )

   Assume that both investors sell a fraction  of their portfolios. The rebalancing in
response to the ECB purchases are equal to

                                         -x
(17)                             T1 =
                                        -x(1 -  )

and

                                        -(1 -  )
(18)                             T2 =            .
                                         -

Assuming supply remains constant, the market clearing condition in changes holds. The
slope for the institution in country 1 is

                     -x + x(1 -  )               x(1 - 2 )       x
(19)     1 =                                =                 =     < -1,
               (x + 1 -  ) - (x(1 -  ) +  )   (1 - x)(1 - 2 )   1-x

and for country 2

                                             1 - 2x
(20)                          2 = 1 -  1 =          > 0.
                                              1-x


                                             42
With this measure of rebalancing, we get the counterintuitive result that 2 > 0, while both
investors accommodate QE by scaling their portfolios in proportion. Intuitively, the ECB
buys a lot Country 1 and less of Country 2. The investor in Country 2 sells a lot of Country
2 and little of Country 1, which suggests it amplifies the effect of the QE programme.
    Next, we consider an alternative way to measure rebalancing. We start from the market
clearing condition in changes

(21)                          QECB P = -Q1 P - Q2 P,

where the products of vectors are to be interpreted as element-by-element multiplication.
The idea is that the ECB purchases may need to be "attributed" to different investors in
proportion to their initial portfolios. That is,

                                         Q1        Q2
(22)                       QECB =           QECB +    QECB .
                                         S         S

We can then rewrite the market-clearing condition as

                               Q1               Q2
(23)            0=      Q1 +      QECB P + Q2 +    QECB P.
                               S                S

This is similar as before, other than that we add a "fixed effect" to each country's rebalancing
based on their initial portfolios. Define

                                                    Qi
(24)                           Ti    =      Qi +       QECB P,
                                                    S

and TECB is the same as before. We now consider the regressions

(25)                                Ti = i + i TECB + i ,

where the market clearing condition implies

(26)                                     1 + 2 = 0 .

Importantly, in step 2, we now measure the rebalancing induced by the ECB as

                                    Qi
(27)                            -      QECB + i QECB .
                                    S




                                               43
If we apply this alternative framework to the example above, then

                                           x
                       -x                x+1-
                                               (x + 1 -  )
(28)          T1 =                 +    (1- )x                  = 0 2×1 .
                      -x(1 -  )        x(1- )+
                                               (x(1 -  ) +  )

Hence, 1 = 2 = 0, and the rebalancing is in proportion to the ECB purchases.




                                           44
                             B.    Additional tables and figures


                             Table B.1: Rebalancing Before the PSPP
The table reports average portfolio rebalancing from 2013Q4 until 2014Q4. The asset categories are defined
as: Elig. Govt. - PSPP eligible government bonds, Inelig. Govt. - PSPP ineligible government bonds,
IG-Corp. - Investment grade corporate bonds, SG-Corp. - Speculative grade corporate bonds, ABS&CB
- ABS and covered bonds, Equity - Euro area equity, and Foreign - Non-euro area assets. The top panel
reports the rebalancing for investor sectors in non-vulnerable countries and the second panel for investors
in vulnerable countries. The third panel reports the rebalancing of the foreign sector and the ECB. The
bottom panel reports net issuances. The flows are reported in billions of euros.




                                                                 Asset category

                                          Elig. Inelig.  IG  SG ABS
 Riskiness           Sector              Govt. Govt. Corp. Corp. &CB Equity Foreign
                     ICPF                     1       7   -2   4   -2     2      11
                     Banks                    8       5 -18    3  -12     5     -25
 Non-vulnerable      Mutual Funds             8       3   -3   9   -4    22      97
                     Household               -2       0   -5  -3   -1     4       3
                     Other                    4      -3    0   0   -1    -2       0
                     ICPF                     7       4   -1   0   -1     1       1
                     Banks                  15       -9 -20  -22  -20    -4       4
 Vulnerable          Mutual Funds             9       1    2   3    0    14      31
                     Household               -5      -1 -13  -10    0     2     -13
                     Other                   -2       0    0  -1    0     1      -4
                     ECB                     -6       6    0   0    8     0       0
                     Foreign                22     -42     2 -26  -12     ­       ­
                     Issuer                 61     -30  -60  -44  -45     ­       ­




                                                    45
