                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          NUDGING AT SCALE:
        EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM FAFSA COMPLETION CAMPAIGNS

                                         Kelli A. Bird
                                    Benjamin L. Castleman
                                      Jeffrey T. Denning
                                       Joshua Goodman
                                        Cait Lamberton
                                     Kelly Ochs Rosinger

                                      Working Paper 26158
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26158


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




We thank Scott Anderson, Chad Massie, and colleagues at the Common Application for their
strong partnership. We also are grateful for the collaboration from Large State agency staff. We
are grateful for funding from the John and Laura Arnold Foundation, the Michael and Susan Dell
Foundation, The Heckscher Foundation for Children, and the Kresge Foundation. Any errors or
omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

 2019 by Kelli A. Bird, Benjamin L. Castleman, Jeffrey T. Denning, Joshua Goodman, Cait
Lamberton, and Kelly Ochs Rosinger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including 
notice, is given to the source.
Nudging at Scale: Experimental Evidence from FAFSA Completion Campaigns
Kelli A. Bird, Benjamin L. Castleman, Jeffrey T. Denning, Joshua Goodman, Cait Lamberton,
and Kelly Ochs Rosinger
NBER Working Paper No. 26158
August 2019
JEL No. D9,I23,I24

                                         ABSTRACT

Do nudge interventions that have generated positive impacts at a local level maintain efficacy
when scaled state or nationwide? What specific mechanisms explain the positive impacts of
promising smaller-scale nudges? We investigate, through two randomized controlled trials, the
impact of a national and state-level campaign to encourage students to apply for financial aid for
college. The campaigns collectively reached over 800,000 students, with multiple treatment arms
to investigate different potential mechanisms. We find no impacts on financial aid receipt or
college enrollment overall or for any student subgroups. We find no evidence that different
approaches to message framing, delivery, or timing, or access to one-on-one advising affected
campaign efficacy. We discuss why nudge strategies that work locally may be hard to scale
effectively.

Kelli A. Bird                                   Joshua Goodman
University of Virginia                          Brandeis University
kb7ud@virginia.edu                              415 South Street
                                                Waltham, MA 02453
Benjamin L. Castleman                           and NBER
University of Virginia                          JoshuaGoodman@Brandeis.edu
Curry School of Education
405 Emmett Street South                         Cait Lamberton
P.O. Box 400277                                 Wharton School of Business
Charlottesville, VA 22902                       3730 Walnut Street
castleman@virginia.edu                          University of Pennsylvania
                                                Philadelphia, PA 19104
Jeffrey T. Denning                              catlam@wharton.upenn.edu
Brigham Young University
435N Crabtree Building                          Kelly Ochs Rosinger
Provo, UT 84602                                 Pennsylvania State University
jeffdenning@byu.edu                             405C Rackley Building
                                                University Park, PA 16802
                                                krosinger@psu.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26158
I. Introduction
        Some of the most promising evidence on the potential efficacy of nudges in public policy
comes from efforts to improve low-income students' access to financial aid in the U.S.
postsecondary system. Researchers have long recognized that complexities associated with the
Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) can deter college-ready students from enrolling
or succeeding in higher education (Dynarski and Scott-Clayton, 2006; King, 2004). Among the
largest school districts, 35-50 percent of high school seniors do not complete the FAFSA prior to
graduation. 1 In 2012, for every nine college students who received a Pell grant, there was one
student who would have received such funding but who did not submit a FAFSA (Bird, 2016).
        Numerous recent studies suggest that nudge campaigns are a low cost but effective way to
increase FAFSA completion rates by helping students navigate the complex submission process.
Table 1 presents a comprehensive overview of nudge and informational intervention studies in
higher education, including their sample, location, and partner organization. 2 Nudges in these
studies frequently consist of one-way communication, sending information or connecting students
to resources to help them navigate college and financial aid processes. In some cases, nudge
campaigns also offer two-way communication, providing students with "light touch" counseling
as they make college application, enrollment, and financing decisions. These interventions appeal
to behavioral economic models in which students may be inattentive to relevant information or
deadlines. They also appeal to neoclassical models of economic behavior because they provide
students information about potential higher education investments.
        Nearly all existing evidence of positive impacts from nudges in higher education comes
from relatively small-scale studies done in partnership with a local organization serving hundreds
or thousands of students. These include individual school districts, colleges, and local non-profits
in various locations across the United States and internationally. The median study in Table 1 has
6,233 students. Many view these types of interventions as promising because it seems possible to



1
  Authors' calculations based on school-level FAFSA completion data available from Federal Student Aid.
2
  We include studies of nudge and informational interventions that focus on helping high school and current
college students navigate college decisions. With few exceptions, all studies are randomized controlled trials.
We exclude studies that involve informational interventions in earlier grades that focus on shaping students'
college expectations and/or persistence in primary and secondary education. We also exclude studies that
involve more intensive college coaching or mentoring interventions given the higher cost typically associated
with these types of outreach, though we acknowledge the distinction between nudge interventions that offer
two-way communication with an advisor and coaching interventions is not always clear.


                                                       2
scale them at low cost. Such scaling could involve partnership with a single statewide or
nationwide organization connected to many students, which we refer to here as "global" scale up.
Alternatively, "local" scale up could occur through coordinating efforts of multiple smaller
organizations that are more local in nature than statewide or nationwide ones. We currently have,
however, limited evidence on whether such interventions maintain such efficacy at scale and what
effective pathways to scale might be (i.e., global versus local scale up). Additionally, we have little
evidence regarding the specific mechanisms that explains these interventions' efficacy.
       In this paper, we provide some of the first evidence on these issues through a global scale
up of FAFSA nudges studied in previous research with much smaller samples. We run the largest
FAFSA nudge campaigns to date by partnering with one nationwide organization and one
statewide organization to send information about FAFSA filing to high school and college
students. The experimental sample comprises 800,000 students across both partners. The first
intervention targeted all lower-income and first-generation high school seniors who had registered
with the Common Application, a national portal through which students can apply to up to 20 of
800+ participating colleges with a single application. Treated students received messages
encouraging them to complete the FAFSA early to maximize the financial aid they received. We
randomly varied the messages along multiple dimensions, including their: behavioral framing;
delivery channel (mail, e-mail, or text message); offer of one-on-one advising assistance; and a
social nudge to encourage peers to complete the FAFSA as well.
       The second intervention targeted all students in a Large State ("Large State") who had
applied to college through a state-sponsored portal that allows applications to all the state's public
four-year colleges, as well as to some private institutions and community colleges. Treated
students received text messages informing them of two important changes in federal financial aid
policy: the ability to file the FAFSA starting October (rather than January) of the year prior to
college enrollment and the ability to use income tax returns their families had already filed in the
financial aid application process. These messages also varied along multiple dimensions, including
their timing and the use of infographics to increase visual salience. We experimentally varied many
aspects of the intervention and targeted different populations.
       We consistently find no effect these messages on student enrollment or financial aid
outcomes. This null finding is consistent across samples, content, timing, visual presentation, and
offers of personalized help. Large sample sizes allow us to rule out very small effects of these



                                                  3
interventions. We believe the design of our experiments and these precise null results contribute
in three ways to the existing research literature.
        First, and most broadly, our work shows that recent concerns about scaling up randomized
controlled trials in developing countries are also relevant in the context of developed countries.
Development economists have recently highlighted promising pilot programs that fail to replicate
at scale. This can occur for a number of reasons including poor fidelity to the treatment, site
selection bias, and context dependence (Allcott, 2015; Bold et al., 2018; Banerjee et al., 2008;
Banerjee et al., 2017). Global scale up of nudges in higher education may also face substantial
barriers to success, for reasons we discuss further below.
        Second, nearly all prior financial aid nudge campaign studies have reached students by
partnering with individual high schools, colleges, or local college-focused non-profits. Many of
those smaller scale studies demonstrated that messages sent to students at critical financial aid
junctures can at low cost generate substantial improvements in college enrollment (Castleman and
Page, 2015; Castleman and Page, 2016a; ideas42, 2016; Page, Castleman, and Meyer, 2018). 3
Very few studies have done scaled up outreach using a global scale approach. Those that have
looked at a large scale such as states or national organizations have, consistent with our results,
found little or no effects. When effects are detected, they are often much smaller than those found
in early work or apply only to a narrow set of students (Hyman, 2018; Gurantz et al., 2019;
Bergman et al., 2019).
        While our research takes a similar global approach to scale as these recent studies, we
extend our understanding of the efficacy of nudge interventions at scale in several ways. Like
Bergman et al. 2019, we focus on the impact of financial aid nudges for a broader segment of the
academic distribution of potential college students. Other recent studies pursuing a global approach
to scale focus on a more narrow, higher-achieving student population. Our study more closely
adheres to the behaviorally-informed design--both in terms of content framing and delivery--of
prior evidence-based studies. Other recent large-scale studies rely more heavily on delivery
methods (e.g., mail or email) that may be less effective at reaching students or they contained
dense information that may have required substantially greater cognitive load for students to



3
 Other similar studies have considered nudges designed to increase academic performance through studying with
mixed success (Oreopoulos et al. (2018a), Oreopoulos et al. (2018b) Dobronyi et al. (2018)). One on one coaching
seems to be the most effective but least scalable method to improve success (Oreopoulos & Petronijevic 2018)


                                                        4
understand. Finally, our intervention focused on a discrete and consequential action: applying for
financial aid. As a result, the intervention focused on concrete, near-term calls to action for
students, whereas other recent studies rely on students completing numerous college planning tasks
or depend on students to be motivated by benefits (in the case of tax credits for higher education)
that they would not realize for numerous months.
       Third, our results help answer important open questions about the mechanisms that drive
prior campaigns' efficacy. Many of these prior campaigns provided one-on-one advising available
to all students who responded to messages they received, or use some form of financial incentive
to encourage student engagement with informational materials and/or with advising (Carrell and
Sacerdote, 2017; Castleman and Page, 2015; Castleman and Page, 2016a; Hoxby and Turner,
2013). Therefore, it is difficult to disentangle how much of the impact observed in past research
stems from simplified information, ongoing reminders, reduced barriers to professional advising,
or from eliminating near-term costs (e.g., application fee waivers), or how much the positive
results were a function of some other study-specific context or population. We designed our
experiment to mimic many of these intervention features. We offered college advising to students,
varied the content and delivery method of information, and sent numerous reminders. We find that
none of these variations ultimately mattered for student outcomes, suggesting that some other
distinguishing feature(s) between prior studies and our interventions accounts for positive effects
in the more localized interventions in this area.
       We note three hypotheses that might explain our null results given the past successes of
very similar, smaller scale campaigns. First, unlike this paper, most prior work involved a local
partner with closer connections to and knowledge of treated students. Local partners may know
something important about their students and such students may react differently to messages from
partners they feel are specifically invested in them or their communities. Second and relatedly, the
global scale-up in this study implied messaging content was more generic and less personalized to
students than in prior interventions, perhaps resulting in lower salience for students. Third, current
cohorts of students may have better information about FAFSA completion than did previous
cohorts, so that there exist fewer students for whom nudge campaigns would make a difference on
the margin.
       Though we cannot distinguish between these hypotheses, our work suggests fruitful areas
for further research on the difficulties of scaling nudge campaigns and demonstrates the potential



                                                    5
pitfall for "global" approaches to scaling nudge campaigns. At the very least, our work suggests
that future attempts to scale up such campaigns should proceed cautiously and with attention paid
to these hypotheses.


II. Intervention Design
Common Application Experiment. Our outreach consisted of two campaigns: a fall campaign, in
which students received two email messages encouraging them to consider college affordability
when deciding where to apply, and a multi-modal (email, text message, and postal) winter
campaign encouraging students to complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid
(FAFSA) as early in the calendar year as possible to maximize their financial aid. The fall email
campaign reached students who had registered with the Common Application by October 12, 2015
("Fall cohort"). The winter campaign targeted the Fall cohort as well as the additional students
who registered with the Common Application by December 18, 2016 ("Winter cohort"). Students
in the Fall cohort received their first email message between October 26 and October 30, 2015.
The Common Application sent a follow-up e-mail message between November 11 and November
16, 2015. The Common Application sent the first winter email during the week of January 11,
2016 and a second email the week of February 1, 2016. For students who entered in the Fall cohort,
these were in practice their third or fourth emails.
        The Common Application sent a generic introductory text message the week of January
10, 2016 to all students assigned to a texting condition, simply informing them that they would
receive a set of messages over the following weeks and encouraging them to save the number
associated with the text so that it would be recognized by their phone. Text messages tailored to
assigned experimental treatments were then sent the weeks of January 17, January 24, January 31,
February 7, and February 14. Roughly 87 percent of our experimental samples were assigned to
receive text messages--this includes all students assigned to the experimental variations, as well
as 50 percent of students in the control condition who received basic text messages. 4 Roughly one-
third of students also received a three-page postal mailer in mid-January.



4
 Not all text messages were delivered, for one of two reasons: (1) the number the student provided was not a
valid cell-phone number; and (2) an unanticipated issue with cell-phone carrier "spam" filters blocking text
message delivery, which resulted in approximately 28 percent of scheduled messages not being delivered. We
discuss this further in Appendix B.


                                                      6
Large State Experiment. The Large State intervention targeted several cohorts of students,
including rising freshmen, current college students, students who had previously applied but not
enrolled, and students who left college with substantial credits but no degree. We focus on the
rising freshman sample for comparability to the Common Application experiment. The other
samples yield similar results with no effect on student outcomes in any of the samples, and the
message variations were generally similar across groups. The rising freshman sample consists of
students who graduated from high school in summer 2016 and applied to college using the state
application portal for fall 2016. 5
         The state agency we partnered with sent an introductory text message, similar to the one
used in the Common Application experiment, on October 11, 2016 to all students assigned to a
texting condition. Text messages for each treatment condition were then sent on the following
dates: October 18, October 25, November 1, November 8, and November 22, 2016. 6 The agency
sent a final text message on January 10, 2017 reminding students about steps they could take to
apply for financial aid.


Experimental variations
         In the Common Application and Large State experiments we tested multiple mechanisms
that could affect campaign efficacy (we describe the specific randomization procedure to assign
students to different experimental conditions in more detail below).
Common Application
        Variations in access to one-on-one advising. Several prior studies demonstrate that
         providing students with one-on-one college or financial advising can lead to substantially
         improved postsecondary outcomes (Avery, 2013; Barr and Castleman, 2017; Carrell and
         Sacerdote, 2017; Castleman and Goodman, 2018; Castleman, Page, and Schooley, 2015).
         By contrast, information-only interventions to improve access to financial aid or college

5
  The application portal also sent text messages to students who applied prior Fall 2016 but who had not enrolled in
school in the previous three years--this is the "Applied Not Enroll" Group in the tables. The Applied Not Enroll
Group had 110,000 treated students and 207,193 control students. Currently enrolled students in college who had
previously used the application portal are referred to as "Enrolled" in the table. The currently enrolled group had
149,736 treated students and 367,006 control students. The last group, "Leavers" were students who had attempted
60 credits at a university or 30 credits at a community college who left without obtaining a degree. For leavers there
were 20,671 treated students and 10,727 students in the control group.
6
  For current students, we also varied treatment timing with some students receiving messages beginning in mid-
September 2016 ("early start"), just prior to the start of FAFSA filing, and others receiving messages starting
October 11, 2016 ("on time start"), after FAFSA filing began.


                                                          7
    have generally had limited or no effect (Bergman, et al., 2019; Bettinger et al., 2016;
    Hyman 2018). We therefore randomly varied whether students received information-only
    outreach or nudges that invited students to connect to an advisor for support with FAFSA
    completion.
   Variations in content framing. Behavioral science theory and empirical evidence
    demonstrate that the way content is framed can influence how salient it is to individuals
    and whether the information drives behavior change. For instance, foundational research
    in behavioral economics demonstrated that people tend to prefer certain benefits over
    potential gains (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). Students from low-income families tend
    to overestimate their net cost of college, suggesting they may not have a precise
    understanding of the financial aid for which they are eligible (Avery and Kane, 2004;
    Grodsky and Jones, 2007). This suggests that making the financial benefits associated with
    FAFSA completion more salient--particularly relative to the amount of time necessary to
    complete the FAFSA--may motivate some students on the margin of FAFSA completion
    to invest the time necessary to apply for financial aid. Based on this hypothesis, we
    developed a "Financial Benefits" content variation. Other behavioral science research
    shows that individuals' identities have strong effects on their attitudes and behaviors
    (Baumeister 1987). Individuals have a vested interest in preserving positive perceptions
    of themselves, and thus, are likely to behave in a manner consistent with positive past
    behaviors (Swann, Jr. and Ely 1984,) showing a robust "self-consistency bias." If students
    embrace an externally-activated identity (such as a nudge that reinforces the motivation
    they have shown by starting their college applications), they are more likely to take actions
    that are framed as identity-consistent. Based on this hypothesis, we developed an
    "Identity/Norms" content variation.      Finally, researchers demonstrate that providing
    people with concrete planning prompts and guidance can increase follow through on
    various actions, from voting to getting a flu vaccination (Nickerson and Rogers, 2010;
    Milkman et al., 2012). Especially for adolescents, who are more likely to struggle with
    organization, planning, and time management (Casey and Somerville, 2011), guiding
    students to form concrete implementation intentions for when, how, and with whom they
    will complete FAFSA may further contribute to increased filing rates. Based on this
    hypothesis, we developed a "Planning" content variation.



                                             8
        Variations in message delivery. Foundational behavioral science research also
         demonstrated that the channels through which people receive information can affect how
         they respond to it (Leventhal, 1963). We varied whether students received outreach
         through postal letters, emails, and/or text messages to investigate whether delivery channel
         affected campaign impacts. 7
Large state
       Variation in information presentation (infographics versus text). Visual imagery can more
        effectively capture attention and make information more salient. We varied whether
        students received infographics with information about how to apply for financial aid or
        received texts containing the same information but without the infographics to investigate
        whether visual images can prompt students to take action.
       Variation in timing of messages. For some of the student samples in the Large State
        experiment, we varied the timing of messages, with some students receiving messages
        several weeks before the FAFSA could be filed and others receiving messages around the
        time FAFSA filing became available (FAFSA filing began October 1). Students in the
        "early" treatment condition received messages beginning in mid-September (FAFSA could
        be filed starting October 1); students in the "on-time" treatment condition received
        messages beginning in early to mid-October. This variation allowed us to examine whether
        students benefit from having additional time to prepare to undertake important tasks or if
        "just in time" messaging is more effective. We do not, however, have this source of
        variation for the rising freshman sample.
       Variations in motivational framing. We developed a motivational framing for the current
        college student sample similar to the one described above for the Common Application
        sample.


We provide additional detail on intervention content for both experiments in Appendix B and
intervention materials can be found in Appendix C.


7
  We also tested a school-level experimental variation in which a subset of students were randomly assigned to
encourage other students at their school to complete FAFSA. As with the other intervention arms we find no
impact of the social nudge on students' postsecondary outcomes. Because of the different structure of the
randomization and given the breadth of variations we already cover in the paper we do not present results from
the social nudge in this paper but can provide them upon request.


                                                      9
III. Research Design
Randomization Procedure
Common Application
        We randomly assigned students to one of the experimental conditions described above in
two phases. In October 2015, we identified students who had by that time registered with the
Common Application and who met at least one of the three following "low socio-economic status"
(low-SES) criteria 8:
    1. Indicated on their application that they qualified for a need-based application fee waiver
    2. Indicated that they were the first in their family to go to college
    3. Indicated that they intended to apply for need-based financial aid AND attended a high
        school where at least 40 percent of students qualified for free or reduced price lunch 9

For the Fall cohort, we excluded students with a reported SAT score of at least 1230 for the math
and verbal sections or a reported ACT score of at least 28 (n=36,632) because these students were
receiving a different and concurrent intervention from the Common Application focused on
college applications. The resulting sample size for the Fall cohort was 187,482 students. To
perform the randomization for the Fall cohort, we first randomly selected 2,000 students to receive
the additional offer of one-on-one advising. 10 We did so by randomly selecting 2,000 schools to
designate as "advising schools", and then randomly selecting one student per advising school to
receive advising. To ensure that students selected for the advising condition were representative
of this population of low-SES Common Applicants, we set the probability for whether a high
school was randomly selected directly proportional to the proportion of low-SES Common
Applicants attending that high school. That is, a high school with 100 low-SES Common
Applicants would be more likely to be chosen as an advising school, compared to a high school
with 50 low-SES Common Applicants. For each student assigned to advising, we then randomly
assigned one of three content variations to pair with the offer of advising (i.e., Advising + Financial

8
  We excluded from our sample 18,602 low-SES students attending high schools participating in a similar
messaging intervention.
9
  Using high-school level data from NCES's Common Core of Data (CCD), we calculated percent of
students who qualified for free or reduced priced lunch during the 2013-14 academic year. We were able
to match this information from CCD to the Common Application data for 95.3% of public school students
(90.4% of public schools).
10
   This relatively small sample size for the Advising experimental condition was due to the high resource
nature of the one-on-one advising offered.


                                                   10
Benefit, Advising + Identity/Norms, and Advising + Planning). Finally, we randomly assigned the
remaining 185,482 students to the other four experimental conditions (Control, Financial Benefit,
Identity/Norms, Planning) in equal proportions. We performed this randomization within high
school in order to increase the precision of our estimates by controlling for school level differences
in student outcomes.
       We conducted the second phase of the randomization in mid-December 2015 for winter
emails, text messages, and postal mailers. We included all students from the October cohort in the
winter campaign, with the exception of 259 students who terminated their accounts with Common
Application prior to the December randomization. Also included in the winter campaign were low-
SES students who registered with Common Application between October and December, and the
low-SES high-achievers previously excluded from the October cohort. This process resulted in an
additional 267,020 students for the winter campaign. All students in the October cohort maintained
their student-level content variation assignment. For the December cohort, we randomly assigned
students to one of four content variations (Control, Financial Benefit, Identity/Norms, or Planning)
in equal proportions. Again, we performed this student-level randomization within high-school.
All students in the winter campaign received email messages. All treated students were also
eligible to receive text messages; over 99% of students provided cell phone numbers. Roughly
one-third of students were randomly assigned (within high-school and treatment variation) to
receive postal mailers.


Large State
       We randomized students who had completed high school and applied for college admission
in Fall 2016 into treatment and control groups. We will refer to this group as "rising freshman." In
total we assigned 70,000 students to receive text messages with 115,793 students not receiving
any text messages who constitute our control group. We stratified on whether students had applied
to four-year schools, two-year schools, or both. Due to data timing issues, we could not confirm
whether students enrolled in the fall prior to sending messages. Hence, some students who applied
to college and did not enroll are included in our treatment group. Randomization for the other
groups including Apply Not Enroll, Enrolled, and Leavers was similar. For enrolled students we
also stratified on student classification (e.g. freshman, sophomore, etc.).




                                                 11
Empirical strategy
   Our evaluation of the impact of the nudge campaign on college and financial aid outcomes
relies on college enrollment data provided by the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) as well
as administrative data from the Large State. The exact variables available differ slightly from each
source.
Common Application
   For the Common Application intervention, we use the following regression models to estimate
the impact of our treatments, either overall or by experimental conditions:


                           = 0 + 1  +  +                                                         (1)


 = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3  + 4  +  +                                                                    (2)


Here, Y is a given outcome for student i in high school s first treated in wave w (fall or winter of
senior year). In equation (1), AnyTreatment indicates whether the student was in any of the
experimental (non-control) conditions. In equation (2), Advising indicates whether the student was
assigned to receive one-on-one advising via text message. Plan, Norms and Financial indicate
which content treatment arm to which the student was assigned. Note that, because students in the
advising conditions were also assigned to one of the three content variations, Advising is not
mutually exclusive from Plan, Norms, or Financial. The omitted category is the control condition.
All regressions include high school by treatment wave fixed effects given,  , that the
randomization was conducted within such strata. We cluster standard errors by high school to
account for potentially unobserved correlations in the error terms across high school classmates.
We show separately that controlling for further demographics has little impact on our estimates
due to the randomization.


Common Application outcome sample construction
          Due to the cost of NSC matches, we were not able to receive college enrollment outcome
data for all students in our sample. We selected a subset of the full sample to receive NSC matches
with which to perform our outcome evaluation in January 2018, which allow us to observe
enrollment and college choice outcomes for the three semesters (Fall 2016, Spring 2017, and Fall



                                                12
2017) following the students' expected year of high school graduation. We selected 271,365
students for the NSC sample by the following method:
   1. In order to take full advantage of the within high school randomization procedure, we first
       identified all high schools at which all the following experimental variations were
       represented by at least one student:
           a. Control condition
           b. Control condition + basic text messages
           c. Financial Benefit, no postal mailer
           d. Financial Benefit + postal mailer
           e. Identity/Norms, no postal mailer
           f. Identify/Norms + postal mailer
           g. Planning, no postal mailer
           h. Planning + postal mailer
           i. Advising, any content variation (if an advising school)
   2. Among these high schools where there was at least one student in each of the nine
       variations, we first selected all advising high schools to contribute to the NSC sample. We
       gave preference to advising schools when constructing our NSC sample in order to
       maximize the statistical power to detect effects of the advising intervention, which was
       offered to only one student per advising high school. This process led to a total of 1,714
       advising high schools, and a total of 130,151 individual students, for the NSC sample.
   3. Among non-advising high schools, we then randomly selected individual high schools to
       contribute to the NSC sample until the full 271,365 students were identified. This made a
       total of 3,681 non-advising high schools, and a total of 141,214 students for the NSC
       sample. Only roughly half of students from the last high school selected entered the NSC
       sample, due to space constraints.
This sampling procedure does give preference to high schools with more students in the full
experimental sample--that is, high schools with some combination of larger enrollment counts, a
larger proportion of lower-SES students, and a larger proportion of students who are Common
Application users. However, when we compare the full experimental sample and the NSC sample
on observable student characteristics, the two samples are quite similar (see Table 2). For instance,
both samples are approximately 60 percent female, 65 percent first in their family to go to college,



                                                 13
and 43 percent used a means-tested fee waiver to submit applications through the Common
Application.


Large State
     Our empirical strategy is very similar for the Large State intervention. We run regressions of
the form:
                                  = 0 + 1  +   +                                                            (3)


     Where  is an outcome for student  ,  is an indicator for a student being assigned
any treatment,  is a vector of student controls including indicators for parent education, self-
reported family income, age at application, gender, and race. We sometimes separate 
into indicators to test if messages that contained infographics had a different effect from text-based
content or early versus on-time information. All regressions also control for the level of
stratification which is what school types a student applied to. Robust standard errors are presented.
We use administrative data from Large State to measure financial aid and enrollment outcomes.
These administrative data contain data from the universe of public higher education institutions in
the state. As we show in Table 3, the sample of rising first year students in Large State (the primary
sample we focus on in our analyses) is over 50 percent female, just over 30 percent of students'
mothers have a high school diploma or less, and 28 percent of the sample reports annual family
income below $80,000. 11


Results
We first present evidence of baseline equivalence and then present results on college enrollment
and persistence as well as financial aid receipt for the overall samples. Next, we discuss whether
the effects vary by student characteristics or variations in treatment. Consistently, we find no effect
of treatment.


Baseline equivalence


11
  We report slightly different measures of parental education level in the Large State than Common
Application based on the data available from each partner. Family income is missing for 47 percent of the
Large State sample.


                                                     14
We assess baseline equivalence by regressing student-level characteristics on indicators of
treatment; in the case of the Common Application, we also include high school by cohort fixed-
effects in these regression models, as this was the level of randomization. Tables 4 and 5 display
the results for the Common Application and Large State interventions, respectively. For the
Common Application, we present the results of these baseline equivalence tests for both the full
experimental sample and the NSC evaluation sample. Overall, we find that the sample is well
balanced on baseline covariates. There is one marginally significant difference in the Large State
sample in terms of age at application, which is to be expected given the number of tests. However,
the magnitude of this difference is extremely small. We also test baseline equivalence across
treatment variations, and find similar evidence of equivalence. 12


Financial aid, college enrollment, and persistence
In Tables 6 and 7 we present evidence of the Common Application (Table 6) and Large State
financial aid nudge campaign (Table 7) impacts on students' college enrollment, enrollment
quality, and persistence. In the Large State intervention, we are also able to report on the impact
of the intervention on a measure of students' FAFSA filing and financial aid receipt. These are
particularly useful because the intervention was specifically targeted to affect student's FAFSA
filing and financial aid packages.
     As we show in Table 6, students in the Common Application sample enroll in college at high
rates overall. Eighty-two percent of the control group enrolled in college in Fall 2016 and 73
percent enrolled at four-year institutions. The financial aid nudges had a precisely estimated zero
impact on overall enrollment or enrollment by institution level. Given the size of our sample we
can rule out impacts greater than half a percentage point. Persistence rates are similarly high among
the sample; 74 percent of students remained continuously enrolled into their second year of
college. We estimate precise zero impacts on continuous enrollment and can again rule out impacts
greater than half a percentage point. We also find little evidence that treatment of Common
Application students affected college application patterns or other measures of quality of college
students enrolled in (Appendix Table A2). 13


12
  Results available upon request
13
  In Appendix Table A1 we show that the Common Application nudge campaign also did not affect a range of
application outcomes, such as whether students applied to any colleges, the number of applications they submitted,
and the quality of institutions to which students applied. In Appendix Table A2 we consider a broader set of


                                                        15
    In Table 7 we present impacts on college enrollment for the Large State intervention. We do
not find impacts on our proxy for filing a FAFSA, Pell receipt, or loan amounts. We observe
enrollment outcomes in the spring semester following the intervention and then in the following
fall (2017-2018 academic year). We also observe a measure for whether students filed a FAFSA 14
for the academic year following the intervention, how much students received in Pell Grant
assistance, and how much students borrowed in loans. Relative to the Common Application
sample, overall enrollment rates for the Large State sample are lower. Fifty-four percent of students
enrolled in college in the first spring after the intervention and 49 percent enrolled in the first fall
after the intervention. We find no effect on enrollment overall in spring 2017 or at four-year
institutions, for which we can rule out impacts larger than one percentage point. The intervention
led to a modest 1.1 percentage point increase in enrollment at two-year institutions that is
statistically significant at the 10 percent level in the first spring. The effect on two-year enrollment
disappears in the next semester.
    We find no impact of the Large State intervention on enrollment in the first fall after the
intervention and we can rule out overall enrollment impacts greater than 1.3 percentage points. It
is not surprising that there are no effects on student enrollment given that the outreach was
designed to affect financial aid outcomes but did not actually change student's FAFSA filing or
financial aid packages. In Appendix Table A3 we show, similar to the Common Application
experiment, that the Large State intervention did not affect the quality of the institution attended. 15
A sizeable share of students engaged with the content--over 40 percent of the treated sample
responded to the text messages. This suggests that a lack of information about FAFSA completion
does not explain the null effects we observe--many students interacted with the information they
received.




enrollment quality measures for the Common Application sample. We find evidence that the intervention led to a
very small positive and significant increase, in the range of 0.5 percentage points, in the share of treated students
attending public institutions and institutions with net prices below $15,000/year. However, these impacts are too
small to be practically significant and we do not find evidence of impact on other quality measures, such as the mean
graduation rate, admission rate, or median SAT scores at institutions students attended.
14
   We do not observe FAFSA filing directly. Instead we know if students filed the FAFSA, received merit aid, or
filed the state-specific form for financial aid if they were enrolled. Because we find no effect on enrollment,
interpretation of this estimate is that among enrolled students, there was no change in the probability of filing the
FAFSA/state-specific form or receipt of merit aid.
15
   We report different institutional quality measures in the Common App and Large State experiments based
on data available from each partner.


                                                         16
Subgroup impacts
       While we find no effects overall, this could mask important heterogeneity in which students
are affected by treatment. For instance, students in the fall and winter versions of the Common
Application experiment could vary in their probability of enrolling due to differences in their
underlying characteristics or the timing of the information. In Appendix Table A4 we show that
the effect of the Common Application intervention did not vary by whether we enrolled students
in the outreach in the fall or winter of their senior year in high school.
       These types of interventions could also have heterogenous effects by measures of student
background. We consider heterogeneity by whether a student was a first-generation college
student, applied using a fee waiver, was female, had a high SAT score, or came from a high school
with high or low fractions of free and reduced-price lunch. In Appendix Table A5 (Common
Application) we largely estimate null impacts for each subgroup, and for the few subgroups for
whom we obtain significant (yet small in terms of magnitude) results, we do not find consistent
patterns of impacts across outcomes. In no case do the subgroup estimates rise above one
percentage point in magnitude. Appendix Table A6 similarly shows no difference in the impact of
the Large State intervention across subgroups including first generation in college, gender, and
low-income students.
       In Table 8 we show results of the Large State interventions for the other cohorts of students
with whom we intervened--current college students, students who had applied but not enrolled in
college, and students who earned substantial credits but withdrew prior to a degree. We find no
impacts of the intervention for any of these students.
       One advantage of our study is that we can look at many different subgroups, many of which
include groups of students who have been found to benefit in previous interventions. We find that
irrespective of time in the college application/enrollment process and student characteristics, our
interventions had no impact.


Treatment variations
       In Tables 9, 10, and 11 we present estimates of whether the impact of the Common
Application and Large State interventions varied based on the treatment variations we tested. In
Table 9 we investigate whether impacts of the Common Application intervention on college
enrollment and enrollment quality varied by how we framed the financial aid nudge content.



                                                  17
Overall, we do not find meaningful differences in outcomes across content frames. There are some
outcomes for which the financial benefit or planning content frame estimates are statistically
significant, but in almost all cases the magnitude of these impacts relative to the control mean is
less than one percent. Relative to the information-only content frame treatment arms, the point
estimates on the advising intervention are slightly larger and because this intervention arm only
had ~2,000 students, the confidence intervals are wider. For instance, we cannot rule out impacts
in the 2-3 percentage point range for advising on whether students enrolled in college in the first
fall after the intervention. Even these impacts would still be modest, but in line with the impacts
of other text-supported advising interventions (e.g., Castleman and Page, 2017).
       In Table 10 we present evidence that compares receiving the information as text or as an
infographic relative to no information. We find no difference in whether students enrolled or the
sector that they enrolled in. We also find no effects on financial aid outcomes based on how we
present information to students. For students who were enrolled at four-year institutions, we varied
whether students received the information early or late; these results are presented in Panel B of
Table 10. There was no effect on overall enrollment but perhaps a shift from two-year enrollment
to four-year enrollment. It also appears that early text messages may have had a very modest effect
on our proxy for filing a FAFSA but this result is marginally statistically significant.
       In Table 11 we test whether impacts of the Common Application intervention varied based
on how we delivered content to students. We do not find consistent differences in impact across
delivery method, and in no case do the impacts associated with a particular delivery method or
combination of methods exceed a percentage point in magnitude.


Discussion
       Despite substantial and growing interest in behavioral science interventions in education
at various levels of government, we currently have little evidence about whether nudge
interventions that have generated positive impacts on postsecondary outcomes at a local level can
be scaled and maintain efficacy. We also have little evidence about the specific mechanisms
underlying the positive impacts of promising smaller-scale nudges. Organizations, policymakers,
and researchers seeking to scale nudge interventions can do so via two primary pathways: one is a
global approach, partnering with a state or national organization to reach out to large numbers of




                                                 18
students, while another is a local approach that consists of partnering with many local
organizations.
       Leveraging both statewide and nationwide large-scale experiments with a collective
sample of over 800,000 students, we find no effect of a global approach to scaling financial aid
nudges on students' financial aid receipt, college enrollment, or college persistence. Our study
contributes to a small body of recent research that demonstrates that large-scale information and
nudge interventions have little effect on students' college or financial aid outcomes (Bergman, et
al. 2019; Bettinger et al., 2012; Gurantz et al. 2019; Hyman 2018).
       A natural question is why these interventions failed to improve postsecondary outcomes
when smaller scale interventions led to increased college enrollment and persistence? Given the
nature of our experiments we can rule out several hypotheses. First, our lack of positive impacts
was not due to the delivery method. Students were randomly assigned to different combinations
of physical mailers, text messages, and emails, and none of the combinations of channels had any
effect. Second, we do not find evidence that nudges at scale are effective for a wide range of
specific student populations who are at various stages of the college-going and completion process.
Many previous nudge interventions, including large-scale campaigns, have focused on college-
intending or high-achieving students (e.g., Castleman and Page, 2015, 2016a; Gurantz et al., 2019;
Hoxby & Turner, 2013; Hyman, Forthcoming), as shown in the descriptions of sample populations
from prior studies in Table 1. Our experiments included students with high baseline college-going
rates (Common Application) and low baseline college-going rates (Large State intervention). Prior
experiments have also demonstrated that low-touch interventions can lead to improved
postsecondary outcomes for students earlier in the college application process (e.g., Hoxby and
Turner, 2013) as well as for students much later in the process (e.g., Carrell and Sacerdote, 2017;
Castleman and Page, 2015). In the Large State intervention we targeted groups of students at
various stages of college-going and completion: rising freshmen, currently enrolled students,
students who applied but did not enroll in college, and students who completed substantial credits
but who withdrew prior to a degree. We find no impact for any of these populations.
       Third, we find little evidence to support that the way content is framed affects whether
financial aid nudges are effective. We did not test every possible version of behaviorally informed
content, but we find no difference in aid receipt or enrollment based on several different
approaches to frame intervention content. One channel we cannot rule out as definitively is the



                                                19
importance of making one-on-one advising available to students. While we do not find significant
positive effects of offering students in the Common Application sample the opportunity to connect
via text with an advisor, our confidence intervals include impacts (2-3 pp) of a similar magnitude
that more local interventions have found from text-based nudge approaches. Additionally, the
take-up rate of the offer of advising was much smaller in our Common Application intervention
compared with prior efforts, with only 11.6 percent of students ever responding to a text message
(Table A6). Take up could be lower for a number of reasons but it seems likely that the more
distant relationship between the Common Application and students as compared to earlier studies
may have played a role. The possibility that large-scale nudging with the option of two-way
advising could have a positive impact is broadly consistent with the body of research on nudge
interventions in postsecondary education summarized in Table 1: campaigns that offer two-way
interaction tend to be more likely to influence students' college decisions than those that facilitate
one-on-one connections to a counselor, advisor, or mentor. Yet from a feasibility perspective, it
would be challenging for a large organization like the Common Application to staff a sufficient
number of advisors to provide meaningful two-way advising to hundreds of thousands of students.
          Having ruled out several potential explanations for why the large-scale nudges were not
effective, we offer several possibilities for why interventions that worked at a local level may not
effectively scale up. First, if participants infer that an intervention is delivered broadly, the salience
and value of the campaign for any one recipient may be diluted. In the context of our study,
students presumably had a weaker connection to the Common Application and the Large State
partner than they presumably did to smaller, community-based organizations that were the
ostensible message sender in many prior interventions. Second, the messages were primarily
generic and one-way, one of the limitations of a global approach to scale, so students may very
quickly have concluded that they were receiving the same outreach as many other students. The
lack of a more direct relationship with the sender and the generic nature of outreach could both
explain our lack of impacts. A parallel large-scale texting campaign conducted by Avery et al. (in
progress) should lend interesting insight into this hypothesis, since their project features both a
national level intervention administered by an organization with whom students had a tenuous
connection and a school-level intervention administered by specific counselors at students' high
school.




                                                   20
       Despite the null effects in the aggregate, several implications emerge from our work. First,
our results suggest that a more effective path to scale may depend on increasing the number of
local institutions implementing evidence-based campaigns. While scaling interventions locally is
a costlier and more labor-intensive approach to scale, by maintaining a stronger connection to
students as recipients, the sustenance of positive impacts could justify greater costs. Advances in
data science and technology also hold promise to improve large-scale outreach efforts, in either
global or local scale up approaches. Chiefly, supplemental data could be leveraged to develop
microtargeted nudges, following practices used in other social marketing contexts (Metcalf et al.
2018). Similarly, data could be leveraged to provide higher degrees of personalization and ensure
that recipients recognize the relevance of the outreach they receive.
       Nudge interventions in higher education have the promise of affordable scalability. We test
whether the effects scale across a range of samples, settings, information framings, delivery
method, and one-on-one help using a global approach by partnering with statewide and nationwide
organizations to reach more than 800,000 students. We find no impact in any of these settings
despite having similar content and even similar researchers working on these projects. We cannot
isolate exactly why our interventions did not work, but it seems like the relationship between the
student and the source of the nudge matters. Future work may be able to test this explicitly and
advance our understanding of when nudges work.




                                                21
References

Allcott, H. (2015). Site selection bias in program evaluation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        130(3), 1117-1165.

Avery, C., and Kane, T.J. "Student Perceptions of College Opportunities: The Boston COACH
       Program." In C.M.Hoxby (Ed.), College choices: The economics of where to go, when to
       go, and how to pay for it. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (2004).

Banerjee, A. V., Duflo, E., & Glennerster, R. (2008). Putting a band-aid on a corpse: incentives
       for nurses in the Indian public health care system. Journal of the European Economic
       Association, 6(2-3), 487-500.

Banerjee, A., Banerji, R., Berry, J., Duflo, E., Kannan, H., Mukerji, S., ... & Walton, M. (2017).
       From proof of concept to scalable policies: Challenges and solutions, with an application.
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(4), 73-102.

Barr, A., Bird, K., & Castleman, B. L. (2019). The effect of reduced student loan borrowing on
       academic performance and default: Evidence from a loan counseling experiment.
       (EdWorkingPaper No. 19-89). Retrieved from Annenberg Institute at Brown University:
       http://www.edworkingpapers.com/ai19-89

Barr, A., & Turner, S. (2018). A letter and encouragement: Does information increase
      postsecondary enrollment of UI recipients?. American Economic Journal: Economic
      Policy, 10(3), 42-68.

Baumeister, R.F. "How the self became a problem: A psychological review of historical
      research." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 163176 (1987).

Baumgardner, A. H. (1990). "To know oneself is to like oneself: Self-certainty and self-affect."
     Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1062-1072

Bergman, P. "Parent-Child Information Frictions and Human Capital Investment: Evidence from
      a Field Experiment." CESifo Working Paper Series No. 5391 (2015).

Bergman, P., J.T. Denning, & D. Manoli. "Is Information Enough? The Effect of Information
      about Tax Benefits on Student Outcomes" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
      2019.

Bettinger, E.P., Long, B.T., Oreopoulos, P., & Sanbonmatsu, L. "The role of application
       assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA
       Experiment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1205-1242 (2012).

Bird, K. "Early bird gets the worm? The impact of application deadlines on the distribution of
       state grant aid." A dissertation presented to the University of Virginia, May 2016.




                                               22
Booij, A. S., Leuven, E., & Oosterbeek, H. (2012). The role of information in the take-up of student
       loans. Economics of Education Review, 31(1), 33-44.

Bold, T., Kimenyi, M., Mwabu, G., & Sandefur, J. (2018). Experimental evidence on scaling up
       education reforms in Kenya. Journal of Public Economics, 168, 1-20.

Bulman, G. "The Effect of Access to College Assessments on Enrollment and Attainment."
      American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 7 (4): 1-36 (2015).

Carrell, S. E., & Sacerdote, B. (2013). Late interventions matter too: The case of college coaching
        in New Hampshire (No. w19031). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
        Research.

Carrell, S.E. & B. Sacerdote. 2017. "Why Do College Going Interventions Work?" American
        Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9(3): 124-51.

Casey, B., Jones, R.M., & Somerville., L.H. "Braking and accelerating of the adolescent brain."
       Journal of Research on Adolescence 21(1): 21  33, (2011).

Castleman, B. L. (2017). Behavioral insights for federal higher education policy. Urban Institute.
       Retrieved October 10, 2018, from https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/
       publication/93376/behavioral-insights.pdf.

Castleman, B.L. (2015). The 160-Character Solution: How Text Messages and Other Behavioral
              Strategies Can Improve Education. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
       Press.

Castleman, B. L., Arnold, K., & Wartman, K. L. (2012). Stemming the tide of summer melt: An
       experimental study of the effects of post-high school summer intervention on low-income
       students' college enrollment. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 5(1), 1-
       17.

Castleman, B., Haskins, R., Akers, B., Baron, J., Dynarski, S., Farran, D., Feldman, A., Jones, D.,
       Keys, B., Maynard, R., Sirindies, P., & Zinman, J. (2017). Behavioral policy interventions
       to address education inequality. Behavioral Science & Policy, 3, 4350.

Castleman, B. L., Owen, L., & Page, L. C. (2015). Stay late or start early? Experimental evidence
       on the benefits of college matriculation support from high schools versus
       colleges. Economics of Education Review, 47, 168-179.

Castleman, B.L. & L.C. Page. "Summer Nudging: Can personalized text messages and peer mentor
       outreach increase college going among low-income high school graduates?" Journal of
       Economic Behavior & Organization, Volume 115, July 2015, pages 144-160.

Castleman, B.L. & J.S. Goodman. 2018. "Intensive college counseling and the enrollment and
persistence of low-income students." Education Finance and Policy 13(1): 19-41.



                                                23
Castleman, B.L. & L.C. Page. "Freshman Year Financial Aid Nudges: An Experiment to Increase
       FAFSA Renewal and College Persistence." The Journal of Human Resources, 51(2): 389-
       415 (2016a).

Castleman, B. L., & Page, L. C. (2016b). Parental influences on postsecondary decision-making:
       Evidence from a text messaging experiment. EdPolicyWorks Working Paper.

Castleman, B. L., Page, L. C., & Schooley, K. (2014). The forgotten summer: Mitigating summer
       attrition among college-intending, low-income high school graduates. Journal of Policy
       Analysis and Management, 33(2), 320-344.

Crocetti, E., M. Rubini, S. Branje, H.M. Koot, & W.Meeus, "Self-Concept Clarity in
       Adolescents and Parents: A Six-Wave Longitudinal and Multi-Informant Study on
       Development and Intergenerational Transmission," Journal of Personality, 84 (5): 580-
       593 (2015).

Darolia, R., & Harper, C. (2018). Information use and attention deferment in college student loan
       decisions: Evidence from a debt letter experiment. Educational Evaluation and Policy
       Analysis, 40(1), 129-150.

DeMarree, K.G., Petty, R. E., & Brinol, P. (2007). "Self-certainty: Parallels to attitude certainty."
      International Journal of Psychology and Psychological Therapy, 7, 159-188.

Dinkelman, T., & Martnez A, C. (2014). Investing in schooling in Chile: The role of information
      about financial aid for higher education. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(2), 244-
      257.

Dobronyi, C. R., Oreopoulos, P., & Petronijevic, U. (2019). Goal setting, academic reminders, and
      college success: A large-scale field experiment. Journal of Research on Educational
      Effectiveness, 12(1), 38-66.

Dynarski, S.M. & J.E. Scott-Clayton. "The cost of complexity in federal student aid: Lessons
      from optimal tax theory and behavioral economics." National Tax Journal, 59(2): 319-
      356 (2006).

Evans, B. J., Boatman, A., & Soliz, A. (2019). Framing and labeling effects in preferences for
       borrowing for college: An experimental analysis. Research in Higher Education, 60(4),
       438-457.

Finklestein, A. & M. J. Notowidigdo "Take-up and Targeting: Experimental Evidence from
       SNAP" Quarterly Journal of Economics (Forthcoming)

French, R., & Oreopoulos, P. (2017). Behavioral barriers transitioning to college. Labour
       Economics, 47, 48-63.




                                                 24
Goldrick-Rab, S., Page, L.C., Sacerdote, B., Castleman, B.L., & Seftor, N. (2019). Financial aid
       nudges: A national experiment to increase retention of financial aid and college persistence.
       Paper presented at the Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness Annual
       Conference.

Grodsky, E., and Jones, M.T. "Real and Imagined Barriers to College Entry: Perceptions of Cost."
      Social Science Research 36(2) (2007): 745-766.

Gurantz, O., Howell, J., Hurwitz, M., Larson, C., Pender, M., & White, B. (2019). Realizing Your
      College Potential? Impacts of College Board's RYCP Campaign on Postsecondary
      Enrollment (EdWorkingPaper No.19-40).

Hastings, J.S. & J.M. Weinstein. "Information, School Choice, and Academic Achievement:
       Evidence from Two Experiments." Quarterly Journal of Economics (2008) 123 (4):
       1373-1414.

Hoxby, C.M. & S.E. Turner. "What High-Achieving Low-Income Students Know About College."
      American Economic Review, 105(5): 514-17 (2015).

Hoxby, C., & Turner, S. (2013). Expanding college opportunities for high-achieving, low income
      students. Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper, (12-014).

Hyman, J. (Forthcoming). Can light-touch college-going interventions make a difference?
     Evidence from a statewide experiment in Michigan. Journal of Policy Analysis and
     Management.

ideas42 (2015). Increasing FAFSA applications: Making college more affordable. New York:
       ideas42. Retrieved from http://www.ideas42.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/FAFSA-
       Brief.pdf

ideas42. "Nudging for college success: A look at applying behavioral science to postsecondary
       persistence."     Preview report, retrieved from http://www.ideas42.org/wp-
       content/uploads/2016/02/ideas42-PSE-Preview.pdf, February 13th, 2017.

Jensen, R. (2010). The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling. The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2), 515-548.

Kahneman, D. & A. Tversky. "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk."
      Econometrica, 47(2): 263-291 (1979).

Karlan, D., M. McConnell, S. Mullainathan, & J. Zinman. "Getting to the top of mind: How
       reminders increase saving". National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
       No.16205. Cambridge, MA (2010).

Kerr, S. P., Pekkarinen, T., Sarvimki, M., & Uusitalo, R. (2014). Educational choice and
       information on labor market prospects: A randomized field experiment. Milan, Italy:
       University of Milan. Working Paper.


                                                25
King, J.E. "Missed Opportunities: New Information on Students Who Do Not Apply for
       Financial Aid." American Council on Education Center for Policy Analysis Issue Brief
       (2004).

Lerner, R.M., & Steinberg, L. (Eds.). Handbook of adolescent psychology (3rd ed.). Hoboken,
       NJ: John Wiley & Sons (2009).

Madrian, B.C. & D.F. Shea. "The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(K) participation and
      savings behavior." Quarterly Journal of Economics (2001) 116 (4): 1149-1187.

Marx, B. M., & Turner, L. J. (forthcoming). Student loan nudges: Experimental evidence on
      borrowing and educational attainment. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

McGuigan, M., McNally, S., & Wyness, G. (2016). Student awareness of costs and benefits of
     educational decisions: Effects of an information campaign. Journal of Human
     Capital, 10(4), 482-519.

Meeus, W. "The study of adolescent identity formation 20002010: A review of longitudinal
      research." Journal of Research on Adolescence, 21, 7594 (2011).

Meyer, K., & Rosinger, K. (2019). Applying behavioral insights to improve postsecondary
      education outcomes: A review of Obama administration efforts and next steps under the
      Trump administration. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 38(2), 481-499.

Milkman, K.L., J. Beshears, J.J. Choi, D. Laibson, & B.C. Madrian. "Following through on
      good intentions: The power of planning prompts." NBER Working Paper No. 17995
      (2012).

Nguyen, T. (2008). Information, role models and perceived returns to education: Experimental
      evidence from Madagascar. MIT Working Paper.

Nickerson, D.W. & T. Rogers. "Do you have a voting plan? Implementation intentions, voter
       turnout, and organic plan making." Psychological Science, 21(2): 194-199 (2010).

Oreopoulos, P., & Dunn, R. (2013). Information and college access: Evidence from a
      randomized field experiment. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 115(1), 3-26.

Oreopoulos, P., Patterson, R. W., Petronijevic, U., & Pope, N. G. (2018a). Lack of study time is
      the problem, but what is the solution? unsuccessful attempts to help traditional and online
      college students (No. w25036). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Oreopoulos, P., & Petronijevic, U. (2018). Student coaching: How far can technology go?. Journal
      of Human Resources, 53(2), 299-329.




                                               26
Oreopoulos, P., & Petronijevic, U. (2019). The remarkable unresponsiveness of college students
      to nudging And what we can learn from it (No. w26059). National Bureau of Economic
      Research.

Oreopoulos, P., Petronijevic, U., Logel, C., & Beattie, G. (2018b). Improving Non-Academic
      Student Outcomes Using Online and Text-Message Coaching (No. w24992). National
      Bureau of Economic Research.

Owen, L. (2012). Narrowing the college opportunity gap: Helping students and families navigate
      the financial aid process. (Order No. 3531990, Oregon State University). ProQuest
      Dissertations and Theses, 171. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com.ezp-
      prod1.hul.harvard.edu/docview/1220880050?accountid=11311.

Page, L.C., Castleman, B.L., & Meyer, K. "Customized nudging to improve FAFSA completion
       and income verification." Working paper, 2016.

Page, L. C., & Gehlbach, H. (2017). How an artificially intelligent virtual assistant helps students
       navigate the road to college. AERA Open, 3(4), 2332858417749220.

Pallais, A. "Small Differences That Matter: Mistakes in Applying to College." Journal of Labor
         Economics 33, no. 2 (April 2015): 493-520.

Rosinger, K. O. (forthcoming). Can simplifying financial aid offers impact college enrollment and
      borrowing? Experimental and quasi-experimental evidence. Education Finance and
      Policy.

Ross, R., S. White, J. Wright, & L. Knapp. "Using Behavioral Economics for Postsecondary
              Success." ideas42, May 23, 2013.

Thaler, R.H., & S. Bernatzi. "Save more tomorrow: Using behavioral economics to increase
        employee saving." The Journal of Political Economy, 112(1): 164-187 (2004).




                                                27
Table 1. Nudge and informational intervention studies in postsecondary education
Authors            Stage in college-   Sample             Sample        Geographic        Partner organization   Intervention                One-way or    Key findings
                   going process                          size          location                                                             two-way
                                                                                                                                             interaction

Oreopoulos and     Forming college     High school        975           Toronto,          Five public high       3-minute video              One-way       Students in treatment group who
Dunn (2013)        expectations        students from                    Ontario           schools in Toronto,    highlighting benefits                     were unsure about their educational
                                       disadvantaged                                      Ontario                of postsecondary                          attainment intentions reported lower
                                       high schools                                                              education and                             expected returns from leaving
                                                                                                                 invitation to use a                       education after high school, were
                                                                                                                 financial aid calculator                  less likely to report that costs
                                                                                                                 to approximate aid                        prevented some from going to
                                                                                                                 eligibility                               college, and were less likely to be
                                                                                                                                                           unsure about educational
                                                                                                                                                           expectations after treatment
Carrell and        Applying for        High school        949           New               Dartmouth College      Personalized in-            Two-way       Women in the treatment group were
Sacerdote          college/Applying    seniors who had                  Hampshire         and 12 high schools    person, phone, and                        more likely to go to college and
(2013)             for financial aid   taken no or few                                    in New Hampshire       email mentoring and                       more likely to enroll in a four-year
                                       steps to apply                                                            financial assistance                      college; increases also seen for
                                       to college with                                                           associated with                           recent immigrants
                                       10th grade test                                                           applying for college
                                       score at or                                                               and financial aid
                                       above 40th                                                                during the spring of
                                       percentile                                                                the senior year
Hoxby and          Applying to         High-achieving,    12,000        United States     Expanding College      Semi-customized             One-way       Students who were sent mailing
Turner (2013)      college             low-income                                         Opportunities          mailings with                             applied to more colleges, were more
                                       high school                                                               information about                         likely to apply to a selective college,
                                       seniors                                                                   college application                       and were more likely to enroll in a
                                                                                                                 process and net costs                     selective college
                                                                                                                 along with application
                                                                                                                 fee waiver
Bettinger,         Enrolling in        High school        16,742        156 tax           H&R Block              1) Professional             Two-way       Assistance + information treatment:
Long,              college/Applying    seniors, recent                  preparation                              assistance completing                     increased college enrollment among
Oreopoulos,        for financial aid   high school                      offices in Ohio                          FAFSA and                                 dependent students and by a smaller
and                                    graduates, and                   and Charlotte                            information about aid                     amount among independent students
Sanbonmatsu                            independent                      (NC)                                     eligibility (assistance +                 with no prior college experience;
(2012)                                 adults with no                                                            information), or 2)                       Information treatment: no change in
                                       college degree                                                            information about aid                     enrollment
                                       with adjusted                                                             eligibility (information
                                       gross income                                                              only)
                                       <$45,000




                                                                                             28
Bergman,          Enrolling in   Rising high         1,042,303   Applicants to   Texas Higher          Emails and letters           One-way    No change in enrollment or
Denning, and      college        school seniors,                 Texas public    Education             describing tax benefits                 reenrollment
Manoli                           college                         colleges        Coordinating Board    for college
(forthcoming)                    students,                       through         and ApplyTexas
                                 students who                    ApplyTexas
                                 applied to but                  application
                                 did not enroll in               portal
                                 college
Hyman             Enrolling in   High-achieving      50,000      Michigan        Michigan              Mailed letter with           One-way    Low-income students more likely to
(forthcoming)     college        high school                                     Department of         information                             enroll in college (mostly driven by
                                 seniors                                         Education             encouraging students                    four-year college enrollment), results
                                                                                                       to consider college and                 attenuate for second-year persistence
                                                                                                       directing them to                       and disappear for third-year
                                                                                                       website with more                       persistence. Low-income and non-
                                                                                                       information; letter                     white students had highest rates of
                                                                                                       varied by either                        website engagement. Letters focused
                                                                                                       highlighting 1) college                 on college affordability led to largest
                                                                                                       affordability, 2)                       rates of website engagement
                                                                                                       college choice, or 3)
                                                                                                       college application
                                                                                                       information
Gurantz,          Enrolling in   Low- and            785,000     United States   College Board         1) Mailed brochure           One-way    No change in enrollment
Howell,           college        middle-income                                                         with information about       and two-
Hurwitz,                         students in top                                                       key elements of              way
Larson, Pender,                  50% of                                                                college application
and White                        PSAT/SAT                                                              process, 2) mailed
(2019)                           distributions                                                         brochure with direct
                                                                                                       outreach via text
                                                                                                       message, virtual
                                                                                                       advising, or small
                                                                                                       financial incentive,
                                                                                                       and 3) Email with link
                                                                                                       to information about
                                                                                                       application process
Barr and Turner   Enrolling in   Unemployment        United      United States   None (Survey of       Letter with                  One-way    Recipients of the letter were more
(2018)*           college        insurance           States                      Income and Program    information about                       likely to enroll in college within 6
                                 recipients                                      Participation data    college costs and                       months
                                                                                 used for college      benefits and steps to
                                                                                 enrollment outcome)   apply for college and
                                                                                                       financial aid
Page and          Enrolling in   Admitted            7,489       Atlanta (GA)    Georgia State         Text-based                   Two-way    Students assigned to treatment group
Gehlbach          college        college students                                University            intervention using                      were more likely to enroll on-time
(2017)                                                                                                 conversational
                                                                                                       artificial intelligence to
                                                                                                       provide personalized
                                                                                                       messages to students
                                                                                                       regarding pre-
                                                                                                       matriculation tasks




                                                                                    29
Castleman and     Enrolling in   College-          4,754      Boston, Fall        uAspire                 14 text messages          Two-way   Assignment to treatment increased
Page (2016b)      college        intending high               River,                                      encouraging students                on-time college enrollment for both
                                 school seniors               Lawrence, and                               or students and their               students and students and parent
                                 and their                    Springfield                                 parents to complete                 groups
                                 parents                      (MA), Miami                                 summer tasks for
                                                              (FL)                                        college enrollment
Castleman,        Enrolling in   College-          1,602      Albuquerque         Albuquerque             Personalized outreach     Two-way   Summer outreach increased
Owen, and         college        intending high               Public School       Public Schools (APS)    via phone, email, and               enrollment among Hispanic males;
Page (2015)                      school                       graduates who       and University of       text messages from                  Hispanic males were particularly
                                 graduates                    intended to         New Mexico (UNM)        either a counselor at a             responsive to outreach from UNM
                                                              enroll at the                               high school or at the               relative to outreach from APS
                                                              University of                               University of New
                                                              New Mexico                                  Mexico encouraging
                                                                                                          students to complete
                                                                                                          summer tasks for
                                                                                                          college enrollment
Castleman and     Enrolling in   College-          6,196      TX, MA, and         Dallas Independent      1) 10 personalized text   Two-way   Text messages increased likelihood
Page (2015)       college        intending high               PA                  School District (TX),   message reminders of                of enrolling in a two-year college;
                                 school                                           uAspire (MA), and       college-related tasks               Peer mentor outreach increase four-
                                 graduates and                                    Mastery Charter         required for                        year college enrollment
                                 their parents                                    Schools (PA)            matriculation, or 2)
                                                                                                          information and
                                                                                                          encouragement from a
                                                                                                          peer mentor
Kerr,             Enrolling in   Soon to           21,194     Finland             97 high schools in      Class session and         One-way   No change in the likelihood of
Pekkarinen,       college        graduate high                                    Finland                 supplemental material               enrolling in postsecondary education
Sarvimki, and                   school students                                                          containing information              or the type of program in which
Uusitalo (2014)                                                                                           about earnings                      students enrolled; within the
                                                                                                          distribution,                       treatment group, those who reported
                                                                                                          employment rates, and               that the labor market outcomes for
                                                                                                          most common                         their intended program was worse
                                                                                                          occupations associated              than they thought were more likely
                                                                                                          with specific                       to change fields
                                                                                                          postsecondary degrees
Castleman,        Enrolling in   College-          927 in     Two large           uAspire                 Phone, email, text, and   Two-way   Offer of counseling increased
Page, and         college        intending high    Boston     urban public                                Facebook messages                   immediate college enrollment (larger
Schooley                         school            (MA);      school districts:                           and in-person meetings              increase among low-income
(2014)                           graduates         1,446 in   Boston (MA)                                 with advisors to                    students); students who received a
                                                   Fulton     and Fulton                                  encourage students to               counseling offer were more likely to
                                                   County     County Schools                              complete summer                     enroll in their intended college,
                                                   Schools    (GA)                                        tasks for college                   remain enrolled through first year,
                                                   (GA)                                                   enrollment                          and persist into sophomore year
Avery (2013)      Enrolling in   Low-income        238        Minneapolis         College Possible        Two-year program          Two-way   Participating in the College Possible
                  college        high school                  and St. Paul                                offering tutoring and               program increased the likelihood of
                                 juniors and                  metro regions                               application assistance              applying to and attending a four-year
                                 seniors                      (MN)                                                                            college




                                                                                     30
Castleman,       Enrolling in         College-           162      Providence (RI)   Seven urban high     Proactive outreach         Two-way    Students assigned to receive
Arnold, and      college              intending high                                schools in Big       from high school                      proactive outreach from high school
Wartman                               school                                        Picture network of   counselors via phone,                 counselors were more likely to enroll
(2012)                                graduates                                     schools              email, instant                        in college on-time, enroll full-time,
                                                                                                         messaging, and                        enroll in a four-year college, and
                                                                                                         Facebook encouraging                  keep college plans developed in high
                                                                                                         students to complete                  school
                                                                                                         summer tasks for
                                                                                                         college enrollment
Carrell and      Enrolling in         High school        2,624    New               20 high schools      Mentoring related to       Two-way    Increase in college-going through at
Sacerdote        college/persisting   seniors on the              Hampshire                              college application and               least first two years for women
(2017)           in college           verge of not                                                       financial aid processes,              assigned to mentoring group; being
                                      applying to                                                        application fees paid,                assigned to mentoring shifted
                                      college                                                            and $100 cash bonus                   enrollment for some women from no
                                                                                                         for participation, 2)                 college to a two- or four-year college
                                                                                                         cash bonus but no                     and from a two-year college to a
                                                                                                         mentoring, and 3)                     four-year college; Smaller, less
                                                                                                         information and                       robust, and non-significant findings
                                                                                                         encouragement via                     for men assigned to mentoring
                                                                                                         letters, emails, and
                                                                                                         phone calls
Oreopoulos and   Persisting in        First-year         24,772   Toronto,          University of        1) Goal setting            One-way    Coaching interventions improved
Petronijevic     college              college students            Canada            Toronto              prompts, 2) mindset        and two-   study habits and subjective well-
(2019)                                                                                                   prompts, 3) online         way        being but did not change grades or
                                                                                                         coaching, 4) online                   persistence
                                                                                                         coaching with one-way
                                                                                                         text messaging, 5)
                                                                                                         two-way text
                                                                                                         messaging, or 6) face
                                                                                                         to face coaching
Oreopoulos and   Persisting in        First-year         5,179    Toronto,          University of        1) One-time online         One way    Increase in GPA among students
Petronijevic     college              college students            Canada            Toronto              exercise designed to       and two    assigned to coaching intervention, no
(2018)                                                                                                   affirm goals, 2)           way        change for other treatment groups
                                                                                                         exercise plus text and
                                                                                                         email outreach with
                                                                                                         weekly messages
                                                                                                         containing academic
                                                                                                         advice and motivation
                                                                                                         content, or 3) exercise
                                                                                                         plus proactive one-on-
                                                                                                         one coaching
Oreopoulos,      Persisting in        College            3,395    Toronto,          University of        1) Psychologically         One way    No change in grades or credit
Petronijevic,    college              students                    Canada            Toronto              informed, personalized     and two-   accumulation but treatment
Logel, and                                                                                               online module, or 2)       way        improved non-academic outcomes
Beattie (2018)                                                                                           module plus text                      with students in both treatment
                                                                                                         message coaching                      groups experiencing a greater sense
                                                                                                         outreach                              of belonging and more likely to seek
                                                                                                                                               help




                                                                                       31
Huntington-      Completing      College            6,047        unknown            Regional four-year       Informational fliers      One-way   No change in credits taken, whether
Klein and Gill   college         students                        (United States)    public university        encouraging students                students took a full course load, or
(2019)                                                                                                       to take a full course               pass rate
                                                                                                             load each semester
Goldrick-Rab,    Applying for    College            7,996        National           National                 1) Text messages with     Two-way   Students who received text messages
Page,            financial aid   students                        (United States)    Postsecondary            simplified information              filed FAFSA in a shorter timeframe
Sacerdote,                                                                          Student Aid Study;       and prompts, and 2)                 than control group students but no
Castleman, and                                                                      advising offered         text messages paired                change in filing rates by the start of
Seftor (2019)                                                                       through College          with offer to connect               the next academic year; no
                                                                                    Possible                 1:1 with advisor; also              difference in treatment effects across
                                                                                                             varied framing of text              framing variations or offer of 1:1
                                                                                                             messages (basic                     advising
                                                                                                             information, basic
                                                                                                             information + cues
                                                                                                             about average peer
                                                                                                             behavior, and basic
                                                                                                             information + prompt
                                                                                                             to commit to a day to
                                                                                                             complete task)
Page,            Applying for    High school        17,731       Austin and         66 high schools in       Personalized, data-       Two-way   Students in high schools that
Castleman, and   financial aid   seniors                         Houston (TX)       eight school districts   driven text messages                received treatment were more likely
Meyer (2016)                                                                                                 with updates on                     to submit and complete FAFSA
                                                                                                             FAFSA submission
                                                                                                             and completion
                                                                                                             process and
                                                                                                             encouragement to seek
                                                                                                             out local supports

Castleman and    Applying for    First-year         808          Students who       uAspire                  12 personalized text      Two-way   Community college students were
Page (2016a)     financial aid   college students                had worked                                  message reminders to                more likely to persist through second
                                                                 with uAspire in                             re-file FAFSA                       year of college; no change in
                                                                 Springfield and                                                                 persistence among students at four-
                                                                 Boston (MA)                                                                     year colleges
                                                                 offices while in
                                                                 high school
ideas42 (2015)   Applying for    College            63,000       mainly metro       Arizona State            8 weekly emails           One-way   Increased priority FAFSA
                 financial aid   students                        Phoenix (AZ)       University               encouraging students                submission
                                                                                                             to file FAFSA early
Evans,           Paying for      High school        1,657 in     High schools in    None (survey data        Hypothetical survey       One-way   High school and community college
Boatman, and     college         seniors,           high         TX, KY, TN,        collected from           that varied the framing             students who received a borrowing
Soliz (2019)                     community          school;      and MA;            students)                (income-based                       offer labeled "loan" were less likely
                                 college            3,770 in     community                                   repayment versus                    to accept the offer, effects were
                                 students, and      communit     colleges in IL,                             income share                        twice as large for black and Hispanic
                                 adults without a   y college;   TN, MI, and                                 agreement) and                      high school students
                                 college degree     843 adults   TX; unknown                                 labeling (loan versus
                                                    without a    for adults                                  income share
                                                    college                                                  agreement) of loan
                                                    degree                                                   offers




                                                                                       32
Marx and           Paying for           Community           19,724        Unknown             Anonymous                Nonzero loan offer         One-way        Students who received a nonzero
Turner             college              college students                  (United States)     community college        listed in financial aid                   loan offer were more likely to
(forthcoming)                                                                                                          award letter                              borrow and borrowed more on
                                                                                                                                                                 average. Students who were induced
                                                                                                                                                                 to borrow completed more credits,
                                                                                                                                                                 increased GPA, and were more
                                                                                                                                                                 likely to transfer to a four-year
                                                                                                                                                                 public college within one year
Rosinger           Paying for           Admitted and        3,476         unknown             Anonymous four-          Standardized financial     One-way        No impact on whether a student
(forthcoming)      college              enrolled                          (United States)     year college             aid award letter                          enrolled, borrowed, or amount
                                        students at a                                                                  intended to simplify                      borrowed
                                        four-year                                                                      informtion about
                                        university                                                                     college costs, loan
                                                                                                                       options, and college
                                                                                                                       outcomes
Darolia and        Paying for           Current college     9,802         Columbia (MO)       University of            Personlized letter with    One-way        No change in whether students
Harper (2018)      college              students                                              Missouri                 summary of borrowing                      borrowed or amount they borrowed
                                                                                                                       to date, estimate of
                                                                                                                       future month
                                                                                                                       payments, and
                                                                                                                       information about
                                                                                                                       borrowing among
                                                                                                                       peers
Barr, Bird, and    Paying for           Community           2,876         Baltimore           Community College        8 text messages sent       Two-way        Reduced unsubsidized, led to worse
Castleman          college              college students                  County (MD)         of Baltimore County      over a month                              academic outcomes, and increased
(2019)                                                                    and                                          providing information                     loan default rates three years after
                                                                          surrounding                                  about borrowing                           entering repayment
                                                                          area                                         choices and connecting
                                                                                                                       students with financial
                                                                                                                       aid counselors
Booij, Leuven,     Paying for           College             3,812         The                 None (survey data        Information about loan     One-way        Treatment increased students'
and Oosterbeek     college              students                          Netherlands         collected from           options imbedded in                       accurate knowledge of loan options
(2012)                                                                                        students)                an online survey                          but had no impact on borrowing
Notes: We include studies of nudge and informational interventions that focus on helping high school and current college students navigate college decisions. Unless indicted by an asterisk, all
studies are randomized controlled trials. We exclude studies that involve informational interventions in earlier grades that focus on shaping students' college expectations and/or persistence in
primary and secondary education (e.g., Dinkleman and Martinez, 2014; Jensen, 2010; McGuigan, McNally, & Wyness, 2016; Nguyen, 2008). Studies are ordered by stage in the college-going
process (earliest to latest) and then with most recent studies listed first. See Castleman (2017), Castleman et al. (2017), French and Oreopoulos (2017), Lavecchia, Liu, and Oreopoulos (2014), and
Meyer and Rosinger (2019) for additional reviews and discussions of these and other studies).




                                                                                                 33
Table 2: Summary statistics for the Common Application full, experimental, and evaluation samples
                                                                                                                      NSC
                                              All Common Applicants             Full Experimental Sample              Match
                                                      (1)                                  (2)                         (3)
Student variables
                                Female                  57.7%                              60.7%                      60.1%

                       First generation                 37.8%                              65.9%                      65.1%

                           Fee Waiver                   25.3%                              43.1%                      43.0%

                 Intent to apply for aid                61.1%                              73.1%                      74.7%

                            SAT score                   1154                               1104                       1107

                            ACT score                    26.5                               25.2                       25.2

                   No SAT/ACT score                     37.5%                              39.0%                      39.0%

                High School GPA (%)                     89.5%                              87.8%                      87.3%

                         Missing GPA                    31.5%                              34.5%                      34.8%

High school variables
      Number of Common Applicants                        234                                136                        176

      Number in experimental sample                       74                                 87                        115

                12th grade enrollment                    369                                345                        383

           Percent Free/reduced lunch                   32.4%                              44.0%                      43.2%

                         Percent white                  58.8%                              49.3%                      46.9%

                                      N                836,269                            454,243                    271,365
Notes: Student-level information is self-reported by students on the Common App, and is based on student responses as of October
12th (for the Fall cohort) or December 18th (for the Winter cohort). The Number of Common Applicants and the Number in
experimental sample variables are based on total counts of Common Applicants in each high school (reported using CEEB code) as of
December 18th, 2015. The final three High school variables are merged in from the Common Core of Data.




                                                                34
Table 3: Summary statistics for the Large State Rising Freshman sample
                                                                                Rising Freshman
                                                                                       (1)
Student variables
                                                            Female                    54.2%

                           Mother's education: Bachelor's Degree                      22.6%

                                                     Income 0-39K                     15.7%

                                                   Income 40-79K                      12.5%
                                                     Income 80K+                      24.4%

                                                   Income Missing                     47.2%

                                                  In State Resident                   89.2%

                                                              White                   62.4%

                                                              Black                   16.7%

                                                          Hispanic                    41.4%

                                                              Asian                   7.7%

                                                Age at Application                     18.6
                                                                                      (0.59)

                                                                 N                   185,749
Notes: Student characteristics are self-reports from college application. See text for a description of the Rising
Freshman sample for Large State. Source is administrative records from Large State.




                                                         35
Table 4: Covariate Balance for Common Application, separately for full experimental and evaluation samples
Panel A: Full Experimental Sample
                                  First                        Intent to                                                               Missing
                   Female       Generation    Fee Waiver     apply for aid      SAT          ACT          No Score      GPA (%)         GPA
                     (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)

Any treatment       0.003          0.001         0.002          -0.001         0.494        -0.019          0.002         0.000         -0.001
                   (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)       (1.019)       (0.031)        (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.002)

N                 454,243        454,243        454,243        454,243        176,809       158,267       454,243        297,394       454,243
Control
mean                0.605         0.657          0.429           0.732         1104          25.21         0.388          0.877          0.346

Panel B: NSC match evaluation sample
                                  First                        Intent to                                                               Missing
                   Female       Generation    Fee Waiver     apply for aid      SAT          ACT          No Score      GPA (%)         GPA
                     (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)

Any treatment       0.003          0.002         0.002          -0.001         0.816        -0.014          0.003         0.001         -0.000
                   (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)       (1.249)       (0.038)        (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.002)

N                 271,365        271,365        271,365        271,365        109,656       90,623        271,365        176,756       271,365
Control
mean                0.599         0.649          0.428           0.748         1107          25.27         0.388          0.873          0.349

Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the specified dependent variable (student characteristics) on
treatment indicators and high school x cohort (Fall or Winter) fixed effects. See notes in Table 2 for more information about these student
characteristics. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are clustered at the high school x cohort level. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01




                                                                  36
Table 5: Covariate Balance for Large State


                                   Mother's        Father's         Family
                                  Bachelor's      Bachelor's        Income          Age at
                     Male          Degree          Degree            80k+         Application       White        Black        Hispanic

                       (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)


Any treatment        0.008          -0.001          -0.002           -0.004         0.009*          0.006        -0.003       -0.006
                    (0.006)         (0.004)         (0.006)          (0.003)        (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.006)



 Control Mean        0.511           0.242           0.196           0.322           18.65          0.661         0.114        0.333

 N                   185,793       185,793         185,793           185,793          185,793       185,793      185,793        185,793
 Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the specified dependent variable (student
 characteristics) on treatment indicators and indicators for level of stratification. All treatments are grouped into a single treatment
 variable. See notes in Table 3 for more information about these student characteristics. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors
 are in parenthesis. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01




                                                                    37
Table 6: Overall treatment impacts of Common Application intervention on enrollment and persistence outcomes
                                           Enrolled at 4- Enrolled at 2-       Enrolled
                              Enrolled 1st         st               st
                                            year 1 Fall      year 1 Fall       2nd Fall        Enrolled
                                Fall after
                                                after            after           after      Continuously
                              intervention
                                            intervention     intervention    intervention
                                   (1)           (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)

           Any Treatment           0.003           0.000            0.002            0.002           0.001
                                  (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.001)          (0.002)         (0.002)

Control mean of outcome           0.824            0.728            0.100            0.791           0.737
                      N          271,365          271,365          271,365          271,365         271,365

Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the specified outcome on an
indicator for any experimental treatment and high school x cohort (Fall or Winter) fixed effects and the student-level
characteristics shown in Table 2. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are clustered at the high school x cohort
level. We construct the enrollment and persistence outcomes using National Student Clearinghouse matches.
Enrollment in Fall immediately after intervention (Fall 2016) or enrollment in following Fall (Fall 2017) enrollment
is defined as whether the student was enrolled as of October 1st, 2016 (2017). Continuous enrollment is defined as
enrollment in Fall 2016, Spring 2017, and Fall 2017. Spring 2017 enrollment is defined as whether the student was
enrolled as of March 1st, 2017. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01




                                                                 38
Table 7: Overall treatment impacts of Large State intervention on enrollment, persistence, and financial aid outcomes for Rising
Freshman
                           1st Spring after intervention          First Fall after intervention  Enrollment   First Fall after intervention  Financial Aid

                  Enrolled         Enrolled at      Enrolled at   Enrolled       Enrolled at     Enrolled at     Filed         Pell Grant         Loan
                                     4-year           2-year                       4-year          2-year       FAFSA           Amount           Amount
                     (1)                (2)                (3)       (4)             (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)              (9)

Any treatment       0.009             -0.001          0.011*       0.001            0.000           0.003         -0.006         -26.75           -20.05
                   (0.006)           (0.005)          (0.006)     (0.006)          (0.005)         (0.006)       (0.006)         (23.8)          (28.75)


 Control mean
   of outcome       0.542             0.316            0.238       0.490           0.294            0.208         0.436          1217.7           1065.3

            N      185,793           185,793         185,793      185,793         185,793         185,793       185,793          185,793         185,793
Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the specified outcome on an indicator for any
experimental treatment and indicators for parent education, self-reported family income, gender, type of school applied to, and race as
well as age at application. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parenthesis. We construct the enrollment and financial aid
outcomes using administrative data from Large State. Messages were sent in Fall 2016, some outcomes are measured then, "1st Spring
after intervention ". "First Fall after intervention" refers to the Fall of 2017 which was the first semester after the messages were sent. * p
< 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01




                                                                           39
Table 8: Impact of the Large State intervention for other student populations
                                              First fall after intervention
                                            Enrolled       Enrolled     Filed    Pell Grant
                             Enrolled
                                            at 4-year      at 2-year   FAFSA      Amount

                                (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)

                                Applied but did not enroll
Any treatment                  -0.001       -0.002**       0.001*       0.000     -0.888
                              (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.000)     (0.001)    (2.93)

Control mean of outcome        0.061         0.050          0.012       0.081    152.3623

N                             317,193       317,193        317,193     317,193    317,193

                                      Currently enrolled
Any treatment                  -0.003       -0.004*         0.000       0.004      17.01
                              (0.004)       (0.002)        (0.003)     (0.004)    (16.26)

Control mean of outcome        0.533         0.154          0.393       0.435     886.21

N                             516,739       516,739        516,739     516,739    516,739

                               Leavers (2-year institutions)
Any treatment                  0.000         0.001          0.001       0.002      8.471
                              (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.004)     (0.004)    (12.81)

Control mean of outcome        0.145         0.109          0.039       0.132     242.33

N                             23,248         23,248        23,248      23,248     23,248


                                                                         40
Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of
the specified outcome on an indicator for any experimental treatment and
indicators for available controls. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in
parenthesis We construct the enrollment and financial aid outcomes using
administrative data from Large State. Messages were sent in Fall 2016, some
outcomes are measured then, "1st Spring after intervention ". "First Fall after
intervention" refers to the Fall of 2017 which was the first semester after the
messages were sent. These are relative to the control group which did not receive
messages. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01




                                                                  41
Table 9: Common Application intervention impacts by content variation


                                               Enrolled at Enrolled at    Enrolled
                               Enrolled 1st
                                                4-year 1st   2-year 1st   2nd Fall          Enrolled
                                 Fall after
                                                Fall after   Fall after     after         Continuously
                               intervention
                                              intervention intervention intervention

                                   (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)

                Advising          0.007         -0.004         0.010          0.014            0.006
                                 (0.009)        (0.010)       (0.007)        (0.009)         (0.010)
                Financial        0.004*          0.003         0.000         0.004*            0.002
                                 (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)
                  Identity        0.001         -0.001         0.002         -0.001           -0.001
                                 (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)
                 Planning         0.003         -0.000        0.003*          0.002            0.002
                                 (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)

Control mean of outcome           0.824         0.728          0.100          0.791          0.737
                      N          271,365       271,365        271,365        271,365        271,365

Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the specified outcome
on the content and advising indicators and high school x cohort (Fall or Winter) fixed effects and the
student-level characteristics shown in Table 2. The excluded category is the control group.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are clustered at the high school x cohort level. Note that the
advising indicator is not mutually exclusive from the three content variation indicators. See notes in
Table 6 for information on the construction of the outcome variables. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p <
0.01




                                                                        42
Table 10: Large State intervention impacts by content variation and timing
                                    Enrolled at    Enrolled at      Filed      Pell Grant
                       Enrolled
                                      4-year         2-year        FAFSA        Amount

                         (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)

                                     Rising Freshman
Content                 0.002          0.000         0.004         -0.00639      -30.08
                       (0.006)        (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.00620)    (24.69)


Media                   0.000          -0.001        0.003         -0.00588      -23.41
                       (0.006)        (0.005)       (0.006)        (0.00620)    (24.61)


N                      185,793       185,793        185,793        185,793      185,793
                           Currently enrolled four-year students


Early Treatment         -0.002         0.005       -0.009***       0.0113*       18.3
                       (0.007)        (0.006)       (0.003)        (0.006)      (21.97)

Late Treatment          0.001          0.006        -0.007**         0.007       22.22
                       (0.007)        (0.006)        (0.003)        (0.007)     (20.33)

N                      252,543       252,543        252,543        252,543      252,543




                                                                      43
Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the
specified outcome on an indicator for treatment and indicators for parent education,
self-reported family income, gender, type of school applied to, and race as well as
age at application. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parenthesis
Messages were sent in Fall 2016, some outcomes are measured then, "1st Spring after
intervention ". "First Fall after intervention" refers to the Fall of 2017 which was the
first semester after the messages were sent. Different treatment arms are represented
including "content" which was text-based information and "media" which conveyed
the same information using graphics. "Early Treatment" was receiving the messages
before students could file the FAFSA while "Late Treatment" received messages just
after the filing window. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.1




                                                                   44
Table 11: Common Application intervention impacts by delivery method

                                                             Enrolled at 4-    Enrolled at 2-
                                            Enrolled 1st                                        Enrolled 2nd
                                                              year 1st Fall     year 1st Fall                       Enrolled
                                              Fall after                                          Fall after
                                                                  after             after                         Continuously
                                            intervention                                        intervention
                                                              intervention      intervention
                                                 (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)               (5)

                    Control, plus text          0.003            0.001             0.002           0.007**            0.004
                                               (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.002)          (0.003)           (0.003)
     Content variation, email and text         0.004*            0.001             0.003           0.006**            0.004
                                               (0.002)          (0.003)           (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.003)
        Content variation, plus postal          0.004            0.001             0.003            0.004             0.002
                                               (0.002)          (0.003)           (0.002)          (0.003)           (0.003)

            Control mean of outcome            0.823             0.727           0.0990             0.788             0.735
                                  N           271,365           271,365          271,365           271,365           271,365

Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the specified outcome on the content and
advising indicators and high school x cohort (Fall or Winter) fixed effects and the student-level characteristics shown in Table 2.
The excluded category is Control, no text. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are clustered at the high school x cohort
level. See notes in Table 6 for information on the construction of the outcome variables. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01




                                                                          45
                                                               Appendix Tables

Table A1: Impacts of the Common Application intervention on college application outcomes
                                                                          Characteristics of colleges applied to
                                                                           Net                    Admission Median
                       Any          Number of                            price < Graduation         Rate <       SAT >    Instructional
                    application    applications    Public     Private     $15k     rate > 70%        30%          1200     Exp > $10k
                        (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)         (9)

 Any treatment         0.000          0.007        0.000      0.000       0.000       0.000         0.001        0.001        -0.001
                      (0.001)        (0.011)      (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)


 Control mean
   of outcome          0.777          3.756        0.623      0.806      0.371        0.559         0.369       0.654         0.525
            N         454,243        454,243      454,243    454,243    454,243      454,243       454,243     454,243       454,243

Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the specified outcome on an indicator for any
experimental treatment and high school x cohort (Fall or Winter) fixed effects and the student-level characteristics shown in Table 2.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are clustered at the high school x cohort level. We construct college application outcomes
using student x application level data provided by the Common App, which includes all applications submitted as of approximately June
2016. We merge in IPEDS data on net price, graduation rate, admission rate, and median SAT score of incoming course to construct
these measures. We also tested other cut-points for the college quality measures in columns (5)-(8) (e.g. net price below $20,000); we
also tested other college quality measures such as 3-year cohort default rate, instructional expenditures above certain amounts, net-price
for low-income students. We find the same pattern of results for these alternative measures. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.1




                                                                        46
Table A2: Impacts of the Common Application intervention on enrollment quality (1st Fall)

                                                                       Admission       Median
                                            Net price    Graduation     Rate <         SAT >       Instructional
                     Public      Private     < $15k      rate > 70%      30%            1200       Exp. > $10k
                      (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)            (7)

Any treatment       0.005**       -0.002     0.005**        -0.002        0.000         0.002         -0.002
                    (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)        (0.002)


Control mean
  of outcome         0.524        0.297       0.292        0.125        0.0560         0.196          0.470
           N        271,365      271,365     271,365      271,365       271,365       271,365        271,365

Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the specified outcome on an
indicator for any experimental treatment and high school x cohort (Fall or Winter) fixed effects and the student-
level characteristics shown in Table 2. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are clustered at the high school
x cohort level. We college quality measures of college attended in Fall 2016 using NSC matches and IPEDS
data on net price, graduation rate, admission rate, and median SAT score of incoming course to construct these
measures. We also tested other cut-points for the college quality measures in columns (5)-(8) (e.g. net price
below $20,000). We also tested other college quality measures such as 3-year cohort default rate, instructional
expenditures above certain amounts, net-price for low-income students. We also constructed these measures for
Fall 2017 enrollment. We find the same pattern of results for these alternative measures. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05.
*** p < 0.01




                                                                       47
Table A3: Impacts of the Large State intervention on enrollment quality (1st Fall)
                                                Cohort        Cohort
                 Graduation Graduation          Default       Default
                                                                       Instructional Instructional
                 rate > 60% rate > 70%         Rate <5%      Rate <10%
                                                                        Exp. > $8k Exp. > $10k

                      (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)         (6)
Any
treatment          0.00162        0.00256      -0.00325       -0.000688        0.00281     0.00194
                  (0.00217)      (0.00210)     (0.00332)      (0.00473)       (0.00273)   (0.00240)

N                  185,793     185,793       185,793       185,793       185,793          185,793
Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the specified
outcome on an indicator for any experimental treatment and indicators for parent education, self-
reported family income, gender, type of school applied to, and race as well as age at application.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parenthesis. We construct the institution level
characteristics using IPEDS. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01




                                                                        48
Table A4: Overall treatment impacts of Common Application intervention on enrollment and persistence
outcomes, by experimental cohort

                                                  Enrolled at 4-    Enrolled at
                                  Enrolled 1st                                    Enrolled 2nd
                                                   year 1st Fall     2-year 1st                     Enrolled
                                    Fall after                                      Fall after
                                                       after         Fall after                   Continuously
                                  intervention                                    intervention
                                                   intervention    intervention
                                       (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)

             Any Treatment           0.003            0.000              0.002       0.003            0.004
                                    (0.002)          (0.003)            (0.002)     (0.002)          (0.003)
      Any Treatment * Fall
                  Cohort            -0.001            0.001             -0.001      -0.003           -0.006
                                    (0.003)          (0.004)            (0.003)     (0.004)          (0.004)

   Control mean of outcome            0.826            0.253           0.0354         0.793            0.257
                          N          271,365          271,365         271,365        271,365          271,365
Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the specified outcome on an
indicator for any experimental treatment; an interaction between the treatment indicator and an indicator for Fall
cohort; high school x cohort (Fall or Winter) fixed effects; and the student-level characteristics shown in Table
2. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are clustered at the high school x cohort level. See notes in Table 6
for more information about the construction of the outcomes. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01




                                                                   49
Table A5: Heterogeneous treatment impacts of the Common Application intervention


Panel A: Estimated treatment impacts by First Generation status

                                                              Enrolled at 4-   Enrolled at 2-
                                          Enrolled 1st Fall                                     Enrolled 2nd
                                                               year 1st Fall    year 1st Fall                    Enrolled
                                               after                                              Fall after
                                                                   after            after                      Continuously
                                           intervention                                         intervention
                                                               intervention     intervention

                                                 (1)                (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)

                       Any Treatment          0.005**              0.001         0.004**           0.003          0.003
                                              (0.003)             (0.003)        (0.002)          (0.003)        (0.003)
     Any Treatment * First Generation          -0.005             -0.001          -0.004          -0.001         -0.002
                                              (0.004)             (0.004)        (0.003)          (0.004)        (0.004)

             Control mean of outcome           0.824               0.728          0.100            0.791          0.737
                        Observations          271,365             271,365        271,365          271,365        271,365

Panel B: Estimated treatment impacts by Fee waiver status

                                                              Enrolled at 4-   Enrolled at 2-
                                          Enrolled 1st Fall                                     Enrolled 2nd
                                                               year 1st Fall    year 1st Fall                    Enrolled
                                               after                                              Fall after
                                                                   after            after                      Continuously
                                           intervention                                         intervention
                                                               intervention     intervention

                                                 (1)                (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)

                       Any Treatment          0.0029              0.0018          0.0007          0.0018         0.0007
                                              -0.0021             -0.0024         -0.0015         -0.0022        -0.0024
         Any Treatment * Fee Waiver           -0.0005             -0.0031         0.0023             0           0.0009
                                              -0.0035             -0.0039         -0.0027         -0.0037        -0.0039




                                                                     50
             Control mean of outcome             0.824             0.728             0.1             0.791          0.737
                        Observations            271,365           271,365          271,365          271,365        271,365

Panel C: Estimated treatment impacts by intent to apply for financial aid

                                                                Enrolled at 4-   Enrolled at 2-
                                            Enrolled 1st Fall                                     Enrolled 2nd
                                                                 year 1st Fall    year 1st Fall                    Enrolled
                                                 after                                              Fall after
                                                                     after            after                      Continuously
                                             intervention                                         intervention
                                                                 intervention     intervention

                                                  (1)                (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)

                        Any Treatment            0.003              0.004           -0.001           0.004          0.003
                                                (0.004)            (0.004)          (0.003)         (0.004)        (0.004)
   Any Treatment * Intent to apply for
                                   aid          -0.001             -0.004            0.003          -0.003         -0.002
                                                (0.004)            (0.005)          (0.004)         (0.005)        (0.005)

             Control mean of outcome             0.824             0.728             0.1             0.791          0.737
                        Observations            271,365           271,365          271,365          271,365        271,365

Panel D: Estimated treatment impacts by gender

                                                                Enrolled at 4-   Enrolled at 2-
                                            Enrolled 1st Fall                                     Enrolled 2nd
                                                                 year 1st Fall    year 1st Fall                    Enrolled
                                                 after                                              Fall after
                                                                     after            after                      Continuously
                                             intervention                                         intervention
                                                                 intervention     intervention

                                                  (1)                (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)

                        Any Treatment           0.005*              0.002            0.002          0.006*          0.003
                                                (0.003)            (0.003)          (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.003)
              Any Treatment * Female            -0.003             -0.003           -0.000          -0.006*        -0.004



                                                                       51
                                              (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.003)         (0.004)        (0.004)

            Control mean of outcome           0.824             0.728              0.1             0.791          0.737
                       Observations          271,365           271,365           271,365          271,365        271,365

Panel E: Estimated treatment impacts by SAT score

                                                             Enrolled at 4-    Enrolled at 2-
                                         Enrolled 1st Fall                                      Enrolled 2nd
                                                              year 1st Fall     year 1st Fall                    Enrolled
                                              after                                               Fall after
                                                                  after             after                      Continuously
                                          intervention                                          intervention
                                                              intervention      intervention

                                                (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)            (5)

                      Any Treatment            0.003             0.000             0.002           0.002          0.001
                                              (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)
          Any Treatment * High SAT             0.001             0.005            -0.004           0.000          0.003
                                              (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.003)         (0.005)        (0.005)

            Control mean of outcome           0.824             0.728              0.1             0.791          0.737
                       Observations          271,365           271,365           271,365          271,365        271,365

Panel F: Estimated treatment impacts by high school Free/Reduced Price Lunch

                                                             Enrolled at 4-    Enrolled at 2-
                                         Enrolled 1st Fall                                      Enrolled 2nd
                                                              year 1st Fall     year 1st Fall                    Enrolled
                                              after                                               Fall after
                                                                  after             after                      Continuously
                                          intervention                                          intervention
                                                              intervention      intervention

                                                (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)            (5)

                      Any Treatment            0.001            -0.001             0.002           0.002          0.001
                                              (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)



                                                                    52
        Any Treatment * FRPL > 40%                0.003              0.004             -0.002              0.000              0.001
                                                 (0.004)            (0.004)            (0.003)            (0.004)            (0.004)

             Control mean of outcome             0.824              0.728               0.1               0.791              0.737
                        Observations            271,365            271,365            271,365            271,365            271,365


Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the specified outcome on an indicator for any
experimental treatment; an interaction between the treatment indicator and an indicator for the student characteristic of interest; high
school x cohort (Fall or Winter) fixed effects; and the student-level characteristics shown in Table 2. Heteroskedasticity robust standard
errors are clustered at the high school x cohort level. See notes in Table 6 for more information about the construction of the outcomes. *
p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01




                                                                        53
Table A6: Heterogeneous treatment impacts of the Large State intervention
                                              First Fall after intervention
                                         Enrolled at    Enrolled at         Filed    Pell Grant
                            Enrolled
First Gen                                  4-year         2-year           FAFSA      Amount

                              (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)       (5)

Any treatment                -0.001         0.000          -0.001           -0.006     -18.80
                            (0.006)        (0.005)        (0.005)          (0.006)    (23.21)

Treated * First Gen          0.000          0.000          0.001            0.001       6.87
                            (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.003)     (8.72)

Male
Any treatment                -0.003         -0.003         0.002            -0.001     0.88
                            (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)          (0.003)    (11.86)

Treated * Male               0.006         0.007*          -0.002           0.002      4.02
                            (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.004)          (0.005)    (16.52)
Low Income
Any treatment                -0.001         -0.002         0.001            -0.001      3.00
                            (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.003)     (7.89)

Treated * Low Income         0.009          0.009          0.001            0.003      -1.80
                            (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.005)          (0.006)    (32.43)

N                           185,793        185,793       185,793           185,793    185,793




                                                                      54
Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the
specified outcome on an indicator for any experimental treatment and treatment interacted
with a student characteristic of interest. We also control for indicators for parent
education, self-reported family income, gender, type of school applied to, and race as well
as age at application. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parenthesis. We
construct the enrollment and financial aid outcomes using administrative data from Large
State. Messages were sent in Fall 2016, some outcomes are measured then, "1st Spring
after intervention ". "First Fall after intervention" refers to the Fall of 2017 which was the
first semester after the messages were sent.. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01




                                                                   55
Table A6: Distribution of Common Application text messages delivered and text interaction, overall and by treatment arm


Panel A: Distribution of text messages delivered
                                                                  All Conditions    Advising      Financial       Planning     Identity       Control
                                                                       (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)         (5)            (6)

                                         Messages delivered
                                                           0         12.3%           12.1%         12.3%           12.3%       12.5%          11.7%
                                                           2          7.3%           7.6%           7.3%            7.4%        7.2%          7.1%
                                                           3         33.9%           34.0%         33.8%           33.9%       33.8%          34.4%
                                                           4          7.2%           7.1%           7.2%            7.3%        7.1%          7.2%
                                                           5          1.2%           1.1%           1.2%            1.2%        1.1%          1.1%
                                                           6         38.3%           38.1%         38.3%           37.9%       38.4%          38.5%
             Number of students assigned to receive messages         397205           1998         112912          112937      113146         56212

Panel B: Interaction statistics for students who received text messages
                                                                   All Conditions   Advising      Financial       Planning     Identity       Control
                                                                        (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)         (5)            (6)

                                                   Opted out          1.1%           0.3%           1.0%            1.3%        1.1%           1.0%
                                                  Responded           4.7%           11.6%          4.3%            5.1%        4.4%           5.0%
                             Conversation Length (messages)           0.06            0.38          0.06            0.07        0.06           0.07
                             Conversation Length (characters)         1.64           31.71          1.29            1.19        1.37           1.71


Notes: See Appendix A for an explanation of the issue with text delivery. Students were able to opt out of receiving subsequent messages at any time by
responding with a keyword such as "STOP". The percent of students who ever responded includes students who only ever responded to opt out. Conversation
length includes messages sent by both the student and the advisor (if in the Advising group), but does not include the original program messages.




                                                                              56
Table A7: Covariate Balance for Common Application, by number of text messages received (students who were assigned to receive texts, only)
                                                                        Intent to
                                               First                    apply for                                                                       Missing
                                 Female   Generation Fee Waiver             aid          SAT          ACT          No Score      GPA (%)                 GPA
                                    (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)                  (9)
Number of messages
received
                         3       -0.008*      -0.004     -0.016***         0.001      9.683***       0.161**         -0.004      0.005***                -0.006
                                 (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.004)       (2.626)       (0.081)        (0.004)       (0.002)               (0.004)
                         4       -0.009*   -0.015***     -0.045***        -0.001      14.12***      0.337***       -0.014**      0.007***                -0.008
                                 (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.005)        (0.005)       (3.203)       (0.101)        (0.006)       (0.002)               (0.006)
                         5        -0.008    -0.021**     -0.048***         0.004      24.27***        0.155          -0.012      0.011***              -0.034***
                                 (0.010)     (0.009)      (0.010)        (0.009)       (5.712)       (0.227)        (0.011)       (0.004)               (0.010)
                         6      -0.011***  -0.033***     -0.126***         0.002      26.60***      0.583***      -0.018***      0.017***              -0.027***
                                 (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.004)       (2.623)       (0.079)        (0.004)       (0.002)               (0.004)

Control mean of outcome             0.625          0.688         0.536           0.7           1075          24.44          0.385         0.869          0.35
N                                  210,974        210,974       210,974        210,974        87,077         71,566        210,974       139,073        210,974

Notes: Each column show the results from a separate student-level regression of the specified dependent variable (student characteristics) on indicators for the
number of messages received (omitted category = 2) and high school x cohort (Fall or Winter) fixed effects. The sample for these regressions include students
assigned to receive text messages and had a valid cell phone number. See notes in Table 2 for more information about these student characteristics.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are clustered at the high school x cohort level. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01




                                                                                 57
58
