                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        AN EXPERIMENT IN CANDIDATE SELECTION

                                           Katherine Casey
                                         Abou Bakarr Kamara
                                           Niccoló Meriggi

                                         Working Paper 26160
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w26160


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2019


Corresponding author: 655 Knight Way, Stanford CA 94305, +1 (650) 725-2167. We thank the All
People's Congress, the Sierra Leone People's Party, Search for Common Ground, the Political Parties
Registration Commission, and the National Electoral Commission of Sierra Leone for their collaboration.
We thank Chiara Amato, Abdulai Bah, Arthur Baker, Tom Bangura, Chris Boyer, Fatu Conteh, Arja
Dayal, Linda Gassama (in memoriam), Yuen Ho, Fatoma Momoh, Alfred Rasheed, Andrés Rodríguez,
Marcos Salgado, Rosemarie Sandino, Osman Siddiqi, Korinayo Thompson, and the entire Innovations
for Poverty Action team in Freetown for excellent research assistance and fieldwork. We are especially
indebted to Rachel Glennerster for her comments and support, as well as to Dave Baron, David Broockman,
Steve Callander, Fred Finan, Emmanuel Gaima, Pedro Gardete, Guido Imbens, Saum Jha, Alhassan
Kanu, Eddie Lazear, Herbert M'cleod, Ben Olken and Stephan Seiler for insightful feedback. We gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the Economic Development Initiative funded by UK Aid, the
Governance Initiative at J-PAL, and the International Growth Centre. All errors are our own. This
study was pre-registered on the AEA registry of randomized controlled trials, where our entry can
be found here: https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2485/history/23509. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Katherine Casey, Abou Bakarr Kamara, and Niccoló Meriggi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An Experiment in Candidate Selection
Katherine Casey, Abou Bakarr Kamara, and Niccoló Meriggi
NBER Working Paper No. 26160
August 2019, Revised January 2020
JEL No. D72,H1,P16

                                              ABSTRACT

Are ordinary citizens or political party leaders better positioned to select candidates? While the American
primary system lets citizens choose, most democracies rely instead on party officials to appoint or
nominate candidates. The consequences of these distinct design choices are unclear: while officials
are often better informed about candidate qualifications, they may value traits--like party loyalty or
willingness to pay for the nomination--at odds with identifying the best performer. We partnered with
both major political parties in Sierra Leone to experimentally vary how much say voters have in selecting
Parliamentary candidates. Estimates suggest that more democratic procedures increase the likelihood
that parties select voters' most preferred candidates and favor candidates with stronger records of public
goods provision.


Katherine Casey                                      Niccoló Meriggi
Stanford University                                  International Growth Centre
Graduate School of Business                          Sierra Leone
655 Knight Way                                       niccolo.meriggi@theigc.org
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
kecasey@stanford.edu

Abou Bakarr Kamara
International Growth Centre
Sierra Leone
abou.kamara@theigc.org
I. Introduction

The competence and integrity of political leaders is a key determinant of government performance.
James Madison went so far as to argue that the primary objective of any political constitution ought
to be leadership selection, specifically to yield rulers with the wisdom and virtue to best pursue
the common good (1788). And yet despite the importance of selection becoming ever more
apparent, Besley (2005) writes that much of the modern political economy literature "has not only
neglected the problem of political selection, it has been positively hostile to the topic" (p. 44). 1
           One critical component of selection is how political parties choose candidates. In most
countries, this is by appointment or nomination by party elites. This contrasts sharply with the
direct vote primary system in the United States, which devolves control to ordinary citizens. The
divergence raises questions about which selection method works better, and what the consequences
of voter versus party leader control might be for the overall electoral system.
           How much say citizens versus party elites have in selecting candidates could be
consequential for two main reasons: they may have access to different information sets, or hold
divergent preferences. On the first point, if voters are poorly informed about politics, giving them
control straightforwardly delivers representation--i.e. citizens get their most preferred
candidate--but it may come at the cost of selection on quality. If severe enough, voters would be
better off delegating the choice to party elites, who use their superior information and expertise to
screen candidates' on their technical merits and identify the best performers. This is the primary
skeptic view.
           The countervailing concern is that elite choices may diverge from voter preferences. This
happens, for instance, if elites' political preferences are shaped by their privileged status, or they
value candidate traits unrelated to performance in office (like party loyalty or willingness to pay
for the nomination). And fundamentally, if no primary is held, party elites may have little idea
what voter preferences are, leading the selections of even the best intentioned party delegates away
from what voters are looking for in candidates.
           There is scant evidence about how these tradeoffs between a poorly informed citizenry and
a potentially misaligned political elite are resolved in practice, and what their implications are for
representation and the quality of selected candidates. Empirical progress on this front has been


1
    We review the more recent literature on political selection below.

                                                                                                        1
constrained by the fact that political parties are generally loathe to vary how they choose candidates
for anything but purely strategic (and thus endogenous) reasons.
        This paper overcomes this identification challenge by partnering with both major political
parties in Sierra Leone on a novel experiment that varied how much say registered voters, as
compared to party officials, have in selecting candidates for the 2018 Parliamentary elections. In
the status quo, parties chose among potential candidates, referred to as "aspirants," in a given
constituency via recommendations from party officials at various levels, with no direct
participation by voters. For a randomly selected subset of races, the parties implemented a new
selection method with two components: i) a party convention where aspirants presented their
qualifications to party officials and local residents, and engaged in informative policy-oriented
debate that was broadcast over radio; followed by ii) opinion polling, representative of all
registered voters in the constituency, that elicited and aggregated voter preferences over aspirants,
which was shared with party officials via a one page report. Neither component is binding on the
party's ultimate choice of candidate, and both are best characterized as alleviating information
constraints. Yet note that if party officials followed the voter reports in all cases (which they did
not), the intervention approximates a direct vote primary with mandatory turnout. 2
        The research team randomly assigned the intervention for each party independently, with
23 treated and 23 control races (for a total sample of 92 party-races nationwide); implemented the
opinion polls; and collected rich data from voters, aspirants and party officials in both treated and
control races. A well-known media group worked with the parties to moderate the party
conventions and put them on the radio. We use the data to first characterize candidate selection in
the status quo, and then estimate causal effects of the new selection method on key outcomes of
interest, focused on representation and its relationship to selection on quality.
        We find evidence that the status quo method of delegating candidate selection to party
officials distorts choices away from voter preferences. This impedes representation, as defined as
the candidate chosen to run in the general election being the aspirant who ranks first among voters.
In control races, party officials selected the voters' first choice aspirant only 39 percent of the time.
This rate increases to 63 percent with treatment, a large and highly statistically significant effect.
Back of the envelope calculations suggest that this positive representation effect corresponds to


2
  The leap from voluntary to mandatory turnout is not unreasonable in this setting, as voluntary turnout reached 87%
in the general election studied. Turnout could, of course, be lower or more selective in the primary stage.

                                                                                                                  2
party officials choosing a different candidate than they would have otherwise in 11 races, and
thereby changing the identity of 6 elected Members of Parliament (i.e. those from the half of treated
races located in regional strongholds where the party was likely to win the general election).
       To explore whether the status quo distortion is driven by a conflict in preferences, we
identify which aspirant characteristics predict their popularity among voters, and compare these to
the traits that make them popular among constituency-level party officials. We find little evidence
of conflict: both voters and party officials prefer aspirants with a stronger record of having
previously provided local public goods, and those who are more conscientious. The former is
measured by the aspirant's involvement in development-oriented projects, like small scale public
infrastructure (constructing a bridge or community center), support to education (rehabilitating
classrooms) and agriculture (procuring farm tools and tractors) over the past three years. The latter
is measured by a behavioral indicator of how carefully the aspirant handled a financial
reimbursement for transport expenses (described in detail in Section VI.A.).
       Given the lack of strong preference divergence, what else might explain why party officials
often fail to select the most popular candidate in the status quo? The data point strongly to
information constraints, which are pervasive in poor countries where transport and communication
costs are high. They are arguably important in rich countries as well, where local party leaders
and representatives in the U.S. have been shown to hold inaccurate views of public opinion (Butler
and Nickerson 2011, Broockman et al. 2019). In Sierra Leone, constituency-level party officials
presume local voters share their first choice over aspirants in 90 percent of races, when voters in
fact only agree with them in 56 percent; and in a third of races, not a single party official (among
multiple surveyed per race) accurately guessed which aspirant ranked first among voters. Their
responsiveness to the voter reports reveals the usefulness of the primary stage in informing party
officials about voter preferences.
       Did the documented increase in representation come at the expense of selection on quality?
To answer this, we compare the characteristics of candidates ultimately sent to the general election
across treatment and control races. Experimental estimates suggest that the more democratic
method led to the selection of candidates with stronger public goods records, meaning that
aspirants who had provided more development projects in the past were more likely to be chosen
to advance to the general election. To the extent that past provision predicts future provision, this
is a cautiously optimistic result. Estimates for conscientiousness are directionally similar but

                                                                                                   3
imprecise. Voter learning from the conventions and radio broadcasts likely aided these positive
results, as the data show that voters in treatment races were substantially better informed about
aspirant qualifications compared to voters in control races. Our headline results thus demonstrate
scope for party officials to incorporate the preferences of voters--even those who are very poor
and lack formal education--in a way that facilitates representation without compromising the
quality of selected candidates.
         We can largely rule out two alternative channels--aspirant entry and financial
contributions--as drivers of the observed empirical patterns. First, differential aspirant entry into
treated races is unlikely to explain our estimated treatment effects, as we find little evidence that
advance announcement of the initiative, which was only partially implemented, induced entry.
Second, financial contributions to secure the nomination appear unlikely to explain distortions
away from voter preferences in either control or treatment races. Average aspirant contributions
(in official application fees and unofficial payments) amount to an unadjusted mean of $2,488,
which is equivalent to 1.3 months of an MP's salary and 34 times the monthly minimum wage
(data we elicited via survey). While this presents a substantial barrier to entry, the data are not
consistent with some of the more nefarious interpretations of these payments, like seats being sold
to the highest bidder 3 or used as a means to override the voter reports. Empirical patterns are
instead more consistent with contributions being tied to the expected returns to candidacy.
         Our analysis contributes to the relatively new literature on political selection (see Dal Bó
and Finan 2018 for review). There is emerging consensus that higher returns to holding office
(Ferraz and Finan 2011, Gagliarducci and Nannicini 2013, Fisman et al. 2015) and greater political
competition (Galasso and Nannicini 2011, De Paola and Scoppa 2011, Dal Bó et al 2017) facilitate
positive selection. 4 Much less is known about the influence of party leaders on selection, and the
two most related studies provide contrasting results. Dal Bó et al (2017) point to the role of party
leaders in making merit-based promotions (among other factors) in contributing to Sweden's
"inclusive meritocracy," one characterized by positive candidate selection on competence across
the socioeconomic spectrum. By contrast, Besley et al (2017) use the same data and find that party
officials have incentives to select competent candidates, but only to the extent that they do not



3
  This concern is not limited to new or weak democracies, as the (now former) Illinois Governor's attempt to sell
President Obama's vacated Senate seat attests (see Davey and Healy 2008).
4
  Noting the caveat that higher illicit (as opposed to official) returns may have the opposite effect (Brollo et al 2013).

                                                                                                                        4
pose an internal leadership threat, a tension that induces lower competence leaders to field lower
competence candidates. Mattozzi and Merlo (2007) come to a similar conclusion, modeling party
recruitment of candidates as a rent maximization opportunity that promotes "mediocracy."
        Historically, skepticism about the role party elites play in candidate selection was a key
driver of the Progressive movement to adopt direct vote primaries in the U.S. Hirano and Snyder
(2019) describe the appeal of primaries as "a straightforward reform that would limit the ability of
political and economic elites to manipulate and profit from the nomination process" (p. 15). They
find evidence via difference-in-differences analysis that primaries promote the selection of
competent candidates in safe, open seats (Hirano and Snyder 2014, 2019). This idea is supported
by theoretical work arguing that primaries produce higher quality candidates, defining quality as
campaign skill (Adams and Merrill 2008), but potentially at the cost of ideological extremity (Serra
2011). More broadly, other models suggest that primaries regulate internal competition to induce
greater effort developing policy (Caillaud and Tirole 2002) and promote the provision of public
goods over private transfers (Ting et al 2018). In developing countries, Carey and Polga-
Hecimovich (2006) and Ichino and Nathan (2013) investigate the impact of primaries on general
election vote shares, but do not look at candidate selection. We follow the pioneering approach of
Wantchekon (2003) in working with political party leaders on a randomized controlled trial.
        Our paper brings these two literatures on political selection and primaries together by
measuring what happens to representation and candidate quality when voters, as compared to party
leaders, are afforded more say in selecting candidates. Treating primaries as a mechanism to
alleviate information constraints distinguishes our approach from much of the literature. While
Adams and Merrill (2008), Folke et al (2016) and Gulzar et al (2019) share our view of primaries
as a way for party leaders to learn about aspirant popularity, our results go further by showing that
they deliver additional information about candidate attributes (i) to voters (as in Hirano et al 2014),
and (ii) from voters to party officials, both of which, importantly, appear to aid selection on quality.
Overall, our results suggest that the more democratic selection method creates value for voters, in
that they are more likely to get their preferred candidates, who have stronger public goods records.
        The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses variation in candidate
selection processes around the world and introduces a simple framework to structure the analysis.
Section III details the experimental design and interventions. Sections IV through VII analyze key
tradeoffs in the status quo, and estimate how they are impacted by the new selection mechanism,

                                                                                                      5
focusing on representation, preference divergence, and selection on quality. Section VIII explores
alternative mechanisms related to aspirant entry and contributions. Section IX concludes.

II. Candidate Selection in Perspective
II.A. Empirical Variation
There is substantial variation across country and over time in how political parties select
candidates. To provide a sense of the dispersion in the relative control of party officials versus
voters, consider first the case of France: central party leaders historically chose all candidates and
allocated them across space to populate sub-national races (Valen et al 1988). Parties in the United
Kingdom have traditionally used a more decentralized approach, where the Labour party for
instance delegates candidate selection to constituency-level party members.              Historically,
relatively high barriers to membership--via financial dues and time requirements--have meant
that this group is quite narrow: data from the 1980's suggests that on average 40 Labour Party
members chose the candidate on behalf of some 70,000 constituents (Bochel and Denver 1983).
       The U.S. anchors the other end of the spectrum, where all states now use some form of
direct primary. Yet the direct vote phenomenon is relatively new: most states adopted mandatory
primary laws between 1900 and 1920, with additional uptake staggered over subsequent decades
(Hirano and Snyder 2019, p. 23). At the Presidential level, the outcome of state-level primaries in
determining each party's candidate only began to bind after the contentious 1968 Democratic
convention in Chicago. More recently, the 2016 Presidential race divided the two major parties
over whether there is now "too little" or "too much" democracy. On one side, members of the
Democratic National Convention increased voter control by circumscribing the role of so-called
"superdelegates," or party elites not beholden to vote the way the primaries went in their respective
states (Levy 2018). Across the aisle, some troubled by the prospect of Donald Trump's candidacy
called for a return to the historically stronger role for party elites as gatekeepers of the nominating
process, and as a check on the excesses of "hyperdemocracy" (Sullivan 2016). Globally, the
demand for direct vote primaries is on the rise: primaries are becoming popular in Latin America
(Carey and Polga-Hecimovich 2006); and for the first time in French history, both major political
parties held direct vote primaries to select their Presidential candidates in 2016 (Briançon 2016).
       The consequences of these disparate design choices on the performance of the electoral
system in delivering high quality, representative candidates and elected politicians are poorly


                                                                                                     6
researched. This study is designed to address this gap. We explore selection of Parliamentary
candidates in Sierra Leone, which in the status quo shares features of the traditional British and
French approaches and is similar to many selection processes across Sub-Saharan Africa. Both
major parties rely on the recommendations of party officials at various levels, beginning with
constituency-level officials, and neither party has a clear mechanism in place to capture the
preferences of voters or rank-and-file party members. The experimental treatment we evaluate--
conventions combined with polling--moves candidate selection in the direction of an American-
style process, by increasing the amount of say that ordinary voters have in selecting candidates,
without getting all the way to a binding direct vote primary that currently reigns in the U.S.


II.B. Conceptual Framework
There is no model in the literature that speaks directly to how a shift from party leader control to
a process that gives more voice to voters affects candidate selection. A simple framework is thus
useful to define key concepts, illuminate tradeoffs between poorly informed voters and potentially
misaligned elites, and frame the experiment studied with respect to information constraints.
       Set up: Suppose each jurisdiction has a single representative voter and a party official,
either of whom could select one candidate from a finite pool of aspirants.              Aspirants are
heterogeneous in quality, which is a vector of universally valued traits (like ability, integrity) and
match-specific traits associated with the jurisdiction (fluency in local languages, knowledge of
local priorities). Quality traits contribute positively to a single dimension of performance in office.
To fix ideas, define performance as the local population's valuation of the bundle of public goods
the candidate will produce if elected, which is a function of two traits: competence, or the volume
of goods produced from a fixed public budget; and alignment, where local voters value a school
more than a clinic if there are few schools and many clinics nearby, or if they prefer education
over health. There is a third factor (such as party loyalty or willingness to pay for the nomination)
that does not directly contribute to performance but is potentially correlated with quality.
       Information: As is standard in principal agent models (see for example Banks and
Sundaram 1993, Fearon 1999), aspirants have private information about their type, meaning that
both the voter and party official select under information constraints. We focus on the intuitive
case where the voter is relatively better informed about local alignment, and the party official
relatively better informed about competence.

                                                                                                     7
        Outcomes: We are interested in how allocating more say to the voter as compared to the
party official affects two outcomes: i) representation, defined as the likelihood that the selected
candidate is the voter's first choice, where her choice is conditioned on her information set; and
ii) selection on quality, which is the expected performance (value of public goods produced) of the
candidate selected. We seek to understand when improvements in representation come with
consequences (positive or negative) for selection on quality, and the role of a non-binding
information treatment in this process.
        Preference divergence: A standard concern about the status quo of delegating the choice
solely to the party official is that only the official values the third factor (call it party loyalty). He
thus maximizes a combination of loyalty and quality that at times selects a loyal aspirant over a
more competent one. If the voter and party official's information sets are similar, then giving the
voter more say straightforwardly enhances both representation and selection on quality. This was
a key argument made by Progressive reformers in the U.S. All else equal, however, the extent to
which preference divergence compromises selection depends on the correlation between loyalty
and quality: if sufficiently negative, the effects could be pernicious; however if sufficiently
positive, it could be of little consequence.
        Screening: A countervailing concern is that the voter is at an absolute screening
disadvantage compared to the party official. This could be the case if her information set is strictly
worse, or if the trait she can observe (alignment) has a lower marginal product with respect to
performance. If so, then giving the voter more voice could increase representation (she gets her
most preferred aspirant), but at the cost of selection on quality (if she had the party official's
information on competence, she would have chosen a different aspirant to maximize performance).
        Experimental treatment: Under this framework, the intervention studied can be interpreted
as alleviating information constraints: i) the conventions reveal information about competence to
the party official and the voter (via radio), enhancing both of their ability to select on it; and ii) the
opinion polling delivers the voter's information about alignment to the party official, enhancing
his ability to select on it. As the polling data is delivered with free disposal, the party official
retains control. While we do not have sharp predictions to take to the data, it seems plausible that
under a reasonable set of parameters this treatment would: i) increase representation, but not to
100 percent, as the party official will deviate from the voter's first choice either to increase
performance or for a more loyal aspirant; and ii) enhance selection on quality, via both the

                                                                                                        8
competence and alignment channels, and hence increase expected performance.
        Other considerations: This simple framework abstracts away from aspirant entry, which
is a key driver in the models of Dal Bó and Finan (2018) and Hirano and Snyder (2019). As entry
is largely shut down in our context, we focus on how information and preferences affect the choice
of the voter versus the party official, conditional on the aspirant pool. There is also a vast literature
in political science about the interaction between primaries and ideology. As the political parties
in Sierra Leone are not strongly differentiated by ideology, it allows us to better isolate factors that
contribute to selection on quality. It is worth noting that the lack of strong ideological labeling is
not unique to Sierra Leone: Cruz et al (2016) compile data on parties in 179 countries and find that
roughly half are "non-programmatic," which means they cannot be classified on a left, center, right
scale or other metric of economic policy. 5


III. Experimental Design
This study explores how political parties in Sierra Leone chose candidates to compete in the 2018
Parliamentary elections. Parliament consists of 132 single-member jurisdictions, won by plurality,
and the general election of interest was declared largely free and fair by domestic and international
observers. 6
        Status quo selection in Sierra Leone is guided by the country's Constitution, 7 which
specifies eligibility requirements for becoming a Member of Parliament (MP), and the parties'
own constitutions and regulations, which outline their internal procedures. In principle, both major
parties begin the process with constituency-level executives screening candidates. These officials
make recommendations to district- or regional-level executives, who in turn make
recommendations to national executives, who have the final say. For the Sierra Leone People's
Party (SLPP), the first, most local, step in this chain involves selection by three to ten constituency-
level officials, compared to an average of 24,000 registered voters per constituency. When
multiple aspirants are under consideration, this group is meant to vote among themselves to
determine which aspirant to recommend upward. The All People's Congress (APC) party takes a
more centralized approach. Its constitution enshrines the right to "elect or select" all candidates,


5
  In 2015 data, 54% of parties are non-programmatic (authors' calculation). See also Cruz and Keefer 2015 (p. 1949).
6
  See, for example, the report of the European Union Election Observation Mission, available at:
https://eeas.europa.eu/sites/eeas/files/eu_eom_sl_2018_final_report_4.pdf
7
  See the Constitution of Sierra Leone (1991) available at http://www.sierra-leone.org/Laws/constitution1991.pdf.

                                                                                                                  9
for all levels of office, and mandates that the party's National Advisory Committee approve all
candidates. Neither party has a mechanism to systematically elicit or aggregate voter preferences.
         For a randomly selected subset of races, the parties experimented with a new selection
mechanism that had two components, implemented in tandem at the constituency-party level: i) a
town hall-style party convention, broadcast over local radio; and ii) representative opinion polling
of registered voters, aggregated into one page reports and shared with party officials. The offer to
participate in the initiative and associated research was managed by the Political Parties
Registration Commission (PPRC) of Sierra Leone, which has the constitutional mandate to
register, supervise, and monitor the conduct of parties.                  Its remit includes monitoring the
accountability of parties to their members and the broader electorate. 8 The PPRC extended the
offer to participate to all registered parties, whose leadership decided whether or not to opt in.
         The parties, the PPRC, the research team, and a civil society group called Search for
Common Ground (SFCG) worked together to design and implement the two-pronged initiative.
SFCG produces programs to promote transparency and accountability around the political process,
providing neutral and reliable content through a broad network of local radio and television
broadcasters. It played a leading role in coordinating broader civil society efforts to support the
2018 (and previous) elections. 9


III.A. Party Conventions
The first component of treatment, a constituency-level party convention, provides an opportunity
for aspirants to present their qualifications and debate each other on policy issues in front of an
audience of party officials, rank-and-file party members, and local residents. These town-hall style
gatherings typically began with a moderator, trained by SFCG, introducing the aspirants to the
audience, and then posing a series of policy questions. Standard questions included: i) explain
who you are and what qualifies you to be a good MP; ii) how would you spend the constituency
facilitation fund, a pot of public money given annually to each elected MP; and iii) what makes
you a good representative of local people, including how you would know what local people want
and how you would represent their interests in Parliament? 10 Additional questions followed,



8
  For more information, see https://www.pprcsierraleone.org/.
9
  For more information, see https://www.sfcg.org/sierra-leone.
10
   Moderators gave each aspirant 2 minutes to respond to each question, alternating who spoke first across questions.

                                                                                                                  10
tailored to the local area, covering topics such as how to deal with local power supply constraints
and allocating mining royalties. Shortly after each convention finished, SFCG delivered audio
recordings of the event to independent local radio stations that re-broadcast the convention
multiple times over subsequent days.
           While the conventions were open to all interested party officials, a core set of three standard
constituency-level positions--the party's constituency chair, secretary and treasurer--were
explicitly encouraged to attend their respective convention. SFCG also publicized these events to
local residents via radio jingles and community visits, encouraging them to attend the town hall or
listen to the broadcasts. The data collection team further provided 25 voters per constituency with
advance notice of the events via survey (see V1 survey described below). In post-convention
surveys, 26 percent of voters in treatment areas reported having attended the town hall or listened
to a broadcast. These rates are higher for those notified in advance (46 versus 21 percent).


III.B. Voter Reports
A few days after the conventions and associated radio broadcasts, the research team fielded an
opinion poll of registered voters in the constituency, visiting voters in-person at their residence.
We sampled individuals from the official registry of voters maintained by the National Electoral
Commission (NEC), which includes names, demographics and home address.                                     To ensure
representation, we first randomly selected 10 voter registration centers (or 40 percent) per
constituency, and then randomly selected ten voters per center, stratifying on age and gender. The
respondent contact rate was high: on average, 94 voters were surveyed per constituency, where 67
percent of those polled were the target respondent, 20 percent were the first replacement, and 13
percent were the second replacement. 11 These surveys are thus substantially more representative
than the telephone polls commonly conducted in the U.S. where, for example, the Gallup poll
currently has a survey response rate of 7 percent (Marken 2018).
           The research team aggregated this opinion poll data, weighted by demographics, into one
page voter reports that displayed the share of votes each of the party's aspirants received among
poll respondents in the constituency (see example in Appendix Figure A1). The top of the report
read as follows: "The first choice of voters in this constituency for the [party] MP symbol 12 is:


11
     Each target respondent was accompanied by two potential replacements from the same demographic bin.
12
     In local parlance, "award the party symbol" means select the candidate to proceed to the general election.

                                                                                                                  11
[name of top ranked aspirant] who has [X]% of the popular vote. This is based on polling results
from a representative sample of [N] registered voters living near 10 different polling centers in this
constituency." The report includes two bar charts showing the vote shares each aspirant received,
first among all voters surveyed, and second for self-reported party supporters only. Due to strong
geographic sorting by partisan affiliation, these two tabulations rarely identified a different
frontrunner. For analysis, we focus on the former. The two parties diverged in how many copies
of these reports they requested printed: the research team delivered over two hundred copies to the
SLPP for distribution to all affected constituency-, district- and national-level executives; and
delivered 25 reports to national executives of the APC.


III.C. Treatment Assignment
For each party that responded positively to the initial invitation to participate, the PPRC asked its
national leaders for a list of 46 constituencies from the universe of 132 nationwide where they
were willing to experiment with the new candidate selection mechanism. The research team then
randomly assigned, via computer program, half of each party's constituency list to treatment and
half to control, stratifying by small geographic bins. For the two major parties, this generates an
experimental sample of 92 party-races. 13 As the two parties occasionally picked the same
constituency for inclusion, these 92 party-race observations cover 80 unique constituencies.
        Figure 1 presents an overview of the random assignment and implementation timeline.14
The conventions launched in mid-November 2017 and all were completed and voter reports
delivered before the parties submitted their official list of candidates to NEC in early January 2018.
Final outcomes of interest relate to which aspirants were registered with NEC to represent their
party as candidates in the March 2018 Parliamentary elections.
        While the original implementation plan further included advance announcement of which
races would use the new selection method, this was only partially implemented (and is thus
bracketed in Figure 1). This is for two reasons: i) the country's constitution stipulates that MP
candidates in public employment (including teachers) must vacate their post a year before the


13
   In addition to the two major political parties, three minor, or "emerging," parties expressed interest in
participating, however did not have any races with more than one aspirant under consideration, so did not proceed to
the implementation stage. One more expressed interest after the implementation window had closed.
14
   To protect the anonymity of research participations, Panels A and B mask locations and show arbitrary
assignments using the old 2007 constituency boundaries (the boundaries were redrawn before the 2018 election).

                                                                                                                 12
election, and this initiative launched too late to affect the entry decisions of those potential
aspirants; and ii) only one of the two participating parties did any advance announcement (the
SLPP publicized the list of treated races and what treatment entailed two months before the
conventions). We thus consider the entry channel largely shut down in this context (see Section
VIII.A. for treatment effect estimates), however expect that it could be consequential in other
settings.
        Data collection was implemented in parallel for both treatment and control constituencies,
and included pre- and post-convention surveys of voters (labeled V1 and V2, respectively),
aspirants (A1 and A2), and party officials (P1 and P2). Data collection rolled out sequentially
across stratification bins and treatment assignment, which is important since the information
environment was evolving over time in all races. On average there were 11 days between the pre-
and post-convention voter surveys. The only exception to the symmetry of data collection is that
P2 was not collected in controls, as it was socially awkward for enumerators to ask party officials
an identical set of questions a few days apart, when no observable event had occurred in the interim
(P2 is for descriptive purposes only and no outcomes depend on P2 data). See summary statistics
in Table 1 (discussed further in Section IV.A.).
        Voter reports were compiled based on post-convention (V2) polling data, the sampling of
which is described above. Respondents in the pre-convention (V1) survey are a subset of the voters
targeted for V2: specifically, V1 covered 25 voters registered to 3 of the 10 sampled registration
centers in V2. For party official surveys (P1 and P2), enumerators surveyed those holding the
same standard constituency-level positions (constituency chair, secretary and treasurer) who were
encouraged to attend the conventions. These respondents were replaced as necessary with holders
of similar constituency positions (e.g. deputy constituency chair) or higher level party officials
(e.g. district chair). Overall, 81 percent of officials surveyed hold constituency-level positions, 6
percent hold district-level positions, and 13 percent hold other positions.


IV. Characterizing Selection in the Status Quo
This section uses the data to explore three aspects of candidate selection in the status quo: i) who
self-selects into politics; ii) which types of races party leaders chose to include in the experimental
sample; and iii) how frequently voters get their most preferred candidates in control races where
selection is fully delegated to party officials.

                                                                                                    13
IV.A. Self-selection into Politics
Comparing the characteristics of voters, party officials and aspirants reveals strong positive self-
selection into politics on education and wealth. It further suggests that tradeoffs emphasized in
the conceptual framework between a poorly informed electorate and a potentially misaligned
political elite could be relevant in Sierra Leone.
           Table 1 shows that voters (in the V2 survey) have on average completed 5 years of
education, 43 percent of them have no formal schooling, and only 4 percent have been to
university. Aspirants, by contrast, have completed over 15 years of education, none lack formal
schooling, and 80 percent have been to university. Party officials sit in between the two, with 12
years of education, 5 percent without schooling, and 34 percent with some university. Such
pronounced selection on education suggests that party officials might be better able than voters to
screen aspirants on their technical merits. As a concrete example, the first formal step for aspirants
is to file an application with the party, which covers items like eligibility requirements and their
standing in the party. Most voters would find it difficult to read the aspirants' applications, or
review their curriculum vitae (even if they were publicly available), while party officials will both
be able to read the documents and use their knowledge of government to assess which
qualifications are important for carrying out the duties of Parliament. 15
           The countervailing concern is that the socioeconomic divide between voters and party
officials will lead the latter to select candidates who are not aligned with voter interests. This
would obtain under a citizen candidate model (Osborne and Slivinski 1996, Besley and Coate
1997), for example, if the elite status of party officials and candidates shapes their policy
preferences away from those of voters. Inequities apparent in proxies for wealth lend some
credence to this concern: voters on average own fewer than 3 assets from a list of 11 household
items (e.g. mobile phone, radio) and only 11 percent have a formal bank account. Aspirants, by
contrast, on average own 9.5 of these assets and nearly all of them (98 percent) have an account.
Party officials again fall in between: they on average own 6 assets and 77 percent have an account.
As to demographics, politics is a male-dominated activity: 80 percent of party officials and 90
percent of aspirants are male, compared to 47 percent of registered voters. Politicians are roughly
ten years older (46 for party officials and 48 for aspirants) than voters (37 years). These summary
statistics make it unclear ex ante whether voters or party officials are better positioned to select

15
     As a point of reference, 33 percent of voters (in the V1 survey) could not name a single MP job responsibility.

                                                                                                                       14
candidates, and point to potential tensions between representation and selection on quality.


IV.B. Where Parties Chose to Experiment
Recall that participating parties selected 46 races from 132 Parliamentary constituencies
nationwide for inclusion in the research sample and thus the lottery that assigned the initiative. It
is instructive to classify their choices with respect to how competitive the general election is likely
to be, which can be done using census data on constituency-level ethnic composition.
         As background, the APC is historically associated with ethnic groups in the north of the
country, including the Temne, and the SLPP is historically tied to groups in the south, including
the Mende (Kandeh 1992). While national politics is quite competitive--as these two respective
groupings are comparable in overall population size--geographic sorting means that most sub-
national jurisdictions are not, as they are located inside one of the two party's regional strongholds.
Figure 2 maps these allegiances. For each constituency, we compute the difference in population
shares of ethnic groups historically associated with the APC versus the SLPP. The darkest red
shading indicates a constituency populated almost entirely by APC-affiliated groups, and the
darkest green indicates one populated wholly by SLPP-affiliated groups. To demonstrate how
strong these allegiances are, regression analysis shows that differences in ethnic population shares
explain 92 percent of the variation in the two party vote for the 2007 Parliamentary elections. 16
         Thus for the majority of subnational races, the locally dominant party's candidate is
delivered on the strength of ethnicity-based ties by a large margin.                        This underscores the
importance of internal party selection, as the process the party uses to choose a candidate
effectively determines the identity of the elected MP. Note that strongholds are not unique to
Sierra Leone, nor a curiosity of the developing world: Hirano and Snyder (2014) calculate that a
minority (44 percent) of U.S. House of Representatives races from 1952 to 2010 were decided by
fewer than 15 percentage points, which is a fairly lax standard for competitiveness. 17,18


16
   Specifically, we regress the constituency-level difference in vote shares for the APC minus the SLPP Parliamentary
candidate on the population share of APC-affiliated ethnic groups minus the population share of SLPP-affiliated
groups (as displayed in Figure 2). This yields an R2 of 0.92. The estimated coefficient on the ethnicity-based measure
is, as expected, positive, large in magnitude (0.76), and precisely estimated (standard error 0.02).
17
   Caste loyalties create strongholds in India, where the literature is mixed as to whether this facilitates (Munshi and
Rosenzweig 2016) or hinders (Banerjee and Pande 2009) selection on quality for the locally dominant caste.
18
   As another benchmark, the average constituency in Sierra Leone has the same partisan leaning as the 18th
Congressional district in California, which contains Palo Alto. This is based on 2018 U.S. House Elections and 2007
Parliamentary Elections in Sierra Leone (pooling votes for the SLPP splinter party, the PMDC, with the SLPP vote).

                                                                                                                    15
        These stronghold races are the ones where party leaders were most interested in piloting
the new selection initiative. Table 2 Panel A shows that while 36 percent of races nationwide are
expected to be safe for a given party, safe seats compose 52 percent of the experimental sample,
reflecting statistically distinct positive selection by party leaders. 19 Parties demonstrate neutral
selection for swing seats: the proportion in the experimental sample is not statistically distinct from
that nationwide (30 versus 28 percent). This leaves strong negative selection out of weak seats,
which constitute only 17 percent of the sample, and suggests that parties did not see much value
in experimenting with selection where they were likely to lose the general election. This first stage
of selective inclusion is important for interpreting our experimental results: they are representative
of races where party leaders were willing to experiment, where the modal race is in the party's
respective stronghold. It further suggests that parties did not view the initiative primarily as a way
to garner general election votes, as they were near guaranteed to win these races.


IV.C. Status Quo Distortion
We can use the polling data from control group races to assess how frequently the status quo model
of delegating candidate selection to party officials gives voters their most preferred candidates.
        The data reveal that this baseline rate is low: in the control group, the two political parties
selected the aspirant who ranked first among local voters in 34.8 and 43.5 percent of races,
respectively. Pooled together, this suggests that in the status quo voters get their most preferred
candidate to represent them in the general election only 39 percent of the time, which constitutes
a clear and sizeable distortion away from voter preferences. This distortion is particularly
important in light of the fact that most of these races are located in party strongholds, as it means
that party officials are not only picking candidates--but effectively future Members of
Parliament--who diverge from voter preferences.


V. Treatment Effects on Representation
The first prediction from the conceptual framework is that the new selection mechanism will
reduce the status quo distortion away from voter preferences and thereby enhance representation,
as defined as whether or not the selected candidate is the aspirant who ranks first among local


19
  We double over the map to accommodate both parties simultaneously, and classify competitiveness at the district
level (the next higher administrative unit) since constituency boundaries were redrawn for this election.

                                                                                                               16
voters. This section evaluates this hypothesis.


V.A. Econometric Specification
To capture how the new candidate selection mechanism affects representation, we estimate:
                                          =  +   +  +                                                             (1)
where outcome  is an indicator variable equal to one if candidate  that represented party  in the
general election for constituency  ranked first among a plurality of voters in the V2 opinion polls;
treatment indicator  signals assignment to the more democratic selection model, which recall was
assigned at the party-constituency level;  are fixed effects for 26 party-region strata used in the
random assignments; and  is an idiosyncratic error. 20 We estimate intention-to-treat effects,
where the parties complied with treatment in 43 of 46 races (93.5 percent) and there was no non-
compliance in controls (generating a scaling factor of 1.07 for treatment-on-the-treated estimates).
In our view, this high rate of compliance is quite extraordinary and attests to the willingness of the
political parties to experiment at the frontier of democratic practice.


V.B. Treatment Effect Estimates
The new selection mechanism has a large positive impact on representation: the estimated
treatment effect on selecting the voters' first choice aspirant is 23.9 percentage points, standard
error 10.6 (first panel of Table 3). On a base rate of 39.1 percent in control races, this effect
corresponds to a 61 percent increase in representation (as we have defined it), which is materially
substantive and statistically distinct from zero at the 95 percent confidence level. To put this in
perspective, it suggests that parties responded to the information provided via the conventions and
voter reports by picking a different candidate than they would have otherwise for 11 races (i.e.
0.239*46 treatment group races). As 52 percent of the experimental sample is located in ethnic
strongholds where the target party is likely to win the general election, this further implies that
party officials thereby likely changed the identity of 6 elected MPs. Column 2 finds little evidence
for heterogeneous treatment effects by party: the coefficient on the interaction between treatment
and ruling party is not statistically different from zero. 21 As we also find little evidence for

20
   Selected candidates are those listed in the NEC official candidate registration data. Voter preferences are from V2
polling data, see Section VII.C. for estimates using V1 polling data, which are quite similar.
21
   At the launch of the experiment the APC was the ruling party, however this changed when the SLPP won the
Presidency in the general election studied.

                                                                                                                   17
heterogeneity by party for other outcomes, we focus on pooled estimates in all following tables.


V.C. Heterogeneity in the Representation Effect
The treatment effect on representation is wholly concentrated in safe and weak seats, where
competition in the general election was expected to be low. To see this, Table 2 Panel B reports
the baseline rate of selecting the voters' preferred aspirant in each type of race (safe, swing and
weak seats); the difference in these rates across treatment assignment; and the associated p-value
that the difference is equal to zero. It is evident that the treatment effect on representation is driven
by responsiveness in safe and weak seats, where representation increases by 29 and 50 percentage
points, respectively. There is no apparent response to treatment for swing seats, where the
likelihood of selecting voters' preferred aspirant is 50 percent in both treated and control races.
        Estimates from an analogous regression, which further includes the randomization strata,
are comparable. Appendix Table A1 shows that the treatment effect in non-competitive general
election races (safe pooled with weak seats) is a highly significant 34.4 percentage points (standard
error 11.7). The coefficient on the interaction between treatment and swing seat is an equally sized
negative term (-34.4, standard error 24.5), however falls below the 90 percent confidence level (p-
value = 0.17). In interpreting these results, note that the 50 percent baseline rate (e.g. for control
races) in swing seats is substantially higher than that in safe (33 percent) and weak seat (38 percent)
races. This pattern is consistent with the parties already investing more resources in determining
who is locally popular for more competitive general election races.


V.D. Downstream Effects on General Election Vote Shares
Did this representation effect in the candidate selection stage lead to a downstream increase in the
party's general election vote share? We find little evidence that it did: the estimated effect of the
new selection method on the general election vote share of the targeted party is small in magnitude
and imprecisely estimated (-0.48 percentage points, standard error 2.96 in Table 3 Panel B).
Column 2 breaks this out by the level of competition, where we see that moving from a swing to
safe seat increases a party's general election vote share on average by 28 percentage points.
Moving from a swing to weak seat decreases this expected shared by 26 points. Both estimates
are significant at 99 percent confidence. None of the estimated coefficients on treatment or its
interactions with competitiveness are statistically distinct from zero.

                                                                                                      18
       This null result makes sense in light of the accumulated estimates thus far: Figure 2 reveals
that the general election is strongly determined by ethnicity-party ties, limiting the scope for the
candidate selection treatment to affect cross-party vote choices in the general election, at least for
partisan strongholds. While there may be more scope for a downstream effect in swing areas,
recall from Table 2 that there is no "first stage" of the experiment in swing races, as parties were
already substantially more likely to pick the local favorite in the status quo and this does not vary
with treatment.
       The null result further aligns with historical evidence regarding the introduction of direct
vote primaries in the U.S.: while Ware (2002) suggests that incumbent party elites expected an
electoral benefit, Hirano and Snyder (2019, p. 37) find no evidence that primaries affected the
general election vote share of the advantaged party. This contrasts with contemporary evidence
from other regions, where adopting primaries has been shown to boost general election prospects,
at least for subgroups like "underdog" parties in Latin American Presidential races (Carey and
Polga-Hecimovich 2006) and opposition parties in Ghanaian legislative elections (Ichino and
Nathan 2013). Similarly, Gulzar et al (2019) show that party leaders in Nepal respond to polling
data by changing which candidates they put forward onto a party ticket, which in turn increases
their general election vote share. None of these latter papers investigate selection on quality.


VI. Preference Divergence
What causes the status quo distortion in representation: is it due to a conflict in preferences between
voters and party leaders, or something else? To explore this question, this section evaluates which
characteristics of aspirants appear to make them popular with voters, and compares them to the
characteristics that make them popular with party officials.


VI.A. Data and Econometric Specifications
Analysis leverages rich data on aspirant characteristics collected during in-person interviews (via
the A1 and A2 surveys). We organized survey questions into eight categories: i) professional
qualifications, including education, incumbency and previous elected office experience; ii) wealth,
including assets and reported income; iii) economic development record, including the number
and value of local public goods the aspirant was involved in providing in the constituency over the
previous three years; iv) cognitive ability, based on a series of election-oriented questions that

                                                                                                    19
involve numeric computations; v) party loyalty, including history of membership and leadership
positions; vi) public service motivation, using questions adapted from Perry (1996); vii) local
networks, including membership in constituency-level social and occupational groups (e.g. saving
clubs); and viii) campaign effort and expenditure during the primary stage. See Appendix Table
A2 for complete variable list and summary statistics.
       We complement this survey data with one measure of directly observed behavior designed
to capture conscientiousness and attention to detail. Since field enumerators requested that
aspirants meet them in the constituency headquarter town to conduct the interviews, they followed
local practice and reimbursed aspirants a set fee to cover their travel expenses. After the survey,
enumerators handed aspirants an envelope explaining that they were giving them 150,000 Leones
(approximately US$20) to cover their travel costs and asked them to verify that the money was
correct. Inside each envelope were eighteen, not fifteen, 10,000 Leone notes. The measure of
conscientiousness is whether the aspirant detected and returned any of the extra three bills. As
nearly all who gave back any money returned all three notes, we focus on the binary measure of
whether any money was returned. Overall, 46 percent of aspirants returned some money.
       Analysis identifies which of the many aspirant characteristics collected appear to be valued
by voters, and whether these are the same traits that party officials value. To do so, we estimate
variants of the linear model:
                                         
                                 =  + =1  
                                           
                                            +  +                                                (2)
where  is the vote share aspirant  who is vying to represent party  in constituency  received

in among selectors , where   {, } denotes voters and party officials, respectively;   is one
of  aspirant traits collected in the data (like education or wealth);  contains the 26 party-region
strata from Equation (1); and  is an idiosyncratic error term. To identify which traits predict
preferences, we test null hypotheses of the form   = 0, and to assess whether voters and party

officials have common preferences over traits, we test   =   . Since the voter data was
collected after the conventions and radio broadcasts (in V2), we estimate a second version of
Equation (2) that includes interaction terms between treatment assignment and the vector of traits
to capture whether voter learning about aspirant characteristics affects their rankings.       For
completeness, we present the same interaction model for party officials, noting that this data is
pre-convention (collected via P1) so estimates for these terms should be null.
       As we collected data on a large number of characteristics relative to a modestly sized

                                                                                                20
sample of aspirants (N = 370), candidate selection is a high dimensional problem. We respond to
this challenge in two ways. First, we implement traditional approaches to reducing the number of
statistical tests without culling any traits. We roll up the  characteristics into standardized indices
for each of the eight survey areas outlined above (following Kling, Liebman and Katz 2007) and
enter the indices, along with our single behavioral measure, into the unified regression of Equation
(2). Second, we use regularized regression methods to select a subset of individual traits with the
greatest predictive power (Zou and Hastie 2005). This affords flexibility in searching over all 
traits (instead of eight indices) and retaining only those found to be relevant, which is useful since
some of the measures collected are likely extraneous in practice, but ex ante we do not know which
ones these are (see discussion in Belloni et al 2014).                  To stabilize estimates, we run the
regularization technique with k-fold validation 200 times for voters and party officials,
respectively, keeping track of the total number and which specific traits are selected in each
iteration. We triangulate results across these two complementary approaches, gaining confidence
if the distinct methods produce similar estimates. 22


VI.B. Estimates of Preference Divergence
Overall we do not find much evidence for a strong conflict in the preferences of voters versus party
officials. Starting with the index-level approach, the two strongest drivers of voter preferences in
Table 4 are the aspirant's record of having provided local public goods and other economic
development projects in the constituency, and their conscientiousness with respect to returning the
extra transport allowance. The estimated coefficients are positive and statistically significant in
both column 1, which pools all voters together, and column 2, which splits voters out by treatment
assignment. In terms of magnitude, the coefficient on development record of 0.04 (standard error
0.01) implies that a one standard deviation unit increase in public goods provision is associated
with a 4 percentage point increase in support among voters in the opinion polls.                               For
conscientiousness, the estimate suggests that returning the extra money is associated with a six
percentage point increase in popularity among voters (significant at 95 percent confidence). There
is also somewhat weaker evidence that voters prefer aspirants with higher levels of wealth, public



22
   This combination of machine learning and traditional econometric methods is useful given that analysis here and
in Section VII has elements of both prediction (which traits predict preferences?) and inference (does the new
process affect selection on these traits?). See Athey and Imbens (2019) for discussion.

                                                                                                                21
service motivation and connectivity to local networks, as the associated coefficients are positive
and at least marginally significant (in column 1 and/or 2).
        Similar characteristics also drive party leader preferences over aspirants. Coefficients in
column 3 are again positive and at least marginally statistically significant for an aspirant's local
economic development record and their conscientiousness with the transport allowance, as well as
for wealth. The one area where there is evidence of a potential divergence in preferences regards
professional qualifications: aspirant qualifications positively and significantly predict party
official appraisals (with a coefficient of 0.11 and standard error 0.04), but do not register among
voters. The associated p-value in column 5, which tests for equivalence of the coefficients
estimated for voters and party officials in control races (columns 2 versus 4), rejects equality at
the 98 percent confidence level. This is consistent with the human capital advantage party officials
have compared to voters in screening on technical merits. It could further reflect differences in
their respective information sets, a question we return to in Section VII.C. The lower half of the
table, as expected, finds little evidence for differences in party officials' preferences in treated
versus control races, as recall this is estimated on pre-treatment data (from the P1 survey).
        Reassuringly, the regularization methods produce a similar pattern of results. Appendix
Table A3 shows that the specific measure of how many development projects the aspirant provided
in the constituency (an item in the economic development index) stands out as the most consistent
predictor of both voter and party leader preferences. This trait was selected in 192 iterations for
party officials and all 200 iterations for voters.       Incumbency (an item in the professional
qualifications index) also registers frequently for both voters and party leaders, and is the only
additional trait that consistently survives penalization for party officials.              For voters,
conscientiousness with respect to returning the extra transport allowance is one of four additional
traits consistently identified as relevant across iterations (the other three are aspirant education and
two measures of party loyalty). As such, allowing the data to speak to which specific measures
have predictive power identifies items in the same three broad areas (development record,
qualifications and conscientiousness) that the index-level approach deemed important.
        Table 5 presents the post-regularization prediction results for the union of these six traits.
The number of development projects and incumbency are the strongest predictors of voter and
party official preferences, entering positively at above 95 percent confidence. The other measures
are less strongly predictive: education registers positively for officials but not voters, and two

                                                                                                     22
measures of party loyalty (willingness to spend money on the party's versus the aspirant's own
campaign, and number of relatives in party leadership) register at least weakly positively for both.


VI.C. Information Constraints
Give the lack of evidence for strong preference divergence between voters and party officials, what
else might explain why party officials frequently fail to select the most locally popular aspirants
in the status quo? Our data point strongly to the importance of information constraints.
       Sierra Leone is a poor country with high transport and communication costs, which create
pervasive information asymmetries throughout the electoral process. There is importantly no large
scale, cost-effective polling technology accessible in this market, implying that party officials are
particularly constrained in attempting to elicit and aggregate local voter preferences over 132 pools
of aspirants. Quite simply, if there is no primary, party officials may have little idea which aspirant
local voters prefer.
       To gauge how important this constraint is in practice, before the conventions the research
team asked party officials (via the P1 survey in both treated and control races) two questions about
the local pool of aspirants under consideration by their party: i) "if the choice to award the symbol
was up to you today, who would be your first choice?" and ii) "if the registered voters in this
constituency voted directly today for the symbol, who do you think would get the most votes?"
Answers to these questions reveal that party officials are imperfectly informed about voter
preferences over aspirants.
       Specifically, 90 percent of party officials indicated that local voters shared their first
preference, e.g. that the aspirant the leader himself preferred would win a local primary in that
constituency. This is incorrect: only 56 percent of presumed shared preferences were in fact a
match with the polling data on voter preferences (from the V2 polling data). Overall, party officials
correctly guessed who would win a local primary only 53 percent of the time. This disconnect is
severe: in 31 percent of races, no party leader (among multiple surveyed per race) correctly guessed
which aspirant was the most popular with local voters.
       This information asymmetry is not limited to poor countries. Folke et al. (2016) study
open-list proportional representation systems in Sweden and Brazil. Drawing an analogy to
primaries, they argue that preference vote tallies reveal information about popularity to party



                                                                                                    23
leaders, who are then more likely to promote a first versus second place finisher of equal ability. 23
A natural next question is what this implies for selection: namely, when party officials
accommodate voter preferences, and switch to more popular candidates, does it affect the quality
of those chosen? The impact could be negative, if voters are poorly informed and less able to
identify high performers. Or it could be positive, if voters possess complementary information on
traits that contribute to performance (e.g. about local alignment from the conceptual framework).


VII. Impacts for Selection on Quality
Assessing whether the documented increase in representation affects selection on quality requires
comparing the characteristics of candidates chosen via the new versus status quo mechanisms.


VII.A. Econometric Specifications
To test whether varying how the primary process is run has a causal impact on the types of
candidates thereby selected, we estimate a series of regressions of the form:
                                                
                                          =   +   +  +                                                         (3)
where   is a characteristic (e.g. education or wealth, as in Equation (2)) of the candidate selected
to compete in the general election on behalf of party  in constituency  ;  and  are the
treatment assignment and randomization strata as defined for Equation (1); and  is an error.
        We link this estimation directly to the two-pronged approach used to explore preference
divergence in Section VI. First, we carry forward all eight indices of aspirant traits and the
behavioral measure used previously. For each one, we estimate whether candidates selected under
the new mechanism are more or less likely to be strong on that dimension. As this requires nine
distinct iterations of Equation (3), we adjust standard errors on these estimates to control the false
discovery rate (FDR) across the nine regressions (following Benjamini et al 2006 and Anderson
2008). Second, we carry forward the union of six specific traits identified as important under the
regularization approach. We again estimate treatment effects for each one, and implement FDR
adjustments. A caveat for both approaches is that statistical power to support such multiple
inference adjustments is strained, as at this stage, estimation operates over the pool of selected
candidates, where there are only 92 observations.

23
  By honing in on the discontinuity between close winners and runners up, their empirical strategy by design
identifies a preference for popularity holding candidate quality fixed (in expectation).

                                                                                                               24
VII.B. Treatment Effects on Selection
Estimates suggest that candidates selected under the more democratic mechanism look somewhat
stronger on their observable characteristics as compared to those chosen via the status quo method.
Candidates selected by the new process on average have stronger records of having previously
provided public goods in the constituency (in Table 6 Panel A). The estimated treatment effect
for the economic development index is 0.29 standard deviation units (standard error 0.13), which
is a materially large and highly significant effect on a naïve, or per comparison, basis (p-value =
0.03). There is also a positive treatment effect estimate for conscientiousness, of 15 percentage
points, but it does not reach significance at conventional levels (p-value = 0.16). Positive effects
for these particular traits are noteworthy in light of the fact that they are strong drivers of voter
preferences (in Table 4). There is further a positive and significant effect on selecting aspirants
with stronger local networks (e.g. membership in local groups), which intuitively aligns with
discussion in the conceptual framework but is empirically unexpected since it did not rank as
consistently as a predictor of voter preferences.
       Implementing FDR adjustments over all nine index-level regressions sends these estimates
below standard significance levels: the corresponding q-values for the two most precise estimates
inflate to 0.22. This is perhaps not surprising given the strains on statistical power. While not a
main focus, note further that we do not find treatment effects on demographics: 85 percent of
selected candidates are male, average age 46, neither of which varies significantly with treatment
assignment (Appendix Table A4).
       Encouragingly, the regularization approach again provides similar results. Panel B of
Table 6 estimates treatment effects on the union of six specific traits that were identified as being
predictive of voter or party official preference rankings over aspirants. The only estimate that is
statistically distinct from zero is the large positive effect on the number of development projects
(0.50 with standard error 0.21). In terms of magnitude, it implies that candidates selected via the
more democratic primary process on average had been involved in providing half an additional
local public good or other development project in the past three years. Given the control group
mean of 2.1 projects, this effect constitutes a 24 percent increase in such provision. As seen
already, the estimate for conscientiousness is positive in sign but not quite significant at
conventional levels (p-value = 0.16). In column 4, the FDR adjustments reduce the significance

                                                                                                  25
of the number of development projects result to the 86 percent confidence level.
       As the estimated treatment effect on economic development record is a key result, it is
worth providing additional context from the data. Overall, 81 percent of aspirants have been
involved in at least one project. Enumerators collected detailed data (project location, timeframe,
expenditure, sources of funds, status of completion etc.) for up to three most relevant projects. In
this project dataset, the modal project is construction of small scale public infrastructure (roads,
bridges, community centers), followed by support to education (classroom construction and
rehabilitation), agriculture (provision of farming inputs, like seeds, tools and tractors), and
healthcare (clinic construction and rehabilitation).
       Does incumbency drive these public goods results? While incumbents have provided more
projects than others (a statistically significant difference of 2.5 versus 1.9 projects on average),
incumbency does not account for these findings. Specifically, all estimates that show how an
aspirant's economic development record predicts voter preferences in Tables 4 and 5, do so while
controlling for incumbency (which voters also value). Moreover, there is evidence for a positive
treatment effect on selecting high development record candidates, accompanied by a null result for
(re-)selecting incumbents, in Table 6. Note further that incumbency is much less entrenched in
Sierra Leone than in the U.S. There were 25 incumbents seeking re-nomination in our sample,
which covers 27 percent of the races (reassuringly incumbency is balanced across party and
treatment assignment). Roughly half of them secured re-nomination from their party. Compare
this to the 2018 U.S. House elections, where 88 percent of incumbents sought re-nomination and
only 1 percent lost their primary.
       Overall, the headline results that come through this triangulation approach are first, that
both voters and party officials value aspirants who have a demonstrated record of providing public
goods in the constituency. And second, the more democratic selection method increases the
likelihood that aspirants who are strong in this regard are selected to then compete in the general
election. Results for conscientiousness are directionally similar, yet estimated with less precision.
To the extent that past public goods provision predicts future provision, which is a question that
ongoing data collection seeks to address, these are guardedly optimistic results.


VII.C. Voter Learning about Technical Merits
The results of this experiment do not bear out concerns of primary skeptics that giving more say

                                                                                                  26
to poorly informed voters increases representation at the cost of screening on quality. This
downside risk appears to have in part been mitigated by voter learning about aspirant qualifications
from the town hall conventions and associated radio broadcasts. To substantiate this channel,
Appendix Table A5 presents treatment effect estimates on what voters know about aspirants, using
the post-convention V2 data. It shows that voters in treated races are more likely to accurately
identify which aspirant in the local pool has the most education (by 15 percentage points), the one
with most public office experience (by 16 percentage points), and the one with the strongest record
of previously providing local public goods (by 10 percentage points). All three estimates are
significant above the 95 percent confidence level. Given baseline rates for correct answers
between 30 and 36 percent, these estimates suggest that voter knowledge of aspirant qualifications
increased by 42 percent on average compared to control races.
       Referring back to Table 4, there is suggestive evidence that this knowledge gain increased
the weight treated voters place on qualifications in ranking aspirants. In the bottom half of column
2, the interaction between treatment and an aspirant's professional qualification index is positive
and marginally statistically significant (0.10 with standard error 0.06). This indicates that more
qualified aspirants were somewhat more likely to be chosen by voters as their first preference for
candidacy in treated versus control races.
       We can further rule out that treated voters are simply acting as party stooges who learn
from the conventions which aspirant party leaders endorse and adopt their point of view. To assess
this, Appendix Table A6 estimates the treatment effect on representation using pre-convention V1
polling data, which effectively shuts down the voter learning channel and fixes their preferences
at baseline. We again find a positive and highly significant treatment effect of the initiative on the
likelihood that voters get their most preferred candidates, equal to 30 percentage points.
       More broadly, the learning results are consistent with earlier work showing that publicizing
policy-oriented debates between candidates in the general election is an effective way to build
voter knowledge in this context (Bidwell et al 2019), and resonates with evidence from Uganda
that debates build voter knowledge in both the primary and general election stages (Platas and
Raffler forthcoming). It also aligns with survey evidence from the U.S. showing that voters learn
about candidate policy positions and move into stronger ideological congruence as the primary
campaign progresses (Hirano et al 2014).



                                                                                                   27
VIII. Alternative Explanations
This section investigates two alternative channels--aspirant entry and financial contributions--
and finds little evidence that either explain much of the observed variation in the data.


VIII.A. Aspirant Entry
Differential aspirant entry into treated races is unlikely to explain these results, largely because the
advance announcement needed to induce entry was only partially implemented. Recall that only
one of the two parties announced in advance which constituencies would participate in the new
selection process. Two months before the conventions began, the SLPP publicized the list of its
23 treatment constituencies--via public announcement and paper leaflets--during their national
delegates' convention to nominate their Presidential candidate. Their promotional materials,
which dub the initiative "Aspirant Voice and People's Choice," describe the two components and
characterize them as a "pilot" designed to "strengthen the internal democracy of our party" (see
flyer in Appendix Figure A2). This could have altered the entry decision of potential SLPP
aspirants. The APC, on the other hand, joined the initiative later and therefore did not announce
the program or targeted constituencies at its own national convention. While the party did inform
all national executives and a cross-section of district executives about the initiative at a subsequent
meeting, this came too late in the process to affect entry decisions.
        To nonetheless test whether the aspirant entry channel is operational in this experiment,
Appendix Table A7 presents treatment effect estimates for the total number of aspirants considered
by each party per constituency. The first two columns use administrative data from the Secretaries
General of the parties. Estimates in column 1 show that just under three aspirants on average
competed for the SLPP's symbol in control races. The estimated treatment effect is 1.00 (standard
error 0.59), which is a marginally significant increase in entry to just under four aspirants per race.
Column 2 shows that the APC on average considered 4 aspirants per constituency, and the
estimated treatment effect is small in magnitude and not statistically distinct from zero (0.20,
standard error 0.59), as one would expect in the absence of advance notification. These data reflect
the number of aspirants who were under consideration at the end of the process when candidate
selections were made.
        We can compare this to the number of aspirants who were surveyed earlier in the process
as part of the research, which captures those who were under consideration by the party at the time

                                                                                                     28
of the conventions. This could be a larger number if some aspirants dropped out or were
disqualified in the interim. Estimates for the APC are nearly identical. For the SLPP, the mean
number of aspirants increases to 4 per race and there is no evidence of a treatment effect. Putting
the survey and administrative estimates together suggests that the initiative may have helped some
SLPP aspirants stay under consideration longer. In light of this, our results are best considered as
partial equilibrium effects holding the pool of aspirants largely fixed. If the new selection process
were to become internalized by parties and scaled up, we anticipate that the entry channel could
become important in general equilibrium. We leave this question for future research.


VIII.B. Financial Contributions
Another factor that could influence candidate selection--both in the status quo and in response to
treatment--is financial contributions to secure the nomination.                     To measure contributions,
enumerators asked aspirants shortly after candidate selections were formally announced (in
January 2018) how much they had paid to the party in official fees and other payments. Note that
these are distinct from the aspirant's own campaign expenses, which were recorded separately.
Enumerators further asked unsuccessful aspirants how much they thought the selected candidate
in their pool had contributed (see Appendix B for survey wording). 24
         Self-reports from control group races suggest that nearly all aspirants made contributions:
89.7 percent of aspirants report non-zero contributions, with an unadjusted mean converted to US
dollars of $2,428. To put this amount in perspective, it is equivalent to 1.3 months official salary
of an elected MP. This looks modest compared to the 17 months of salary that public healthcare
workers paid to secure a promotion in another low income country (Weaver 2018), but lies well
out of reach for ordinary Sierra Leoneans, where for instance the monthly minimum wage is $71.
These official fees and other contributions thus constitute a substantial barrier to entry into politics.
         Two of the more nefarious interpretations of these contributions are not consistent with the
empirical patterns we find. First, the data do not suggest that candidacy is being sold to the highest
bidder in the status quo. Selected candidates self-reported the highest contribution in their pool in
only 35 percent of control races. While this top payer rate increases to 54 percent when substituting



24
   The specific question asked, "How much contribution in total have you given to the party leaders for acquiring the
party symbol from the start of your campaign? This includes registration/application fees, tips, small or big token to
all the party leaders, kola [gratitude] money and transportation reimbursement tips."

                                                                                                                   29
out low candidate self-reports with the average report of unsuccessful aspirants (about how much
they think the selected candidate contributed), it remains well below 100 percent. Overall, selected
candidates contribute somewhat less on average than unsuccessful aspirants in control group races.
         Second, in treated races, the data are not consistent with contributions being used to
compensate for low popularity levels, i.e. to buy off party officials so that they deviate from the
voter reports. Specifically, selected candidates do not contribute differentially more than
unsuccessful aspirants in treatment races where the party ultimately chose someone other than the
voters' first choice (the mean difference is $1,348) compared to races where party officials went
with the voters' first choice (mean difference of $1,696).
         An alternative way to conceptualize these payments is with respect to the expected return
to candidacy, which is increasing in three multiplicative components: the returns to office, the
probability the party wins the seat in the general election, and the likelihood of being selected as
candidate. The first component includes the salary of an MP, scope for promotion (e.g. to a
ministerial post), and other remunerative opportunities that positions in government afford access
to. It is likely that there are returns even for those who lose the general election, particularly for
members of the ruling party, as candidacy opens up avenues to public sector employment and
positions within the party organization (see Colonnelli et al 2019 for estimates in Brazil). In light
of this, both major parties were able to recruit aspirants in all 132 Parliamentary races nationwide.
         As to the second term, the likelihood that the party wins the seat in the general election is
increasing in the ethnic-party allegiance of voters in the constituency. This implies that willingness
to contribute should be higher in stronghold races, which is exactly what we see in the control
group data: mean contributions increase from $1,089 in weak seats, to $1,530 in swing seats, to
$2,983 in safe seats. Appendix C discusses how this increase in expected returns in turn affects
aspirant entry in the status quo, and finds evidence that there are more aspirants in the pool, who
are of higher average quality, in stronghold races, which is consistent with findings from Brazil
(Ferraz and Finan 2011), Italy (Gagliarducci and Nannicini 2013), Sweden (Dal Bó et al 2017) and
the U.S. (Hirano and Snyder 2019). 25
         Regarding the third factor, willingness to contribute should be higher for aspirants with a
better chance of being selected as the candidate, which is an object that the experimental treatment


25
  While interesting, note that this does not affect our experimental estimates as treatment assignment is stratified
within small geographic areas and we include fixed effects for these strata in all relevant specifications.

                                                                                                                       30
might affect. To see this, recall the assumption in the conceptual framework that aspirants have
private information about their type, which the conventions and opinion polling deliver (at least in
part) to party officials. For high types, this implies that their probability of being selected
increases, and thus their willingness to pay should as well. For low types, the opposite should
hold. A simple way to capture this in the data is to test whether selected candidates contribute
differentially more than unsuccessful aspirants in treated versus control races.
        Appendix Table A8 tests this hypothesis by regressing contributions on whether the
aspirant was selected to be the candidate, treatment assignment, and the interaction of the two
terms. The positive and significant coefficient on the interaction between being selected and
treatment implies that the spread between how much successful and unsuccessful aspirants
contributed is indeed wider in treatment races. This spread is more pronounced in column 4, which
restricts attention to stronghold races. These estimates suggest that unsuccessful aspirants in
treated races contributed less (by $781 on average), and selected candidates contributed more (by
$1,947), than their counterparts in control races.
        Overall, these results are consistent with aspirant willingness to pay being tied to the
expected returns to candidacy, and thus for those whose expected returns increase with treatment--
because they are more likely to be selected under the new process--their contributions increase as
well. The offsetting reduction by aspirants who become less likely to be selected generates no net
effect of treatment on mean contributions for the aspirant pool overall (reported in column 1 of
Table A8). This is one speculative interpretation of the data, and there may well be others that
align with this constellation of results.


IX. Conclusion
Elections are large public investments: the United Nations Development Programme, the largest
international donor in the electoral space, expended more than three billion dollars to support
elections in poor countries over the past fifteen years (UNDP 2019). The efficacy of such
investments in delivering representative and competent elected politicians depends critically on
how candidates are selected. If party officials select candidates with little input from voters,
citizens may well be perfectly enfranchised on paper--entitled to participate in free and fair
general elections--but wholly irrelevant in practice, at least for partisan strongholds. This problem
is largely absent from discussions about the design of donor support for elections: to illustrate, as

                                                                                                  31
late as 2004 there was no explicit reference to political parties anywhere in the UNDP's own multi-
year funding framework (UNDP 2006 p. 11). This neglect arises in part from concerns about
impartiality that lead donors to shy away from direct engagement with parties.
       The two major political parties in Sierra Leone demonstrate that there are practical ways
to improve candidate selection. An alternative approach to selection was offered in a party-neutral,
equitable fashion, and relied on party leadership to determine whether it was in their party's interest
to opt in. By revealed preference, the fact that both parties participated and put forward their
stronghold races for inclusion suggests that they saw value in the initiative. That they (for the
most part) complied with treatment assignment attests to their willingness to experiment at the
frontier of democratic practice.
       The experiment demonstrates that the primary selection stage plays an important role in
reducing information asymmetries. Results show that voters learn about candidate qualifications
and party officials learn about voter preferences. The finding that party officials responded to the
information relayed by selecting different types of candidates, and that these candidates have
stronger records of local public goods provision, is a cautiously optimistic result.
       In thinking about external validity, a few factors about the context and intervention are
worth emphasizing. A concern about the U.S. primary system is that it leads to the selection of
candidates who are more ideologically extreme than the general population. This is less of an issue
in our context as parties in Sierra Leone are largely non-ideological, as are about half of all parties
worldwide (Cruz et al 2016). Moreover, in this study, preferences over candidates were gathered
from a representative sample of voters via home visits. This again reduces the risk that those with
more extreme views, or particular demographic groups, wield disproportionate influence. Results
might be different where there are higher barriers to participate, such as travel and time costs to
reach polling centers or attend meetings. In addition, weak advance announcement, combined with
the nonbinding nature of the treatment, dampened incentives for new or different types of
candidates to come forward. This effectively closes an entry channel that is likely to be
consequential in other settings. While these factors help us isolate the role of information
revelation in the candidate selection stage, they limit our ability to extrapolate from these results
to what might happen when a well-publicized, binding, direct vote primary is introduced.
       Analysis in this paper has focused on the question of selection. Ongoing data collection
turns to the question of accountability. Through a combination of Parliamentary administrative

                                                                                                    32
records and field audits of public spending by elected MPs, we will soon have evidence on whether
these candidates who were selected via a more democratic primary process perform any better or
worse once they get into public office.




References

Adams J, Merill III S. "Candidate and Party Strategies in Two-Stage Elections Beginning with a
      Primary." American Journal of Political Science 52:2(2008), 344-359.
Anderson, Michael L., "Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
      Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedaian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training
      Projects," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103:484(2008),1481-1495.
Athey, Susan, and Guido W. Imbens. "Machine Learning Methods That Economists Should Know
       About," Annual Review of Economics 11 (2019), 685-725.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Rohini Pande. "Parochial Politics: Ethnic Preferences and Politician
       Corruption," unpublished manuscript, Harvard Kennedy School, 2009.
Banks, Jeffrey S. and Rangarajan K. Sundaram, "Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection in a Model
       of Repeated Elections" in Political Economy: Institutions, Information Competition, and
       Representation (W. Barnett, et al., Eds.), Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK, 1993.
Belloni, Alexandre, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen. "High-Dimensional Methods
       and Inference on Structural and Treatment Effects." Journal of Economic
       Perspectives, 28:2(2014), 29-50.
Benjamini, Yoav, Abba M. Krieger and Daniel Yekutieli, "Adaptive Linear Step-Up Procedures
      That Control the False Discovery Rate," Biometrika, 93(2006), 491-507.
Besley Timothy, "Political Selection," Journal of Economic Perspectives 19:3(2005): 43-60.
Besley,     Timothy and Stephen Coate. "An Economic Model of                      Representative
          Democracy," Quarterly Journal of Economics 112:1(1997), 85-114.
Besley, Timothy, Olle Folke, Torsten Persson, and Johanna Rickne. "Gender Quotas and the
       Crisis of the Mediocre Man: Theory and Evidence from Sweden," American Economic
       Review, 107:8(2017), 2204-42.
Bidwell, Kelly, Katherine Casey and Rachel Glennerster, "Debates: Voting and Expenditure
      Responses to Political Communication," accepted for publication, Journal of Political
      Economy, 2019.
Bochel, John and David Denver, "Candidate Selection in the Labour Party: What the Selectors
       Seek," British Journal of Political Science, 13:1(1983), 45-69.
Briançon,     Pierre,  "The      French      (primary)    revolution,"    Politico,   9/26/2016,
       https://www.politico.eu/article/the-french-primary-presidential-election-2017-nicolas-
       sarkozy-francois-hollande-les-republicains-socialist/ accessed 12/5/2018.

                                                                                              33
Brollo, Fernanda, Tommaso Nannicini, Roberto Perotti, and Guido Tabellini. "The Political
       Resource Curse." The American Economic Review 103, no. 5 (2013): 1759-796.
Broockman, David E. Nicholas Carnes, Melody Crowder-Meyer and Christopher Skovron, "Why
      Local Party Leaders Don't Support Nominating Centrists," British Journal of Political
      Science, 2019: 1-26.
Butler, Daniel M. and David W. Nickerson, "Can Learning Constituency Opinion Affect How
        Legislators Vote? Results from a Field Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Political
        Science, 6:1(2011), 55-83.
Caillaud, Bernard and Jean Tirole, "Parties as Political Intermediaries." The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, (2002), 1453-1489.
Carey, John M. and John Polga-Hecimovich, "Primary Elections and Candidate Strength in Latin
       America." The Journal of Politics 68:3(2006), 530-543.
Casey, Katherine, "Crossing Party Lines: The Effects of Information on Redistributive Politics,"
       American Economic Review, 105:8(2015), 2410-2448.
Colonnelli, Emanuele, Mounu Prem and Edoardo Teso, "Patronage and Selection in Public
      Organizations," CEPR Discussion Paper 13697, April 2019.
Cruz, Cesi and Philip Keefer, "Political Parties, Clientelism, and Bureaucratic Reform,"
      Comparative Political Studies, 48:14(2015), 1942-1973.
Cruz, Cesi, Philip Keefer and Carlos Scartascini, "Database of Political Institutions Codebook,
       2015 Update (DPI2015)," Inter-American Development Bank, 2016. Updated version of
       Thorsten Beck, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer and Patrick Walsh, "New
       tools in comparative political economy: The Database of Political Institutions," World
       Bank Economic Review 15:1(2001): 165-176.
Dal Bó, Ernesto and Frederico Finan, "Progress and Perspectives in the Study of Political
      Selection," Annual Review of Economics, 10(2018), 541-575.
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Frederico Finan, Olle Folke, Torsten Persson and Johanna Rickne, "Who
      Becomes A Politician?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132:4 (2017), 1877-1914.
Davey, Monica and Jack Healy, "Illinois Governor Charged in Scheme to Sell Obama's Seat,"
       The New York Times 9 December 2008, accessible here:
       https://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/09/us/politics/10Illinois.html
De Paola, Maria and Vincenzo Scoppa, "Political competition and politician quality: evidence
      from Italian municipalities," Public Choice 148(2011): 547-559.
Fearon, James D. "Electoral Accountability and the Control of Politicians: Selecting Good Types
       versus Sanctioning Poor Performance," in Democracy, Accountability, and Representation
       (S. Przeworski et al., Eds.) Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press 1999, 55­97.
Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan, "Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of Brazil's
       Publicly Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       123:2(2008), 703-745.
Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan, "Motivating Politicians: The Impacts of Monetary Incentives
        on Quality and Performance," unpublished manuscript, University of California, Berkeley,

                                                                                               34
       2011.
Fisman, Raymond, Nikolaj A. Harmon, Emir Kamenica, and Inger Munk, "Labor Supply of
      Politicians," Journal of the European Economic Association, 13(2015): 871-905.
Folke, Olle, Torsten Persson and Johanna Rickne, "The Primary Effect: Preference Votes and
       Politician Promotions," American Political Science Review, 110:3(2016), 559-578.
Gagliarducci Stefano and Tommaso Nannicini, "Do Better Paid Politicians Perform Better?
       Disentangling Incentives from Selection." Journal of the European Economic Association,
       11:2(2013), 369­98.
Galasso, Vincenzo and Tommaso Nannicini, "Competing on Good Politicians," American
       Political Science Review 105:1(2011), 79­99.
Gulzar, Saad, Zuhad Hai and Binod Kumar Paudel, "Information, Candidate Selection, and the
       Quality of Representation: Evidence from Nepal," manuscript, December 2019.
Hirano, Shigeo, Gabriel S. Lenz, Maksim Pinkovskiy and James M. Snyder, Jr. "Voter Learning
       in State Primary Elections," American Journal of Political Science, 59:1(2014), 91-108.
Hirano, Shigeo and James M. Snyder Jr., "Primary Elections and the Quality of Elected Officials,"
       Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 9:4(2014), 473-500.
Hirano, Shigeo and James M. Snyder Jr., Primary Elections in the United States. Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press. 2019.
Ichino, Nahomi and Noah Nathan. "Do Primaries Improve Electoral Performance? Clientelism
        and Intra-Party Conflict in Ghana." American Journal of Political Science 57:2(2013), 428-
        441.
Kandeh, Jimmy D. "Politicization of Ethnic Identities in Sierra Leone." African Studies Review
      35(1992), 81-99.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. "Experimental Analysis of
       Neighborhood Effects," Econometrica, 75:1(2007), 83-119.
Levy, Adam, "DNC changes superdelegate rules in presidential nomination process," accessed:
       https://www.cnn.com/2018/08/25/politics/democrats-superdelegates-voting-
       changes/index.html
Madison James. 1788. "Federalist Paper No. 57" reprinted in The Federalist Papers, Ed. Jim
      Miller, Mineola, New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 2014, 279-283.
Mattozzi, Andrea and Antonio Merlo, "Mediocracy," Journal of Public Economics 130 (2007),
      32-44.
Marken, Stephanie, "Still Listening: The State of Telephone Surveys,"                       2018,
      https://news.gallup.com/opinion/methodology/225143/listening-state-telephone-
      surveys.aspx?version=print
Munshi, Kaivan and Mark Rosenzweig, "Insiders and Outsiders: Local Ethnic Politics and Public
      Good Provision," unpublished manuscript, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 2016.
Osborne, Martin J., and Al Slivinski. 1996. "A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-
      Candidates," Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1): 65-96.

                                                                                               35
Perry, James. "Measuring Public Service Motivation: An Assessment of Construct Reliability and
        Validity." Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory: J-PART, 6:1(1996), 5-22.
Platas, Melina and Pia Raffler, "Meet the Candidates: Field Experimental Evidence on Learning
        from Politician Debates in Uganda," forthcoming in Dunning, Grossman, Humphreys,
        Hyde, McIntosh, and Nellis (eds.): Information, Accountability, and Cumulative Learning.
        Lessons from Metaketa I. Cambridge University Press.
Serra, Gilles, "Why Primaries? The Party's Tradeoff Between Policy and Valence." Journal of
       Theoretical Politics 23:1 (2011), 21-51.
Statistics Sierra Leone, "Population and Housing Census," 2004.
Sullivan, Andrew, "America Has Never Been So Ripe for Tyranny," New York Magazine, 1 May
       2016:                 http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2016/04/america-tyranny-donald-
       trump.html?gtm=bottom
Ting, Michael M., James M. Snyder, and Shigeo Hirano. "Primary Elections and the Provision of
       Public Goods," Journal of Politics 80:2 (2018), 647-661.
United Nations Development Programme, "A Handbook on Working with Political Parties," New
       York: 07 Jan 2006.
United Nations Development Programme, "Funding Analysis of UNDP Electoral Assistance
       2004-2018," internal memorandum, 4 January 2019.
Valen, Henry, Michael Gallagher and Michael March, Candidate Selection in Comparative
       Perspective: The Secret Garden of Politics, London: Sage Publications, 1988.
Wantchekon, Leonard, "Clientelism and Voting Behavior: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
      Benin," World Politics 55(2003), 399-422.
Ware, Alan. The American Direct Primary. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2002.
Weaver, Jeffrey, "Jobs for Sale: Bribery and Misallocation in Hiring," manuscript, University of
      Southern California, 2018.
Zou, Hui, and Trevor Hastie. "Regularization and Variable Selection via the Elastic Net," Journal
      of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Statistical Methodology) 67:2 (2005), 301-20.




                                                                                              36
                              Figure 1: Experimental Design

Panel A: Ruling party (APC) constituency selection and assignment (locations masked)




Panel B: Opposition party (SLPP) constituency selection and assignment (locations masked)




Panel C: Implementation timeline




                                                                                            37
                                    Figure 2: Ethnic-party Strongholds




Notes: this map shows the geographic distribution and intensity of ethnicity-based ties to the two major political
parties for Parliamentary constituencies in Sierra Leone. For each constituency, we compute the difference in
population shares of ethnic groups historically associated with the All People's Congress (APC) minus those of ethnic
groups associated with the Sierra Leone People's Party (SLPP). Darker red shading indicates a constituency-level
ethnic-party bias closer to 1.0 (e.g. where 1.0 indicates that the constituency is 100 percent populated by APC-
affiliated ethnic groups) and darker green implies closer to -1.0 (e.g. a 100 percent SLPP-affiliated population). Color
choices reflect party symbols: the APC's logo is a red rising sun and the SLPP's is a green palm tree. Mappings
between ethnic groups and parties are from Kandeh (1992) and Casey (2015). Ethnicity data is from the 2004 census
(Statistics Sierra Leone 2004), mapped into constituency administrative boundaries for the 2007 Parliamentary
elections. Note that constituency boundaries were redrawn before the 2018 elections studied here.




                                                                                                                    38
                                   Table 1: Self-Selection into Politics

                                                         Mean,         Mean,          Mean,        p-value on (1)
                                                         voters        party         aspirants      vs (2 and 3)
                                                                      officials
                                                           (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)
Years of education                                        4.86          12.14          15.28           <0.001
   Percent with no formal schooling                       43%            5%             0%             <0.001
   Percent with some university education                  4%           34%            80%             <0.001
Asset ownership (of 11 household items)                   2.66          6.44           9.49            <0.001
Proportion that have a bank account                       0.11          0.77           0.98            <0.001

Proportion male                                           0.47          0.80           0.90            <0.001
Years of age                                             37.37          46.09          47.50           <0.001

Observations                                             7,544           245            433
Notes: i) this table compares characteristics of voters (from survey V2), party officials (from survey P1) and
aspirants (from survey A1); ii) p-values in column 4 refer to t-tests rejecting equality of means for voters as
compared to party officials and aspirants pooled together; iii) the list of assets includes radio, personal computer,
mobile phone, DVD player, refrigerator, bicycle, motor vehicle, generator, television, electric fan, and flashlight;
and iv) bank account includes either domestic or foreign accounts.




                                                                                                                   39
                                 Table 2: Heterogeneity with Respect to General Election Competitiveness

                                   Panel A: Selection of races for the initiative                   Panel B: Selected candidate is voters' 1st choice
                                   Proportion Proportion Difference p-value                           Mean        Mean     Difference       p-value
                                   nationwide in sample (2) vs (1) for (3)                           controls   treatment   (6) vs (5)      for (7)
                                        (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)            (6)             (7)              (8)
Safe seat constituencies               36.0             52.0            14.0         <0.01             33.3           62.5            29.2             0.04
Swing constituencies                   28.0             30.0             2.0          0.60             50.0           50.0             0.0             0.99
Weak seat constituencies               36.0             17.0           -20.0         <0.01             37.5           87.5            50.0             0.04

Observations (party-races)              264              92
Notes: i) this table shows heterogeneity for two outcomes--where party officials chose to experiment and how responsive they were to the voter reports--by the
level of likely competition in the general election; ii) p-values are from t-tests on the equality of means across samples, which compares the national population
of races to those included in the experimental sample for panel A, and across treatment and control group races for panel B.




                                                                                                                                                                40
                   Table 3: Estimated Treatment Effects on Representation

Panel A: Direct Effect on Representation
                                                              Selected candidate is voters' first choice
                                                                     (1)                     (2)
Treatment                                                           23.91                   26.09
                                                                   (10.56)                (16.02)
Ruling party                                                                                27.17
                                                                                          (39.60)
Ruling party X Treatment                                                                    -4.35
                                                                                          (21.27)
Mean in controls                                                    39.13
Observations                                                         92                       92

Panel B: Indirect Effect on General Election Vote Shares
                                                Party's vote share in the general election
                                                        (1)                     (2)
Treatment                                              -0.48                  -0.64
                                                      (2.96)                 (3.40)
Safe seat                                                                     27.90
                                                                             (6.64)
Safe seat X Treatment                                                         -2.01
                                                                             (6.13)
Weak seat                                                                    -25.95
                                                                             (6.89)
Weak seat X Treatment                                                          6.91
                                                                             (5.54)

Mean in controls                                                     44.98
Observations                                                          91                          91
Notes: i) this table reports treatment effects on representation in the candidate selection stage and downstream
effects on the party's general election vote shares; ii) ordinary least squares regression with robust standard
errors; iii) specifications include fixed effects for 26 party-region strata used in the random assignments; and
iv) one race is missing in Panel B since the general election was disputed and is being resolved by the courts.




                                                                                                                   41
             Table 4: Voter and Party Official Preferences over Aspirant Characteristics
                                                Aspirant's share in voter        Aspirant's share in party      p -value
                                                          polls                       official survey           (2 vs 4)
                                                     (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)
Professional qualifications index                   0.04           -0.01            0.11            0.13          0.02
                                                   (0.03)          (0.04)          (0.04)          (0.05)
Wealth index                                        0.03            0.04            0.05            0.06          0.60
                                                   (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.03)
Economic development record index                   0.04            0.04            0.04            0.05          0.75
                                                   (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.03)
Public service motivation (PSM) index               0.04            0.05            0.03            0.01          0.38
                                                   (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.04)
Party loyalty index                                 0.04            0.02            0.04           -0.04          0.44
                                                   (0.03)          (0.06)          (0.06)          (0.08)
Cognitive ability index                             0.01           -0.00            0.02           -0.02          0.65
                                                   (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.04)
Local network index                                 0.03            0.10            0.05            0.13          0.69
                                                   (0.03)          (0.04)          (0.05)          (0.07)
Campaign effort and expenditure index              -0.03           -0.01           -0.02            0.03          0.48
                                                   (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.04)          (0.04)
Conscientiousness indicator                         0.06            0.07            0.09            0.09          0.53
                                                   (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.04)
Professional qualifications X Treatment                             0.10                           -0.04
                                                                   (0.06)                          (0.08)
Wealth X Treatment                                                 -0.02                           -0.02
                                                                   (0.03)                          (0.05)
Development record X Treatment                                      0.01                           -0.00
                                                                   (0.03)                          (0.05)
PSM X Treatment                                                    -0.02                            0.04
                                                                   (0.04)                          (0.06)
Party loyalty X Treatment                                           0.05                            0.15
                                                                   (0.07)                          (0.12)
Cognitive ability X Treatment                                       0.01                            0.07
                                                                   (0.05)                          (0.06)
Local network X Treatment                                          -0.14                           -0.15
                                                                   (0.06)                          (0.09)
Campaign X Treatment                                               -0.03                           -0.09
                                                                   (0.04)                          (0.07)
Conscientiousness X Treatment                                      -0.02                            0.00
                                                                   (0.03)                          (0.05)
Observations                                        370              370            369             369            368
Notes: i) columns 1 and 2 (3 and 4) use aspirant characteristics to predict their popularity among voters (party
officials) in the V2 opinion polls (P1 survey); ii) column 5 tests for differences in preferences between voters and
party officials in control races, reporting the p-value from chi-squared tests of equality of coefficients across estimates
in columns 2 and 4 from a seemingly unrelated regression framework; iii) robust standard errors clustered by party-
constituency; iv) specifications include fixed effects for 26 party-region randomization strata; and v) independent
variables are eight indices of aspirant traits expressed in standard deviation units plus the binary behavioral               42
measure of conscientiousness.
  Table 5: Voter and Party Official Preferences in Post-Regularization Regressions

                                                            Aspirant's share in         Aspirant's share in
                                                               voter polls             party official survey
                                                                      (1)                         (2)
Number of development projects                                       0.04                        0.04
                                                                    (0.01)                      (0.01)
Incumbent MP                                                         0.16                        0.21
                                                                    (0.06)                      (0.09)
Years of schooling                                                   -0.01                       0.03
                                                                    (0.01)                      (0.01)
Party versus own campaign expenditure                                0.04                        0.08
                                                                    (0.02)                      (0.03)
Number of relatives in party leadership                              0.03                        0.04
                                                                    (0.02)                      (0.02)
Conscientiousness indicator                                          -0.02                       -0.03
                                                                    (0.01)                      (0.02)

Observations                                                          370                         369
Notes: i) this table presents post-regularization estimates that retain only those aspirant traits with the
greatest predictive power selected via 200 iterations of k-fold elastic net procedures; ii) robust standard errors
clustered by party-constituency; iii) specifications include 26 party-region randomization strata; iv) all traits
expressed in natural units; and v) party versus own expenditure indicates an affirmative response to the
question "Are you willing to spend more money on your party's campaign versus your own?"




                                                                                                                     43
                  Table 6: Estimated Treatment Effects on Candidate Selection

                                                             Treatment         Standard         Naïve       FDR q-
                                                               effect            error         p-value       value
                                                                 (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)
Panel A: Index-level Regression Estimates
Personal qualifications index                                   -0.03           (0.10)           0.75         0.75
Wealth index                                                    -0.12           (0.13)           0.37         0.56
Economic development index                                      0.29            (0.13)           0.03         0.22
Public service motivation index                                 -0.08           (0.15)           0.60         0.75
Party loyalty index                                             0.04            (0.09)           0.62         0.75
Cognitive ability index                                         -0.13           (0.12)           0.29         0.53
Local networks index                                            0.19            (0.09)           0.04         0.22
Campaign expenditure index                                      -0.16           (0.12)           0.19         0.49
Conscientiousness indicator                                     0.15            (0.10)           0.16         0.35

Panel B: Regularized Regression Estimates
Number of development projects                                  0.50            (0.21)           0.02         0.14
Incumbent MP                                                    -0.09           (0.07)           0.23         0.57
Years of schooling                                              -0.17           (0.23)           0.45         0.72
Party versus own campaign expenditure                           -0.13           (0.19)           0.50         0.72
Number of relatives in party leadership                         0.24            (0.22)           0.29         0.57
Conscientiousness indicator                                     0.15            (0.10)           0.16         0.57


Observations                                                     92

Notes: i) this table reports treatment effect estimates on the characteristics of selected candidates for 9 indices of
traits in Panel A and for the 6 individual traits selected via regularized regression in Panel B; ii) each row reports
results from a separate OLS regression with robust standard errors that includes fixed effects for 26 party-region
randomization strata; iii) in Panel A, all indices are equally weighted sums of underlying traits expressed in
standard deviation units (following Kling, Liebman and Katz 2007) and conscientiousness is a binary indicator;
iv) in Panel B all traits are in natural units; v) party versus own expenditure indicates an affirmative response to
the question "Are you willing to spend more money on your party's campaign versus your own?;" and vi) column
4 presents false discovery rate (FDR)-sharpened q-values that adjust for multiple inference over all estimates by
panel, following Benjamini, Krieger and Yekutieli (2006) and Anderson (2008).




                                                                                                                     44
                                FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION
           Supplemental Materials for "An Experiment in Candidate Selection"
                                By Casey, Kamara and Meriggi


Contents
   -   Appendix A: Supplemental figures and tables
           -   Figure A1: Example voter report
           -   Figure A2: SLPP advance announcement flyer
           -   Table A1: Heterogeneous representation effect by general election competitiveness
           -   Table A2: Aspirant characteristics summary statistics
           -   Table A3: Aspirant traits selected via regularized regression
           -   Table A4: Estimated treatment effects on candidate demographics
           -   Table A5: Voter learning from conventions and broadcasts
           -   Table A6: Estimated treatment effects on representation in V2 versus V1 data
           -   Table A7: Estimated treatment effects on aspirant entry
           -   Table A8: Estimated treatment effects on contributions to parties
   -   Appendix B: Aspirant contributions survey script
   -   Appendix C: Status quo self-selection in safe versus weak seats
           -   Table A9: Aspirant characteristics by general election competitiveness




                                                                                              A1
Figure A1: Example voter report (aspirant names redacted)




                                                            A2
Figure A2: SLPP Advance Announcement Flyer (constituency list redacted)




                                                                          A3
Table A1: Heterogeneous Representation Effect by General Election Competitiveness

Dependent variable                                    Selected candidate is voters' first choice
                                                                         (1)
Swing seat                                                              17.19
                                                                      (35.10)
Treatment                                                               34.38
                                                                      (11.74)
Swing seat X Treatment                                                 -34.38
                                                                      (24.47)

Observations (races)                                                          92
Notes: i) this paper reports heterogeneous treatment effects on the likelihood that the party selected the aspirant
who ranks first among voters by the expected level of competition in the general election; ii) ordinary least
squares regression with robust standard errors; iii) specifications include fixed effects for 26 party-region
strata used in the random assignments; and iv) the omitted category for the swing seat indicator is
uncompetitive genereal election seats, e.g. safe and weak seats pooled together.




                                                                                                                      A4
                                              Table A2: Aspirant Characteristics Summary Statistics

Professional qualifications                                                                            Mean      SD       N    Min      Max
  Years of education                                                                                   15.32     1.56    385    4       16
  Current or most recently held job is white collar                                                    0.76      0.43    385    0        1
  Years spent serving in elected office                                                                2.07      4.64    382    0       39
  Is an incumbent member of parliament                                                                 0.06      0.25    385    0        1

Wealth                                                                                                 Mean      SD       N    Min      Max
  Monthly income from current or most recently held job (in USD)                                       848.32   922.44   385   35.71   2857.14
   Assets and accounts (1 point for each that aspirant owns of: bicycle, DVD player, fan, generator,
   mobile phone, personal computer, radio, refrigerator, flashlight, television set, motor vehicle,    10.71     1.75    385    0        13
   national bank account, foreign bank account)

Economic development record
   Has been involved with or managed any development projects in their own constituency in the          0.82     0.38    385    0        1
   past 5 years
   Number of development projects involved with or managed in the past 3 years (list up to 3 with       1.90     1.17    385    0        3
   detailed accounting of location, type, budget, source of funds)
   Total funding for listed development projects (log Leones + 1)                                      12.49     8.65    385    0       26.94

Cognitive ability                                                                                      Mean      SD      N     Min      Max

   Percentage of correct answers to the following questions: 1) "How many members of the
   Parliament of Sierra Leone were directly elected from single member constituencies in 2012?" 2)      0.40     0.49    300    0        1
   "How many other members of the Parliament of Sierra Leone were there in 2012?" 3) "How
   many members were there in total in the Parliament of Sierra Leone in 2012?"
   Percentage of correct answers to the following questions: 1) "How many members of the
   Parliament of Sierra Leone were directly elected from single member constituencies in 2017?" 2)      0.35     0.48    283    0        1
   "How many other members of the Parliament of Sierra Leone were there in 2017?" 3) "How
   many members were there in total in the Parliament of Sierra Leone in 2017?"
   Correctly estimated the number of women in their constituency                                        0.60     0.49    357    0        1



                                                                                                                                       A5
   Aspirant's estimated percentage match their raw estimates for women and total population   0.49    0.50    268    0     1
   (mathematics)
   Correctly estimated constituency population given 3% growth rate (mathematics)             0.52    0.50    357    0     1
   Correctly estimated national population given 3% growth rate (mathematics)                 0.48    0.50    383    0     1
   Aspirant's estimated percentage match their raw estimates for youth and total population   0.40    0.49    354    0     1
   (mathematics)
Party Loyalty                                                                                 Mean     SD      N    Min   Max
  Preference for personal vs. campaign spending                                               3.18    0.89    385    1      5
  Number of family relatives within the party leadership                                      0.67    0.96    385    0      7
  Number of different party leaders the aspirant has met with                                 3.31    2.30    385    0      8
  Number of Meetings held with party leaders                                                  15.13   21.61   385    0    195
  Time spent as a member of party (years)                                                     18.19   11.76   385    0     60
  Has previously run for elected office as a member of their party                            0.28    0.45    385    0      1
  Number of party roles or positions held since joining the party                             1.24    1.43    385    0      9
  Aspirant is from a chief/ruling family                                                      0.47    0.50    385    0      1
  Has provided any monetary or in kind support to their party this election cycle             0.37    0.48    385    0      1
  Has you received any monetary or in kind support from their party this election cycle       0.05    0.22    385    0      1

Local Networks                                                                                Mean    SD       N    Min   Max
  Born in this constituency                                                                   0.81    0.39    385    0     1
  Has primary residence in constitutency                                                      0.84    0.36    334    0     1
  Is registered to vote in constituency                                                       0.96    0.19    385    0     1
  Member of constituency Women's Group                                                        0.37    0.48    385    0     1
  Member of constituency Youth Group                                                          0.65    0.48    385    0     1
  Member of constituency Farmers' Group                                                       0.55    0.50    385    0     1
  Member of constituency Fishing Group                                                        0.13    0.33    385    0     1
  Member of constituency Savings Group                                                        0.34    0.47    385    0     1
  Member of constituency Elderly Group                                                        0.68    0.47    385    0     1
  Member of constituency Employers' Group                                                     0.28    0.45    385    0     1
  Member of constituency Workers' organizations and Trade Unions Group                        0.37    0.48    385    0     1
  Member of constituency Environmental Group                                                  0.41    0.49    385    0     1

                                                                                                                          A6
   Member of constituency Journalist Group                                                              0.08    0.28    385    0     1

Campaign Expenditure                                                                                    Mean     SD      N    Min   Max
  Numer of rallies aspirant has held in their constituency over the past six weeks                      1.15    2.36    384    0     20
  Number of communities or villages have visited in constituency over the past six weeks                31.17   41.77   385    0    300
  Number of times aspirant has interviewed or put a jingle on the radio over the past six weeks         1.09    1.76    385    0     10
  Aspirant has provided any in kind support to their campaign in the past six weeks                     0.64    0.48    385    0      1
   Amount of personal money aspirant has spent on their campaign in the past six weeks (log Leones      16.11   4.53    385    0    20.37
   + 1)
Public Service Motivation* (all coded from 1= disagree strongly to 5 = Agree strongly; **
                                                                                                        Mean     SD     N     Min   Max
indicates disagreement signals higher PSM)
   a. I respect public officials who can turn a good idea into law                                      4.14    1.51    349    1     5
   b. I would prefer seeing elected politicians do what is best for my constituency                     4.15    1.48    349    1     5
   c. Politicians can create a large impact to make society more equal and just                         4.02    1.51    349    1     5
   d. It is hard for me to get intensely interested in what is going on in my community**               3.97    1.42    349    1     5
   e. I would prefer seeing public officials do what is best for the whole community                    4.05    1.52    349    1     5
   f. An official's obligation to the public should always come before loyalty to superiors             3.93    1.52    349    1     5
   g. I do not believe that government can do much to make society fairer.                              3.57    1.56    349    1     5
   h. If any group does not share in the prosperity of our society, then we are all worse off.          3.56    1.60    349    1     5
   i. I am not afraid to go to bat for the rights of others even if it means I will be ridiculed        4.05    1.45    349    1     5
   j. When public officials take an oath of office, I believe they accept obligations not expected of   3.83    1.60    349    1     5
   other citizens
   k. I believe everyone has a moral commitment to civic affairs no matter how busy they are            4.13    1.46    349    1     5
   l. I have an obligation to look after those less well off.                                           4.00    1.50    349    1     5
   m. Most social programs are too vital to do without.                                                 3.56    1.49    349    1     5
   n. I seldom think about the welfare of people whom I don't know personally.**                        3.38    1.66    349    1     5
   o. I have little compassion for people in need who are unwilling to take the first step to help      3.17    1.59    349    1     5
   themselves**
   p. Making a difference in society means more to me than personal achievements.                       4.11    1.49    349    1     5
   i. Serving citizens would give me a good feeling even if no one paid me for it.                      4.10    1.49    349    1     5
   i. I feel people should give back to society more than they get from it.                             4.09    1.50    349    1     5

                                                                                                                                    A7
Conscientiousness Behavioral Measure                                                               Mean   SD     N     Min   Max

                                                                                                   0.46   0.50   370    0     1
  Returned any of up to 3 extra 10,000 Leone notes given in reimbursement for transport expenses




                                                                                                                             A8
                                     Table A3: Aspirant Traits Selected via Regularized Regression
Panel A: Aspirant vote share in leader survey                                       Panel B: Aspirant vote share in voter polls
Variable                                             Frequency                      Variable                                    Frequency
Number of Development Projects                          192                          Number of Development Projects                200
Incumbent MP                                            103                          Incumbent MP                                  200
Number of Meetings with Party Leaders                   80                           Number of Relatives in Party Leadership       200
Number of Relatives in Party Leadership                  31                          Years of schooling                            199
Years Spent Serving in Elected Office                    17                          Party Versus Own Campaign Expenditure         181
Conscientiousness                                       17                           Conscientiousness                             100
Party Versus Own Campaign Expenditure                    3                           Time Spent as Member of Party                  37
Has Previously Run for Public Office within Party        3                           Number of Rallies Hosted in Constituency        7
Lives in Home Constituency                               2                           Number of Iterations                          200
From a Chiefly "Ruling" Family                           2
Years of Schooling                                       1
Number of Visits to Constituency in Past 6 Weeks         1
Has Received in-kind Support from Party                  1
Log of Development Project Spending                      1
Number of Different Party Leaders Candidate Met With     1
Number of Rallies Hosted in Constituency                 1
Registered to Vote in This Constituency                  1
Has a White-Collar Job                                   1
Number of Iterations                                    200
Notes: i) this table ranks aspirant traits by the number of times each was selected across 200 iterations of regularized regression; ii) the dashed line
indicates the median number of traits selected over the 200 iterations, where traits above this frequency are carried forward into the post-
regularization regressions of main text Table 5; iii) to tune the penalization parameters, each iteration uses k-fold cross validation, making ten
random subsets of the data, using nine to train the model and the tenth as the validation sample; and iv) with an eye toward sparsity, we instruct the
algorithm to search for optimal  values in the range (0.5, 1), where =1 corresponds to LASSO with zero traits retained and =0 corresponds to
ridge regression with all traits retained.




                                                                                                                                                           A9
      Table A4: Estimated Treatment Effects on Candidate Demographics

                                                     Mean in         Treatment         Std. error
                                                     controls          effect

Dependent variables:                                    (1)               (2)              (3)
Proportion male                                        0.85              0.07            (0.07)

Age                                                    46.35             0.33            (1.93)

Observations                                             92

Notes: i) this table reports estimated treatment effects on the demographic characteristics of
selected candidates; ii) each row reports results from a separate ordinary least squares regression;
and iii) specifications include fixed effects for 26 party-region strata used in the random
assignments.




                                                                                                       A10
          Table A5: Voter Learning from Conventions and Broadcasts

                                                       Mean in         Treatment         Std. error
                                                       controls          effect

Dependent variables:                                      (1)               (2)              (3)
Identify most educated aspirant                          0.36              0.15            (0.05)

Identify most public office experience                   0.30              0.16            (0.06)

Identify strongest development record                    0.32              0.10            (0.05)

Observations                                            4,097             8,961
Notes: i) this table reports estimated treatment effects on the political knowledge of voters; ii) each
row reports results from a separate ordinary least squares regression using V2 data with robust
standard errors clustered by party-race; and iii) specifications include fixed effects for 26 party-
region strata used in the random assignments.




                                                                                                          A11
      Table A6: Estimated Treatment Effects on Representation in V2 versus V1 Data

Dependent variable                                  Selected candidate is voters' first choice
                                                    V2 data                              V1 data
                                                       (1)                                  (2)
Treatment                                             23.91                               30.43
                                                     (10.52)                              (9.54)

Mean in controls                                      36.96                                      26.09

Observations                                            92                                         92
Notes: i) this table compares the estimated treatment effect on representation using pre- and post-convention
polling data; ii) OLS with robust standard errors; iii) specifications include fixed effects for 26 party-region strata
used in the random assignments; and iv) column 1 reproduces estimates from Table 3, panel A to show the treatment
effect on representation using post-convention V2 data to define voter preferences over aspirants, while column 2
runs the same specification but instead uses pre-convention V1 data to define voter preferences over aspirants.




                                                                                                                   A12
                   Table A7: Estimated Treatment Effects on Aspirant Entry

                                         Party administrative data                Research survey data
                                           SLPP                APC               SLPP                 APC
                                             (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)
Treatment                                   1.00               0.20               0.30                0.52
                                           (0.59)             (0.59)             (0.70)              (0.66)

Control mean                                2.68               4.00               4.00                3.96
Observations (races)                         45                 38                 46                  46
Notes: i) this table estimates treatment effects on the total number of aspirants considered per party-race; ii)
ordinary least squares regression with robust standard errors; iii) specifications include fixed effects for each
party's respective randomization strata; and iv) columns 1 and 2 use administrative data from each party's
Secretary General, columns 3 and 4 use the number of aspirants surveyed by the research team.




                                                                                                              A13
             Table A8: Estimated Treatment Effects on Contributions to Parties

                                 All aspirants          Selected           All aspirants      All aspirants in
                                                       candidates                            stronghold races
                                       (1)                 (2)                   (3)                  (4)
Treatment                              -66                 816                  -358                 -781
                                      (248)               (460)                (311)                (409)
Selected candidate                                                              -611                 -826
                                                                               (352)                (503)
Selected X Treatment                                                           1174                 1947
                                                                               (557)                (822)

Observations                           385                  92                  385                  237
Notes: i) this table estimates how contributions (demarcated in US$) from aspirants to parties are affected by the
experimental treatment; ii) ordinary least square regression with robust standard errors clustered by party-race;
iii) specifications include fixed effects for 26 party-region strata used in the random assignments; and iv)
contributions are winsorized at the 95th percentile.




                                                                                                               A14
Appendix B: Aspirant Contributions Survey Script


ENUMERATOR PROMPT: "Now I would like to ask you some questions about the campaign
for the symbol. We know it's expensive to campaign and we know parties are short of funding."
[Enumerator: Remind everyone that their answers will be kept secret.]

EXPENSE QUESTION: "How much contribution in total have you given to the party leaders for
acquiring the party symbol from the start of your campaign? This includes registration/
application fees, tips, small or big token to all the party leaders, kola money and transportation
reimbursement tips."
[Enumerator: Please list the total amount in Leones. For example, if the amount is 100,000
Leones (one hundred thousand) enter 100000. If none, please enter ZERO.]

WINNER EXPENSE QUESTION: "To the best of your knowledge, how much contribution do
you think the aspirant who received the symbol has given in total to the party leadership for
receiving the party symbol?"
[Enumerator: Please list the total amount in Leones. For example, if the amount is 100,000
Leones (one hundred thousand) enter 100000. If none, please enter ZERO.]




                                                                                             A15
Appendix C: Status Quo Self-Selection in Strong versus Weak Seats
A key idea in the existing literature is that higher returns to office induce positive selection into
the pool of aspirants, which has been documented empirically with data from Brazil (Ferraz and
Finan 2011), Italy (Gagliarducci and Nannicini 2013), Sweden (Dal Bó et al 2017) and the U.S.
(Hirano and Snyder 2019). We can leverage the fact that differences in ethnic composition in
Sierra Leone directly affect how likely the party is to win the Parliamentary seat, which in turn
determines the expected returns to candidacy. Under this view, in the status quo we would expect
there to be more aspirants, and of higher average quality, in stronghold races.
       To explore this idea, Appendix Table A9 presents characteristics of the aspirant pool by
the expected level of general election competition. It shows that there are more aspirants under
consideration for stronghold safe seats, 5 on average, which is statistically distinct from the 4 vying
for the nomination in swing seats and the just over 2 in weak seats. Aspirants on average appear
to be of higher quality in stronghold areas: they on average have completed an additional half year
of education (15.6 years in safe seats versus 15.0 in swing and 14.7 in weak) and are more likely
to have some university training (86 percent versus 74 and 62). They also appear a bit wealthier,
although the differences are only significant comparing safe to weak seat aspirants, where the mean
number of assets owned is 9.6 versus 8.2 (of 11). No clear pattern emerges with respect to
demographics.
       As mentioned in the main text, it is clear from the last row of estimates that contributions
to the party are also increasing in the likelihood that the aspirant's party will win the general
election. Together these estimates are consistent with the probability of winning driving much of
the expected return to office and thereby inducing positive selection into the aspirant pool.




                                                                                                  A16
                               Table A9: Aspirant Characteristics by General Election Competitiveness

                                                             Mean,           Mean,           Mean,             p-value          p-value          p-value
                                                           safe seats      swing seats      weak seats        (1) vs (2)       (2) vs (3)       (1) vs (3)
                                                               (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)
Number of aspirants                                           4.94            4.04            2.31              0.09             <0.01            <0.01

Years of education                                           15.58            14.95            14.70            <0.01            0.51             <0.01
Percent with some university education                        0.86             0.74             0.62             0.01            0.18             <0.01
Asset ownership (of 11 household items)                       9.64             9.61             8.24             0.88            <0.01            <0.01
Proportion that have a bank account                           0.97             0.96             0.92             0.91            0.27             0.17

Proportion male                                               0.90             0.86             0.95             0.20             0.15             0.40
Years of age                                                 48.21            45.23            49.76             0.01             0.02             0.39

Average contribution to party (controls only)               $2,983           $1,530           $1,089             0.14             0.61             0.25

Observations (party-races)                                     48               28               16
Observations (all aspirants)                                  237              113               37
Observations (aspirants, control races only)                  118               51               16
Notes: i) this table compares characteristics of aspirants across races where the general election is expected to be a safe, swing or weak seat for the
aspirant's party; ii) p-values refer to t-tests rejecting equality of means across columns; iii) the list of assets includes radio, personal computer, mobile
phone, DVD player, refrigerator, bicycle, motor vehicle, generator, television, electric fan, and flashlight; iv) bank account includes either domestic or
foreign accounts; and v) payment refers to self-reported official and unofficial fees paid by aspirants to party leaders in control group races only.




                                                                                                                                                           A17
