                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                    CREATING MOVES TO OPPORTUNITY:
       EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON BARRIERS TO NEIGHBORHOOD CHOICE
                                          Peter Bergman
                                            Raj Chetty
                                         Stefanie DeLuca
                                        Nathaniel Hendren
                                        Lawrence F. Katz
                                        Christopher Palmer
                                      Working Paper 26164
                           http://www.nber.org/papers/w26164
                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                            August 2019, revised March 2020
We are grateful to our partners who implemented the experiment analyzed in this paper: the
Seattle and King County Housing Authorities (especially Andria Lazaga, Jenny Le, Sarah
Oppenheimer, and Jodell Speer), MDRC (especially Gilda Azurdia, Jonathan Bigelow, David
Greenberg, James Riccio, and Nandita Verma), and J-PAL North America (especially Jacob
Binder, Graham Simpson, and Kristen Watkins). We thank Isaiah Andrews, Ingrid Gould Ellen,
John Friedman, Edward Glaeser, Scott Kominers, Katherine O'Regan, Maisy Wong, Abigail
Wozniak, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments and discussions. We are
indebted to Michael Droste, Federico Gonzalez Rodriguez, Jamie Gracie, Kai Matheson, Martin
Koenen, Sarah Merchant, Max Pienkny, Peter Ruhm, James Stratton, and other Opportunity
Insights pre-doctoral fellows for their outstanding contributions to this work, as well as the Johns
Hopkins based fieldwork team who helped collect interviews, including: Paige Ackman,
Christina Ambrosino, Divya Baron, Joseph Boselovic, Erin Carll, Devin Collins, Hannah Curtis,
Christine Jang, Akanksha Jayanthi, Nicole Kovski, Melanie Nadon, Kiara Nerenberg, Daphne
Moraga, Bronte Nevins, Elise Omaki, Simone Robbennolt, Brianna So, Jasmine Sausedo, Sydney
Thomas, Maria Vignau-Loria, Allison Young, andMEF Associates. This research was funded by
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative, Surgo Foundation, the
William T. Grant Foundation, and Harvard University. This project and a pre-analysis plan were
preregistered with the AEA RCT Registry (AEARCTR-0002807). This study was approved
under Harvard Institutional Review Board IRB18-1573, MDRC IRB 1030056-4, and Johns
Hopkins University HIRB 00001010. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Peter Bergman, Raj Chetty, Stefanie DeLuca, Nathaniel Hendren, Lawrence F. Katz,
and Christopher Palmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2807
Video Summary of Study Findings
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w8hHtk7oe1w&feature=youtu.be
Creating Moves to Opportunity: Experimental Evidence on Barriers to Neighborhood Choice
Peter Bergman, Raj Chetty, Stefanie DeLuca, Nathaniel Hendren, Lawrence F. Katz, and
Christopher Palmer
NBER Working Paper No. 26164
August 2019, revised March 2020
JEL No. H0,J0,R0
                                            ABSTRACT
Low-income families in the United States tend to live in neighborhoods that offer limited
opportunities for upward income mobility. One potential explanation for this pattern is that
families prefer such neighborhoods for other reasons, such as affordability or proximity to family
and jobs. An alternative explanation is that they do not move to high-opportunity areas because
of barriers that prevent them from making such moves. We test between these two explanations
using a randomized controlled trial with housing voucher recipients in Seattle and King County.
We provided services to reduce barriers to moving to high-upward-mobility neighborhoods:
customized search assistance, landlord engagement, and short-term financial assistance. Unlike
many previous housing mobility programs, families using vouchers were not required to move to
a high-opportunity neighborhood to receive a voucher. The intervention increased the fraction of
families who moved to high-upward-mobility areas from 15% in the control group to 53% in the
treatment group. Families induced to move to higher opportunity areas by the treatment do not
make sacrifices on other aspects of neighborhood quality, tend to stay in their new
neighborhoods when their leases come up for renewal, and report higher levels of neighborhood
satisfaction after moving. These findings imply that most low-income families do not have a
strong preference to stay in low-opportunity areas; instead, barriers in the housing search process
are a central driver of residential segregation by income. Interviews with families reveal that the
capacity to address each family's needs in a specific manner -- from emotional support to
brokering with landlords to customized financial assistance -- was critical to the program's
success. Using quasi-experimental analyses and comparisons to other studies, we show that more
standardized policies -- increasing voucher payment standards in high-opportunity areas or
informational interventions -- have much smaller impacts. We conclude that redesigning
affordable housing policies to provide customized assistance in housing search could reduce
residential segregation and increase upward mobility substantially.
Peter Bergman Columbia                           Nathaniel Hendren
University 525 W. 120th                          Harvard University
Street                                           Department of Economics
Box 174                                          Littauer Center Room 235
New York, NY 10027                               Cambridge, MA 02138
bergman@tc.columbia.edu                          and NBER
                                                 nhendren@gmail.com
Raj Chetty
Department of Economics                          Lawrence F. Katz
Harvard University                               Department of Economics
                                                 Harvard University
Littauer 321                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
Cambridge, MA 02138A                             and NBER
and NBER                                         lkatz@harvard.edu
chetty@fas.harvard.edu
                                                 Christopher Palmer MIT
Stefanie DeLuca                                  Sloan School of
Johns Hopkins University                         Management 100 Main
Department of Sociology                          Street, E62-639
sdeluca@jhu.edu                                  Cambridge, MA 02142
                                                 and NBER
                                                 cjpalmer@mit.edu
I    Introduction

Recent research has established that children's outcomes in adulthood vary substantially across
neighborhoods and that moving to higher opportunity neighborhoods earlier in childhood improves
children's outcomes significantly (Chetty, Hendren, and Katz 2016; Chetty and Hendren 2018a;
Chyn 2018; Lalibert´
                   e 2018). Yet the vast majority of low-income families in the United States,
including those receiving Housing Choice Vouchers from the government, live in low-opportunity
neighborhoods (Metzger 2014; Mazzara and Knudsen 2019). This pattern prevails even though
many families live near areas with similar or lower rental costs that historically have produced
much better economic outcomes for children (Chetty et al. 2018). Why don't more low-income
families take advantage of these options and move to opportunity? More broadly, what explains
the segregation of low-income families into high-poverty, low-opportunity neighborhoods in many
cities?
    One potential explanation is that low-income families prefer to stay in low-opportunity areas
because these neighborhoods have other valuable amenities, such as shorter commutes, proximity
to family and community, or greater racial and ethnic diversity. An alternative explanation is
that low-income families do not move to high-opportunity areas because of barriers, such as a lack
of information, frictions in the search process (e.g., a lack of credit or liquidity), or a reluctance
among landlords to rent to them. Distinguishing between these two explanations is important
for understanding the drivers of residential segregation as well as for designing affordable housing
policies to address any barriers that limit moves to opportunity.1
    We test between these explanations using a randomized controlled trial, implemented in collab-
oration with the Seattle and King County housing authorities, that sought to reduce the barriers
families may face in moving to higher opportunity areas. The trial involved 430 families who applied
for and were issued Housing Choice Vouchers, which provide $1,540 per month in rental assistance
on average to eligible low-income families. The sample consisted of families with a child below age
15 issued vouchers between April 2018 and April 2019 in the Seattle and King County area, who
had a median household income of $19,000.
    We began by defining "high-opportunity" neighborhoods as Census tracts that have historical
rates of upward income mobility in approximately the top third of tracts in the Seattle and King
County area, drawing on data from a preliminary version of the Opportunity Atlas. On aver-

  1. An extensive literature in sociology and economics has studied the determinants of residential choice and segre-
gation over the past fifty years. We discuss how our study contributes to this literature at the end of the introduction.


                                                           1
age, children who grow up in low-income (25th percentile) families in the areas we designated as
"high opportunity" earn about 13.9% ($6,800 per year) more as adults than those who grow up in
low-opportunity areas in families with comparable incomes. Historically, around 12% of voucher
recipients in Seattle and King County leased units in the areas we define as high opportunity.
    Families who applied for housing vouchers were randomly assigned (with 50% probability) to a
control group or treatment group. The value of the vouchers and the restrictions governing their
use followed pre-existing housing authority regulations and did not differ between the treatment
and control groups. Families in the control group received standard briefings on how to use their
vouchers. Families in the treatment group were offered a supplementary program designed to help
them lease units in high-opportunity areas called Creating Moves to Opportunity (CMTO). The
CMTO program consisted of three components: customized search assistance, landlord engage-
ment, and short-term financial assistance. The total cost of the program was about $2,660 per
family.2 Search assistance was provided by a non-profit group and included information about
high-opportunity areas, assistance in preparing rental documents, guidance in addressing issues in
a family's credit and rental history, and help in identifying available units and connecting with
landlords in high-opportunity areas. On average, CMTO staff spent about six hours working with
each family. The staff also engaged directly with landlords in opportunity areas to encourage them
to lease units to CMTO families and expedite the lease-up process. Landlords who leased to CMTO
families were additionally offered an insurance fund for damages to the unit above and beyond the
security deposit. Finally, financial assistance included funds administered by the program staff
for security deposits and application fees, averaging $1,000 per family. Importantly, all families in
the treatment group had the option to use their housing voucher in any neighborhood within the
housing authorities' jurisdictions (although CMTO services were only provided in high-opportunity
areas).3
    The CMTO treatment increased the share of families who leased units in high-opportunity
neighborhoods by 37.9 percentage points (s.e. = 4.2 pp, p < 0.001), from 15.1% in the control

   2. This $2,660 figure is the up-front cost of the program services; it excludes downstream costs incurred in the
form of higher housing voucher payments that were incurred by housing authorities because treatment group families
moved to more expensive neighborhoods. See Section III.C for details.
   3. This element of neighborhood choice is the critical distinction between CMTO and the Moving to Opportunity
(MTO) experiment implemented in the 1990s, which required that families in the experimental group move to low-
poverty Census tracts to receive a voucher. Studies of the MTO experiment have shown that families who moved to
higher-opportunity areas as required by the experimental treatment had improved mental health and well-being and
better economic outcomes for their children (Kling, Liebman, and Katz 2007; Chetty, Hendren, and Katz 2016; Ludwig
et al. 2012). The focus of the CMTO experiment is on why families receiving vouchers without such requirements
typically do not live in such areas.


                                                        2
group to 53.0% in the treatment group. We find similarly large treatment effects on moves to high-
opportunity areas across several subgroups, including racial minorities, immigrant families, and
the lowest-income households in the sample. CMTO changed where families moved, not whether
they moved at all with a Housing Choice Voucher: in both the treatment and control groups,
approximately 87% of families leased a unit somewhere using their housing vouchers. The fact that
families are able to use their vouchers to find housing at similar rates even without CMTO services
shows that the program did not induce families to move to high-opportunity areas simply to use
their vouchers; rather, it expanded families' neighborhood choice sets.
   Families in the treatment group moved to many different Census tracts across the Seattle and
King County area: the 118 families in the treatment group who moved to a high-opportunity area
live in 46 different tracts, mitigating the concern that the program might simply reconcentrate
low-income families in new neighborhoods (Clark 2008). Families who moved to high-opportunity
areas chose neighborhoods whose characteristics are representative of high-opportunity areas over-
all, which tend to have lower poverty rates, higher shares of two-parent families, slightly lower
shares of non-white residents, and lower population density. Families who moved to opportunity
did not gravitate to lower-opportunity areas within the set of neighborhoods designated as "high op-
portunity"; in fact, several families moved to the highest-upward-mobility neighborhoods in Seattle
and King County.
   Families induced to move to high-opportunity areas by the CMTO treatment tend to stay in
higher-opportunity areas when their leases come up for renewal (one year after their initial move).
Among families who leased up at least one year earlier, 60.0% of families in the treatment group live
in high-opportunity areas, compared with 19.1% in the control group. These rates are almost the
same as those observed at initial lease up, showing that the treatment effect on neighborhood choice
is highly persistent over one year. Furthermore, in a post-move survey of a randomly selected subset
of families, families in the treatment group express higher rates of neighborhood satisfaction and a
greater likelihood of wanting to stay in their new neighborhoods. For instance, 64.2% of families
in the treatment group report being "very satisfied" with their new neighborhood, compared with
45.5% in the control group. These findings suggest that families in the treatment group are likely
to remain in high-opportunity areas in the long run.
   Families who moved to high-opportunity areas do not appear to have made sacrifices on other
observable neighborhood amenities, such as distance to their prior location or proximity to jobs,
nor in the quality of the unit they rent, as measured by its size, age, or other characteristics.


                                                 3
This may be because Seattle and King County had a tiered payment standard for vouchers that
offered higher payments for more expensive neighborhoods (a policy introduced independently of
the CMTO experiment), allowing families to access more expensive units in high-opportunity areas.
Indeed, the average monthly rent was $188 higher for families assigned to the CMTO treatment
group than the control.
    Our experimental results imply that most low-income families do not have a strong preference
to stay in low-opportunity areas; rather, barriers to moving to high-opportunity areas play a central
role in explaining neighborhood choice and residential sorting patterns. Explaining our findings with
a frictionless model in which neighborhood choices are determined purely by preferences would
require that a large group of families happen to be close to indifferent between low- and high-
opportunity areas. In particular, our treatment effect estimates conditional on leasing up imply
that 43% of families must have a willingness to pay (WTP) to live in a low-opportunity area between
$0 and $2,660 (the per-family cost of the CMTO program).4 This is implausible both because we
find uniformly large treatment effects across subgroups and because the marginal families induced
to move to high-opportunity areas by the intervention report much higher levels of neighborhood
satisfaction after moving.5 A more plausible explanation of the data is that many low-income
families have strong preferences to move to high-opportunity areas, but are prevented from doing
so by barriers in the search process. Such barriers could potentially be captured in a reduced-
form manner by incorporating sufficiently large housing search costs into the model (e.g., Wheaton
1990; Kennan and Walker 2011), but unpacking what these search costs are is critical for developing
policies that could reduce these costs and help families find housing in their preferred neighborhoods.
    To understand the barriers families face and the mechanisms through which CMTO addressed
them, we conducted 161 in-depth (on average, two hour) interviews with a stratified random sample
of families in the treatment and control groups during and after their move. Many families reported
that they had limited time and resources to search for housing, as they were facing challenges such
as domestic violence, mental health conditions, or holding multiple jobs while caring for children as
single parents. Families identified five key mechanisms through which the CMTO program helped
them move to opportunity: providing emotional support, increasing motivation to move to a high-
opportunity neighborhood, streamlining the search process by helping to prepare rental applications

   4. Adding the 18% who move to opportunity in the control group implies that a majority of the population is
willing to pay at most $2,660 to live in a low-opportunity area.
   5. Similar reasoning suggests that the scarcity of voucher holders in high-opportunity areas is also unlikely to be
due to strong preferences for non-voucher holders among landlords. In particular, any such preference must be small
enough to be overcome by the CMTO treatment for a large fraction of landlords.


                                                          4
and "rental resumes," providing direct brokerage services and representation with landlords, and
providing crucial and timely assistance for auxiliary payments that could prevent a lease from
being signed. The qualitative interviews show that the CMTO program's ability to respond to each
family's specific needs and circumstances was critical to the program's impact. Service utilization
was highly heterogeneous across families, with some families relying heavily on search assistance,
while others used more financial assistance or took advantage of direct landlord referrals.
    Consistent with the importance of customized services, we find that CMTO increased access
to high-opportunity neighborhoods substantially more than other more standardized policies with
similar goals. One prominent approach, termed Small Area Fair Market Rents, is to provide
financial incentives to help families move to higher-opportunity neighborhoods by offering higher
voucher payment standards in higher-rent ZIP codes within a metro area (HUD 2016). The King
County Housing Authority implemented such a policy in March, 2016. Using a quasi-experimental
difference-in-differences design comparing voucher recipients in Seattle vs. King County, we find
that King County's change in payment standards had little or no impact on the rate of moves to
high-opportunity areas, with an upper bound on the 95% confidence interval of a 7.7 pp increase
­ an order of magnitude lower than the effects of CMTO. We also study a policy introduced by
the Seattle Housing Authority that increased payment standards specifically in high-opportunity
neighborhoods (as designated for the CMTO experiment). Again, we find it had a much smaller
impact on the rates of moves to high-opportunity areas. Indeed, only 20% of voucher recipients
with children moved to high-opportunity areas even after these changes in payment standards were
implemented. These findings show that financial incentives are insufficient to induce a high rate
of moves to opportunity by themselves (although they may be necessary to facilitate such moves
through CMTO-style programs, especially in expensive housing markets).6
    Another alternative to customized housing search assistance is to provide information in a
lower-cost, more standardized manner. Schwartz, Mihaly, and Gala (2017) report results from a
randomized trial showing that short-run financial incentives and light-touch counseling had little
impact on the rate of moves to higher opportunity areas in Chicago. Bergman, Chan, and Kapor
(2019) randomized the provision of information to families about the quality of schools associated
with rental units on a website commonly used by voucher holders. The information intervention
resulted in moves to units with slightly better neighborhood schools, but had a much smaller impact

   6. Of course, there are many potential goals of affordable housing beyond increasing upward mobility for children,
such as providing safe and stable shelter or shorter commutes. Small Area Fair Market Rents could be valuable in
achieving these other objectives; our results do not speak to such considerations.


                                                         5
on neighborhood quality than CMTO. Moreover, CMTO greatly increased (by 48 percentage points)
the fraction of families who stayed in high-opportunity areas even among those who were living in
high-opportunity neighborhoods when they applied for vouchers ­ families who were presumably
informed about those areas. Furthermore, 72% of families felt"good"or"very good"about moving to
an opportunity neighborhood even at the point of the baseline survey, before the CMTO intervention
began. These results all suggest that information alone does not drive CMTO's impacts and is
unlikely to greatly increase moves to opportunity areas by itself.
    From a policy perspective, our results imply that redesigning affordable housing programs to
facilitate more moves to opportunity could have substantial impacts on residential segregation and
intergenerational income mobility. Using data from Chetty et al. (2018), we estimate that the moves
from low- to high-opportunity Census tracts induced by CMTO will increase average undiscounted
lifetime household incomes by $214,000 (8.4%) for children who move at birth and stay in their new
neighborhoods throughout childhood. More broadly, given that low-income families do not have
strong preferences for low-opportunity neighborhoods, our results provide support for increasing
the availability of affordable housing in higher-opportunity areas through other policies such as the
Low Income Housing Tax Credit, project-based units, or changes in zoning regulations.
    Although our findings are encouraging for mobility programs that facilitate residential choice,
two important caveats should be kept in mind. First, general equilibrium effects could dampen the
causal impacts of neighborhoods when families move in or out of them. In practice, the families in
CMTO came from a wide variety of neighborhoods and, as noted above, moved to a wide variety of
different areas. This dispersion suggests that CMTO (or even scaled-up versions of the program)
will not change the characteristics of any neighborhood sufficiently to dampen the benefits of moving
to higher opportunity areas. Moreover, most of the families who moved to a high-opportunity area
in the CMTO program would have moved to some other neighborhood even absent these services,
implying that CMTO does not have any incremental effect on destabilizing the neighborhoods
where families were initially living.7

   7. If the supply of housing units in each neighborhood is fixed, as is likely the case in the short run, the families
induced to move to opportunity by CMTO must displace other families from high-opportunity areas, thereby reducing
the aggregate gains from the program. Since the average voucher holder has a lower income than the average
family living a high-opportunity area, expanding CMTO would increase the share of low-income families relative to
high-income families in high-opportunity neighborhoods. Such reallocations could increase aggregate income since
neighborhoods appear to matter less for the outcomes of children in higher-income families (Chetty et al. 2018) and,
irrespective of their impacts on total income, may be desirable from a distributional perspective. In the long run, the
supply of housing may expand in response to increases in demand in high-opportunity areas induced by the CMTO
program. These general equilibrium effects could be quantified following the methods developed in Galiani, Murphy,
and Pantano (2015), Davis, Gregory, and Hartley (2018), and Davis et al. (2017).


                                                           6
   Second, it remains to be seen whether the findings reported here for the Seattle and King
County area generalize to other housing markets. On the one hand, Seattle and King County are
tight housing markets in which high-opportunity areas have little affordable housing, suggesting
treatment effects could be even larger elsewhere. On the other hand, Seattle may be a market that
is conducive to opportunity moves, as it bans source-of-payment discrimination and has other char-
acteristics that may make it easier for lower-income families to find housing in higher-opportunity
areas. We hope that other public housing authorities will be able to test similar programs elsewhere,
perhaps in the context of the Housing Choice Voucher Mobility Demonstration.
   This paper builds on an extensive literature in sociology and economics that has analyzed the
role of preferences versus structural barriers as causes of segregation (e.g., Schelling 1971; Kain
and Quigley 1975; D. Massey and N. Denton 1987; Sampson 2012; Sharkey 2013; Lareau and
Goyette 2014; Krysan and Crowder 2017). Much of this work has focused on racial segregation,
highlighting the importance of forces such as discrimination (Yinger 1995; Turner et al. 2013) and a
lack of information (Krysan and Bader 2009) in producing segregation despite African Americans'
preferences for living in more integrated neighborhoods (e.g. Charles 2005; Emerson, Chai, and
Yancey 2001). A smaller body of work has examined the drivers of socioeconomic segregation (e.g.,
Reardon and Bischoff 2011), which is our primary focus here. Our contributions to this literature
are (1) establishing experimentally that barriers have substantial causal effects on neighborhood
choice among low-income families; (2) characterizing the barriers at play, showing in particular that
they extend beyond racial discrimination, a lack of information, or a lack of financial liquidity and
instead involve deeper psychological and sociological constraints; and (3) demonstrating that these
barriers can be reduced through feasible modifications of existing government programs.
   The paper is organized as follows. Section II summarizes a set of facts on the geography
and price of opportunity in Seattle and King County that motivate our intervention. Section III
provides institutional background on the housing voucher program and describes our intervention
and experimental design. Section IV describes the data we use. Section V reports the experimental
results and interprets their implications using a stylized model of neighborhood choice. Section VI
presents qualitative evidence on mechanisms. In Section VII, we compare the effects of CMTO to
other policies, including changes in payment standards and informational interventions. Section
VIII concludes.




                                                 7
II     The Geography and Price of Opportunity in Seattle

In this section, we summarize four facts on the geography and price of opportunity that motivate
our intervention.8
     First, children's rates of upward income mobility vary substantially across nearby tracts. Figure
1a plots upward income mobility by Census tract in King County (which includes the city of Seattle
and surrounding suburbs) using data from the Opportunity Atlas (Chetty et al. 2018). The map
shows the average household income percentile rank at age 35 for children who grew up in low-
income (25th percentile) families in the 1978-1983 birth cohorts.9 There is substantial variation
in upward mobility across tracts: the (population-weighted) standard deviation of children's mean
income ranks in adulthood across tracts within King County is 4.7 percentiles (approximately
$5,175, or 10.3% of mean annual income for children with parents at the 25th percentile).
     Second, much of the variation in upward mobility across neighborhoods is driven by the causal
effects of childhood exposure rather than sorting. Recent studies have established that moving to
high-upward-mobility ("high-opportunity") neighborhoods improves children's outcomes in adult-
hood in proportion to the amount of time they spend growing up there. These studies, summarized
in Appendix Figure 1, use research designs ranging from random assignment of vouchers (Chetty,
Hendren, and Katz 2016) and quasi-experimental estimates based on variation in the age of chil-
dren at the time of the move (Chetty et al. 2018; Lalibert´
                                                          e 2018) to demolitions of public housing
projects (Chyn 2018). They find that approximately two-thirds of the observational variation in
upward mobility across tracts is due to causal effects of place.
     Third, low-income families are concentrated in lower-opportunity neighborhoods. Even among
families that receive rental assistance from the government in the form of housing vouchers, 76.2%
of families in Seattle and King County live in tracts with below-median levels of upward mobility.
Figure 1a illustrates this fact by showing the 25 most common locations where families with housing
vouchers moved between 2015 and 2017 (as a percentage of the total population in each tract).
Families are clustered in lower-opportunity tracts (red colors) even though there are often much
higher-opportunity tracts nearby.
     Fourth, the segregation of low-income families into low-opportunity areas is not simply explained
by differences in the price of housing between low- and high-opportunity neighborhoods. Figure

   8. We establish these facts using data from Seattle and King County here, but the same four facts hold systemat-
ically in other metro areas across the country.
   9. Children are assigned to tracts in proportion to the number of years they spent growing up in that tract until
age 23; see Chetty et al. (2018) for further details.


                                                         8
1b plots the upward mobility measure shown in Figure 1a against median rent for a two-bedroom
apartment in each tract, using data from the 2012-2015 American Community Survey (ACS) to
measure rents. Neighborhoods with higher upward mobility are slightly more expensive: the (low-
income count-weighted) correlation between rents and upward mobility is 0.24 within King County.
However, there is considerable variation in upward mobility even conditional on rent. Figure 1b
highlights the most common tracts where voucher holders lived prior to our experimental interven-
tion and shows that many families could potentially move to "opportunity bargain" neighborhoods
that would improve their children's outcomes without having higher rents.10
    These four facts motivate our central questions: Why don't more low-income families, especially
those receiving housing vouchers, move to opportunity? Do families prefer lower-opportunity areas
because they have other advantages (e.g., a shorter commute to work or proximity to family)? Or
do they prefer higher-opportunity neighborhoods, but face barriers that limit access to such areas?
If families face such barriers, how can we intervene to help families live where they would like to
live?


III     Intervention and Experimental Design

In this section, we describe our intervention and experimental design. We begin by providing
some institutional background on the Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program. We then discuss
our definition of high-opportunity neighborhoods, the services offered in the Creating Moves to
Opportunity program, and the design of the randomized controlled trial.

III.A     Background on the Housing Choice Voucher Program

The HCV program provides rental assistance to 2.2 million families in the United States each year,
with a total program cost of approximately $20 billion annually (see Collinson, Ellen, and Ludwig
(2015) for a comprehensive description of the program). The program is overseen at the federal
level by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), but is administered by
local Public Housing Authorities (PHAs). In this study, we work with two PHAs: the Seattle
Housing Authority (SHA), which issues vouchers that can be used in the city of Seattle, and the
King County Housing Authority (KCHA), which issues vouchers that can be used in the rest of



  10. Moreover, the housing authorities offer tiered payments standards such that families receive more rental assis-
tance if they find housing in a more expensive area, further reducing the effective cost of housing in high-opportunity
neighborhoods.


                                                          9
King County, excluding the cities of Seattle and Renton.11 Both KCHA and SHA are among a
small number of PHAs who participate in HUD's Moving to Work program, which gives them
greater flexibility to implement policy pilots than other PHAs.
    The HCV program is targeted at low-income families. To be eligible for a voucher from SHA
and KCHA, families must have household income below 80% of Area Median Income (AMI).12 In
line with national patterns, more families meet this criteria than the number of vouchers available.
The PHAs address this problem by using a lottery to assign families positions on a waiting list.
Families who are homeless or who have incomes below 30% of AMI are given priority on the waitlist.
In practice, virtually all families who actually receive vouchers fall well below the 30% AMI cutoff,
which corresponds to $29,900 for a family of 3. In Seattle and King County, the typical family who
received a voucher during our experiment had been on the waitlist for about 1.5 years.
    Families eligible for the HCV program are required to contribute 30 to 40% of their annual
household income toward rent and utilities. They then receive a housing subsidy that covers the
difference between a unit's listed rent and the family's contribution, up to a maximum amount
known as the Voucher Payment Standard. In SHA and KCHA, the maximum monthly voucher
payments for a two-bedroom unit were $2278 and $2110, respectively.13
    Once families are issued a voucher, they typically have 4 to 8 months to use the voucher to lease
a unit; if the voucher is not used by that point, it is issued to another family. To use a voucher,
families must find an interested landlord whose unit passes a quality inspection conducted by the
PHA using HUD-defined housing quality standards. After leasing, families remain eligible for the
voucher they received indefinitely as long their income remains below eligibility thresholds.

III.B     Defining Opportunity Areas

The first step in our intervention is to designate which areas are "high-opportunity" neighborhoods.
Using a preliminary version of the Opportunity Atlas data on upward mobility shown in Figure
1a, we define high-opportunity neighborhoods as Census tracts that have upward mobility in ap-
proximately the top third of the distribution across tracts within Seattle and King County.14 We

  11. Vouchers from both SHA and KCHA may be ported out to use in other areas if they meet certain requirements;
this occurs relatively infrequently in practice.
  12. Families must also meet certain additional requirements, such as having children or meeting certain age require-
ments. The full set of requirements are available here for SHA and here for KCHA.
  13. In recent years, both SHA and KCHA have adopted tiered payment standards that offer higher payments in
more expensive areas to enable families to move to more expensive neighborhoods.
  14. We describe the procedure used to construct the preliminary measures of upward mobility in Appendix A.
Appendix Figure 2 compares the preliminary estimates to the final Opportunity Atlas estimates shown in Figure 1a
(which were released in October 2018) and shows that they are quite similar in practice, with a correlation of 0.74


                                                         10
then adjust these definitions to (1) create contiguous areas and (2) account for potential neighbor-
hood change.15 We create contiguous areas by including Census tracts that fall below the "high
opportunity" threshold according to their upward mobility estimates but are surrounded by other
high-opportunity areas and excluding high-opportunity Census tracts that are surrounded only by
lower-opportunity neighborhoods (see Appendix A for details).
    We address neighborhood change by evaluating whether the historical measures of upward
mobility in the Opportunity Atlas ­ which are constructed using data for children who grew up in
these areas in the 1980s and 1990s ­ are good predictors of opportunity for children growing up in
those areas today. Chetty et al. (2018) examine the serial correlation of upward mobility measures
across cohorts. They find that rates of upward mobility are generally quite stable over time and
that historical mobility is more predictive of future mobility than typical contemporaneous proxies
for opportunity, such as poverty rates. That said, there are certain parts of Seattle, especially near
the center of the city, which have gentrified dramatically in the past ten years and could potentially
have very different outcomes today. To evaluate the impacts of this change, we examine the test
scores of low-income (free-lunch-eligible) students living in these areas, a plausible leading indicator
of upward income mobility. The test-scores of low-income students did not change significantly in
these areas (although average test scores, pooling all income groups, increased as higher-income
families moved in). We conclude based on this analysis that the historical Opportunity Atlas
measures provide good predictors of opportunity for low-income families even in these changing
neighborhoods.16 Based on these and other qualitative analyses by the housing authorities, we
chose to proceed with the designations largely based on the Opportunity Atlas data.
    Figure 2a shows the final set of Census tracts that were designated as "high opportunity" (in the
dark shading) after this process. These definitions of high-opportunity areas differ from previous
definitions used by SHA and KCHA as well as other practitioners and researchers. Most prior
studies define "high-opportunity" areas based on proxies such as the availability of jobs, transit
access, crime rates, poverty rates, etc. In contrast, we directly define high-opportunity areas as
places where low-income children have had good outcomes historically. We focus on children because
prior work has shown that neighborhoods have the largest impacts on children's rather than adults'

across tracts in King County.
  15. We also excluded three high-opportunity tracts that already had a large concentration of voucher holders, based
on the reasoning that the barriers families face in moving to these areas were already low.
  16. Of course, there is no guarantee that this will be the case in other areas where neighborhoods have changed
substantially. The Opportunity Atlas data provide a good starting point for predicting upward mobility (which is
inherently unobservable) for the current generation of children, but should ideally be complemented with more recent
data and qualitative judgment on a case-by-case basis to settle on final definitions of opportunity neighborhoods.


                                                         11
economic outcomes. We focus on their outcomes rather than proxies for those outcomes because
prior work has shown that observable characteristics such as poverty rates capture only about 50%
of the variation in upward mobility across areas.
    Figure 2b shows why this distinction matters in practice. The left panel replicates the Op-
portunity Atlas data from Figure 1a, while the right panel shows the Kirwan Child Opportunity
Index (Acevedo-Garcia et al. 2014), a commonly used index constructed by combining education,
health, and economic indicators. The two measures have a (population-weighted) correlation of
0.3, leading to several important differences between them. For example, the Kirwan index ranks
Capitol Hill and parts of the Ballard neighborhood as high-opportunity areas (given their proximity
to jobs), yet these neighborhoods have historically had some of the lowest rates of upward mobility
in Seattle. Conversely, there are several areas, such as the eastern part of Kent in King County
and the Northeastern part of Seattle, which rate poorly according to the Kirwan index but offer
high rates of upward income mobility for low-income children. Such areas often excel on other
dimensions that are correlated with upward mobility, such as measures of social capital and family
stability, which are typically not incorporated into traditional measures.
    Helping families move to high-opportunity areas as defined based on the Opportunity Atlas
rather than traditional Kirwan or poverty-rate-based indices is likely to produce larger impacts
on upward income mobility for two reasons. First, we estimate that the average high-opportunity
area identified as described above using the Opportunity Atlas has a causal effect on upward
income mobility that is nearly 40% larger than what one would have obtained if one identified
the same number of high-opportunity tracts based on the Kirwan index or poverty rates. Second,
neighborhoods that have high rates of upward mobility despite appearing worse on observable
dimensions tend to have lower rents (Chetty et al. 2018). As a result, our designation of high-
opportunity areas identifies more affordable neighborhoods than traditional Kirwan-type or poverty-
rate-based indices, expanding the set of high-opportunity areas that would be affordable to families
receiving vouchers.17

III.C     The Creating Moves to Opportunity Intervention

In collaboration with our research team, the Seattle and King County Housing Authorities devel-
oped a suite of services designed to facilitate moves to high-opportunity neighborhoods, building on

 17. Only 36% of the families who moved to high-opportunity tracts in our treatment group moved to a tract that
would have been defined as "high opportunity" had we identified high-opportunity areas as those with the lowest
poverty rates, underscoring why the metric for opportunity matters.


                                                      12
formative fieldwork conducted by our partners and lessons from prior mobility and housing search
assistance programs such as the Baltimore Regional Housing Program (DeLuca and Rosenblatt
2017), the Abode Program in San Mateo, and other programs (see Table 2 of Schwartz, Mihaly,
and Gala 2017). The service model includes three components summarized in Figure 3a: search
assistance, landlord engagement, and short-term financial assistance.
    Search assistance services were provided by a non-profit group, which provided "family and
housing navigators" who contacted families via in-person meetings, phone calls, and text messages.
The services included: (1) information about high-opportunity areas and the benefits of moving to
such areas for families with young children; (2) help in making rental applications more competitive
by preparing rental documents and addressing issues in their credit and rental history; and (3) search
assistance to help families identify available units, connect with landlords in opportunity areas, and
complete the application process. Importantly, these services were tailored to address the specific
issues each family faced: for some families, search assistance focused extensively on application
preparation and issues such as credit history, while for others they spent much more time on the
search process itself. CMTO staff spent 6 hours directly assisting each family on average, spread
throughout the search process from an initial meeting shortly after the family is notified of eligibility
for a voucher to the point of lease-up (Figure 3b).
    The CMTO staff also engaged directly with landlords in high-opportunity areas by explaining
the new program and encouraging them to lease units to CMTO families. Landlords were also
offered a damage mitigation (insurance) fund for any damages not covered by the tenant's security
deposit incurred within the first 18 months after the start of the lease (up to a limit of $2,000).18
Through these interactions, the staff were able to identify listings from landlords who indicated
they would be willing to rent their units to voucher holders who met certain criteria. This landlord
engagement was an important source of listings for families: connections with landlords facilitated
by CMTO staff account for 47% of the moves to opportunity neighborhoods in the treatment
group. The staff then helped expedite the lease-up process for landlords through rapid property
inspections and streamlined paperwork, serving as a liaison between families, landlords, and housing
authorities.
    Finally, CMTO families were provided with various forms of short-term financial assistance
(liquidity) to facilitate the rental process. This included funds for application screening fees, security


 18. To date, no landlords have filed such a claim. Of course, if such expenses are incurred in the future, the effective
per voucher cost of CMTO estimated below could rise.


                                                           13
deposits, and any other expenses that arose and were standing in the way of lease-up. Importantly,
these payments were customized by staff to address the specific impediments a family faced by the
CMTO staff. On average, families in the treatment group received $1,043 in such assistance.
   Unlike other mobility programs, such as MTO and the Baltimore Housing Mobility Program,
which require families to use their vouchers (at least initially) in opportunity areas, families in
CMTO could use their housing voucher in any neighborhood within their housing authority's
jurisdiction.
   Program Costs. The net cost of the CMTO program was approximately $2,660 per family:
$1,043 of financial assistance, $1,500 of labor costs for the services, and $118 in additional PHA
expenses to administer the program (Table 3). This $2,660 figure is the direct cost of the interven-
tion itself per issued voucher. Because Seattle and King county have tiered payment systems that
offer higher voucher payments in more expensive neighborhoods, we estimate that they also incur
additional voucher payment costs of $2,630 per year as a result of the treatment group families
choosing to move to more expensive neighborhoods (see Section V.D. below). We separate these
downstream costs from the cost of program services because they will likely vary substantially
across metro areas, depending upon rents and the degree to which payment standards vary across
neighborhoods. In future work, it would be useful to analyze how the program could be optimized
to support families in moving to less expensive high-opportunity areas ("opportunity bargains") to
reduce downstream voucher payment costs.
   As another method of scaling the costs of the program, note that the up-front cost of the
CMTO program per family who moved to a high-opportunity area is $5,010, which is comparable
to previous mobility programs that involve intensive counseling and support. We present a detailed
description of these cost calculations, a further breakdown of cost components, and comparisons to
the other mobility programs in Appendix B and Appendix Table 1.

III.D    Experimental Design

Our sample frame consists of families who were on the waiting list for a voucher from either KCHA
or SHA between April 2018 and February 2019. We further limit the sample to families with at least
one child below age 15, taking into account both prior evidence that the benefits of moving to high-
opportunity neighborhoods are largest for young children and our definition of high-opportunity
areas that focuses specifically on children's outcomes.
   The randomized trial was implemented by MDRC with J-PAL North America staff providing


                                                 14
overall project management. The trial was registered in the AEA RCT Registry in March 2018,
began on April 3, 2018, and ended with final voucher issuances on April 26, 2019.19 Families were
first invited to an intake appointment, at which point they were offered the option to participate
in the CMTO experimental study by consenting and completing a baseline survey. 90% of families
who were identified as eligible on a preliminary basis consented to participate in the study.20 These
families were then randomized (with 50% probability, stratified by PHA) into either the CMTO
treatment or control groups. A total of 497 families consented to participate in the experiment, of
whom 430 met the voucher eligibility requirements and were part of the final experimental sample.
    Control group families received the standard services provided by their housing authority, which
included a group briefing about how to use the voucher but no specific information about oppor-
tunity areas or any search assistance. Treatment group families received the CMTO program
described in Section III.C in addition to the briefing and standard support services.


IV      Data

This section describes the data we use for the experimental analysis and the quasi-experimental
analysis of changes in payment standards. We draw information from several sources: the adminis-
trative records of SHA and KCHA, a baseline survey, a service delivery process management system,
tract-level and housing-unit-level data from external sources, and post-move followup surveys and
interviews that form the basis for our qualitative analysis. After describing these data sources and
key variable definitions, we provide descriptive statistics and test for balance across the treatment
and control groups.

IV.A      Data Sources

Housing Authority Administrative Records. The core data we use comes from the PHAs' internal
administrative records. We obtained anonymized data on all families issued vouchers from 2015-
2019, including post-voucher-issuance outcomes and family characteristics. The key outcomes we
study include whether a household issued a voucher successfully leases a unit using the voucher, in
what Census tract this lease up occurred, and at what rent. Family characteristics obtained from
voucher application forms include gender, race, ethnicity, homeless and disability status, household


 19. From February-May 2018, KCHA and SHA piloted the CMTO program. During this pilot phase, all families
with at least one child aged 15 or younger were invited to participate in this pilot and 41 families enrolled.
 20. Enrollment rates were approximately 90% across all the subgroups we examine, except that households who do
not speak English as a primary language enrolled at a slightly lower 77% rate.


                                                      15
size, income, and address at time of application. Data on lease-ups were obtained up through
February 6, 2020, by which point vouchers had either been taken up or had expired for all families
who participated in the experiment.
   Baseline Survey. We conducted a baseline survey for all families who enrolled in the CMTO
experiment after providing informed consent. We collected information on characteristics including
the head of household's primary language, birth country, years in the United States, tenure in
the Seattle area, education, current housing status, employment status, employment location and
commute length, moving and eviction history, receipt of social services, and child care utilization.
In addition, we asked about self-reported assessments of current neighborhood satisfaction, motiva-
tions to move, opinions of various neighborhoods, and overall happiness. The baseline survey also
included information on children, such as their ages, grade levels, school name, special education
participation, school satisfaction, and participation in extracurricular activities. The full baseline
survey instrument is available here.
   Service Delivery. The service providers used a case management system built by MDRC to
record data on interactions with households and landlords in real time. For households, the database
includes information on the housing search process, contact with the search assistance staff, and
take-up of financial assistance. Data on the housing search process includes information on whether
the household made goals and completed several tasks: visiting neighborhoods, looking for housing,
contacting property owners, completing rental applications, and preparing to move. Data on contact
with housing search assistance staff include the date of each contact, the method of contact, who
initiated the contact, the location of the contact, the reason for the contact, whether the contact
included rental application coaching or visiting a prospective unit, and how long the meeting lasted.
Records of financial assistance include the amount and type of financial assistance requested and
received. Finally, we also collected information on credit, rental, and criminal histories, savings,
childcare availability, smoking status, pet ownership, and neighborhood preferences and priorities.
   For landlords, the database contains information on landlord characteristics, outreach efforts,
and unit availability. We recorded information about each unit referred to a household by a housing
locator, including the outcome of any such referrals.
   Housing Unit and Tract Characteristics. We obtain information about the characteristics of
the units that families rented from rent reasonableness reports (for KCHA), and Zillow, Redfin,
Apartments.com, and King County Property records (for SHA). These data on unit characteristics
were linked to CMTO households using a unique household identifier. We were able to obtain


                                                 16
information on unit characteristics for 81% of the units rented by families in our sample. These
data include information on unit size, year built, and appliance availability.
   We obtain data on the characteristics of the Census tracts to characterize the origin and desti-
nation neighborhoods for each family from several sources. We predict the effect of the treatment
on children's outcomes in adulthood using three sets of outcome variables from the Opportunity
Atlas (Chetty et al. 2018) for children with parents at the 25th percentile of the income distribu-
tion: mean household income rank, the incarceration rate, and (for women) the teen birth rate. We
measure other Census characteristics such as the poverty rate and racial demographics using the
2013-2017 American Community Survey. Tract-level transit and environmental health indices are
drawn from publicly available HUD Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing (AFFH) data. Test score
data by school district are obtained from the Stanford Education Data Archive (Fahle et al. 2017).
   Follow-up Survey and Qualitative Interviews. We conducted in-person interviews between De-
cember 20, 2018 and February 25, 2020. We contacted a randomly selected subset of experimental
participants, stratifying by PHA (SHA, KCHA), treatment status (treatment, control), and lease
up status (leased up, still searching). We overweighted families in the treatment group and those
still searching for housing to maximize power to learn about mechanisms through which the treat-
ment works during the search process (see Appendix C for details and further information on the
design of the qualitative study). At the end of each interview, we asked two questions about their
satisfaction with their current neighborhood.
   We interviewed 161 families in total, out of 202 who were targeted for inclusion in the qualitative
study, for an 80% response rate (Appendix Table 2). Of these 161 families, 130 had leased up at the
point of interview and thus have post-move neighborhood satisfaction data. Among the families
interviewed post-move, 97 are in the treatment group and 33 are in the control group.

IV.B      Baseline Characteristics and Balance Tests

Table 1 presents summary statistics on the baseline characteristics of the 430 CMTO participants
and their origin neighborhoods for the pooled sample and separately for the control and treatment
groups.
   Baseline Characteristics. Families participating in the CMTO experiment are quite economi-
cally disadvantaged (Panel A of Table 1). The median household income of CMTO participants
of around $19,000 falls just below the 15th percentile of the national household income distribu-
tion (based on data from the 2017 Current Population Survey) and less than one quarter of King


                                                 17
County's median household income in 2017 of over $86,700. Only 5% of the CMTO household heads
have a four-year college degree, and 13% were homeless or living in a group shelter at baseline. The
vast majority (80%) of the household heads are female and 12% were married at baseline. About
half of the CMTO participants (49%) are Black (non-Hispanic), 25% are White (non-Hispanic),
about 8% are Hispanic, and 7% are Asian. A little more than a third (35%) of the household heads
are immigrants and about a fifth of the participants required a translator for the baseline survey
and in-take services. 56% of participants were employed at baseline, and only 28% were working
full-time (35 or more hours a week).21
    Panel B of Table 1 provides information on CMTO participants' attitudes toward moves to
higher-opportunity neighborhoods.22 At baseline, CMTO participants expressed interest in mov-
ing to higher opportunity neighborhoods, but were worried about the feasibility of making such
moves. Around 80% of households indicated they were comfortable moving to a racially different
neighborhood. Over 70% of families indicated that they were willing to move to at least one of three
areas we named (Northwest Seattle, Northeast Seattle, and South of Ship Canal for SHA; North
King County, East King County, and East Hill Kent for KCHA) that have many high-opportunity
neighborhoods. However, only 29% of the CMTO families felt they would find it easy to pay moving
expenses to move to a different neighborhood. The primary motivation expressed by CMTO par-
ticipants for moving to a new neighborhood was better schools (43%), safer neighborhood (22%),
and better or bigger home (16%).23 Few CMTO participants list employment-related motivations
for moving to a new neighborhood.
    Panel C of Table 1 shows that CMTO families were living at baseline in relatively disadvantaged
neighborhoods within King County on several dimensions. The mean poverty rate of the Census
tracts in which CMTO families lived was 17% in 2016, as compared to 10.9% for King County. The
mean predicted income rank in adulthood of children growing up in a low-income (25th percentile)
family was 43.9 (about $35,000) in the baseline neighborhoods of CMTO families, which falls at
approximately the 31st percentile of tracts across King County.
    Balance Tests. The final column of Table 1 reports p-values for tests of the difference in the
  21. Although CMTO participants have low incomes relative to the median family, they are significantly better off
than participants in the Moving to Opportunity experiment (Sanbonmatsu et al. 2011). For example, only 28% of
MTO household heads were employed at baseline as compared to 56% of CMTO household heads. Only 3% of CMTO
families were living in extremely high-poverty tracts (40% or higher poverty rate) at baseline, as compared to 100%
of MTO families.
  22. See Appendix Table 10 for the exact questions used to assess these attitudes and the way in which responses
were coded.
  23. These motivations contrast with the MTO families, where concerns about gangs and violence was the primary
motivation to move for most families, while better schools was the primary motivation for a much smaller group.


                                                        18
mean of each variable between the treatment and control groups.24 The baseline characteristics are
generally balanced between the treatment and control groups, as would be expected given random
assignment. There is a slightly higher share of individuals with less than a high school degree in
the control group and some imbalance in perceptions of neighborhoods and willingness to move to
different types of areas. However, an F-test for balance across all the baseline variables shown in
Table 1 yields a statistically insignificant p-value of 0.22. We conclude that the pattern of observed
differences between the treatment and control groups is consistent with the degree of sampling
variation that one would expect given random assignment of treatment status but verify that the
main results are robust to the inclusion of controls for baseline characteristics.
    The qualitative sample (the subset of households for whom we have post-move neighborhood
satisfaction data) remains representative of the full CMTO quantitative sample (Appendix Table
3). There is no evidence of selective attrition from the qualitative sample: rates of response to the
followup survey do not vary with treatment status and families who responded to the survey are
balanced on observable baseline characteristics (Appendix Tables 2 and 4).


V      Experimental Results

This section presents the main experimental results. We divide our analysis into five parts. First,
we analyze how the CMTO treatment affected the rate of moves to high-opportunity areas, the
primary outcome specified in our pre-analysis plan. Second, we predict the effects of the treatment
on rates of upward income mobility using historical data from the Opportunity Atlas. Third, we
examine heterogeneity in treatment effects across subgroups. Fourth, we analyze impacts on other
dimensions of neighborhood and unit quality to assess whether families moving to opportunity made
sacrifices on other margins. Fifth, we report results on rates of persistence in new neighborhoods
and neighborhood satisfaction based on post-move surveys. In the final subsection, we discuss
how the experimental findings shed light on the relative importance of preferences vs. barriers in
neighborhood choice using a stylized model.




  24. Since randomization was stratified by PHA (Seattle vs. King County), we compute these p-values by regressing
the outcome on indicators for treatment status and PHA and report the p-value on the treatment indicator. In
practice, since randomization rates were essentially identical in the two PHAs, the resulting difference is very similar
to the raw difference in means between the treatment and control group.


                                                          19
V.A      Impacts on Neighborhood Choice

We estimate the treatment effect of CMTO on an outcome yi (e.g., an indicator for moving to a
high-opportunity area) using an OLS regression specification of the form:


                                  yi =  + T reati + KCHAi + Xi +                 i                              (1)

where Treat is an indicator variable for being randomly assigned to the treatment group, KCHA is
an indicator for receiving a voucher from the King County Housing Authority (as opposed to the
Seattle Housing Authority), and X is a vector of baseline covariates.
    In our baseline specifications, we include the KCHA indicator (since randomization occurred
within each housing authority) but no additional covariates X . In supplemental specifications, we
evaluate the sensitivity of our estimates to the inclusion of the baseline covariates listed in Table
1. Including these additional covariates has little impact on the estimates, as expected given that
the covariates are balanced across the treatment and control groups.
    Figure 4a shows the effect of the CMTO program on the fraction of families who rent units
in high-opportunity areas using their housing vouchers. To facilitate visualization, we plot the
control group mean (pooling all control group families across the two housing authorities) and
the control group mean plus the estimated treatment effect  from equation (1). The CMTO
intervention increased the share of families moving to high-upward-mobility (opportunity) areas
by 37.9 percentage points (s.e. = 4.2, p < 0.001) from 15.1% in the control group to 53.0% in
the treatment group.25 The 15.1% rate of moves to high-opportunity areas in the control group is
similar to historical rates (Figure 4a), suggesting that the high rate of opportunity moves in the
treatment group did not crowd out moves to opportunity areas that control group families would
have made.26
    In Figure 4b, we analyze whether the CMTO program affected overall lease-up rates, a secondary
outcome in our pre-analysis plan. This figure replicates Figure 4a, changing the outcome to an
indicator for leasing up anywhere (not just in a high-opportunity area). The lease-up rates are
very similar and statistically indistinguishable across the treatment group (87.4%) and control

  25. These estimates are based on 427 families; we exclude 3 households whose voucher was transferred to other
PHAs shortly after voucher issuance (and whose information we lost thereafter) here and throughout the analysis
below.
  26. In particular, if there are a small number of units available in high-opportunity neighborhoods, the increased
success of CMTO treatment group families in leasing those units could come at the expense of other voucher holders
who would have gotten the units. This does not appear to occur in practice, presumably because the marginal family
competing for housing in a high-opportunity neighborhood is typically not a voucher holder.


                                                        20
group (85.9%). The fact that lease-up rates were quite high even in the control group shows that
CMTO's impacts are not simply driven by providing services that enable families to use their
vouchers (e.g., landlord referrals) and steering them to certain areas as a condition for receiving
these services. Rather, CMTO changed where families chose to live by reducing barriers to leasing
a unit in high-opportunity areas in particular.
    Conditional on leasing up, 60.7% of families leased units in high-opportunity areas in the treat-
ment group, compared with 17.6% in the control group (Figure 4c). Hence, if all families were to
receive CMTO services and treatment effects remained stable, we would expect 60.7% (rather than
the current 17.6%) of families using vouchers to live in high-opportunity areas in steady-state.
    Figure 5 maps the neighborhoods to which treatment and control families moved (among those
who leased a unit using their voucher). While control group families are concentrated in lower-
opportunity neighborhoods in the southern and western parts of the metro area, treatment group
families are widely dispersed across high-opportunity neighborhoods.27 The 118 treatment group
families in our sample who moved to an opportunity area spread out across 46 distinct Census
tracts. The fact that the CMTO treatment induces families to move to a diffuse set of high-
opportunity areas reduces the risk that the predicted gains from moving to a higher-opportunity
neighborhood will be diminished by changes in neighborhood composition. To see this, suppose the
CMTO program were scaled up to include all families with children who currently receive Housing
Choice Vouchers in Seattle and King County. If families were to move to Census tracts at the
same rates as in our treatment group, the CMTO program would increase the number of voucher
holding households as a fraction of total households by about 7.2 percentage points in the median
high-opportunity tract to which CMTO families move.

V.B     Predicted Impacts on Upward Mobility

How do the changes in neighborhood choices induced by CMTO affect children's future outcomes?
Answering this question directly will require following children over time. However, we can predict
the impacts of the moves induced by the CMTO program on children's future outcomes using
the historical measures of upward mobility from the Opportunity Atlas (under our maintained
assumption that rates of upward mobility will not change over time).
    As specified in our pre-analysis plan, we measure upward mobility as the predicted adult house-
hold income rank for children with parents at the 25th percentile, drawn directly from the publicly
 27. At the point of voucher application, most treatment and control families are concentrated in South and West
Seattle (Appendix Figure 3).


                                                      21
available Opportunity Atlas data.28 The treatment effect on this measure of upward mobility is an
increase of 1.6 percentile ranks (s.e. = 0.4, p < 0.001), from 44.5 (roughly an income of $36,000
at age 34) in the control group to 46.1 ($37,800) in the treatment group (Figure 4d).29 Families
in the treatment group also moved to neighborhoods with lower predicted teen birth rates and
incarceration rates (Appendix Figure 4).
    Recent studies (Andrews, Kitagawa, and McCloskey 2019; Mogstad et al. 2020) have shown that
the 1.6 rank gain could potentially be an upward-biased estimate of the true impact on upward
mobility because of sampling error in the Opportunity Atlas estimates. In particular, the tracts
that have the highest estimated rates of upward mobility in the Opportunity Atlas may not in fact
have the highest true levels of upward mobility because of noise in the estimates. Moreover, tracts
that got a positive noise draw are more likely to be defined as "high opportunity." We address
these concerns in three ways. First, we construct optimal forecasts of upward mobility by applying
the linear shrinkage procedure with covariates outlined in Appendix A to the Opportunity Atlas
estimates. Under the assumption that upward mobility across tracts is normally distributed (condi-
tional on the covariates), the forecasts yield an unbiased estimate of the gain from the intervention
(Andrews, Kitagawa, and McCloskey 2019). The treatment effect on the forecasts of upward mobil-
ity is 1.6 percentiles, the same as what we obtain with the raw estimates.30 Second, we show that
tracts classified as high-opportunity based on data for the 1978-83 birth cohorts have significantly
higher levels of upward mobility (with p < 0.001) using data for the 1984-89 birth cohorts. Third,
the Opportunity Atlas estimates are highly predictive of the actual earnings outcomes of children
randomly induced to move to different neighborhoods in the Moving to Opportunity experiment
(Chetty et al. 2018, Figure X). Together, these results confirm that the tracts to which families in
the treatment group moved are not merely classified as "high opportunity" due to noise and do in
fact have higher latent levels of upward mobility, as one would expect given that the reliability of
the Opportunity Atlas tract-level estimates is 0.91 (Chetty et al. 2018).
    We translate the treatment effect estimate of 1.6 percentiles on household income ranks into
  28. We use the final, publicly available version of the Opportunity Atlas when constructing these predictions rather
than the preliminary measures that were used to define "high opportunity" areas to maximize precision. However,
results are similar if we use the preliminary measures because they are highly correlated with the final measures
(Appendix Figure 2).
  29. For families who did not lease up using their vouchers, we use upward mobility in their origin Census tract as
the outcome. A survey of these households suggests that most stay in their origin tract and those that do move on
average move to areas with lower upward mobility.
  30. The forecasts happen not to change the estimates significantly because some of the tracts to which families in
the treatment group moved have lower estimates in the raw Opportunity Atlas data than one would predict based
on covariates; as a result, even though shrinkage reduces the predicted gains from moving to most high-opportunity
tracts, it ends up not affecting the overall mean significantly.


                                                         22
an estimated causal impact on income for a given child whose family is induced to move to an
opportunity area by CMTO by making two adjustments. First, not all of the observational variation
in upward mobility across areas is driven by the causal effects of place; some of it reflects selection
that would not be captured by a child who moves. Chetty et al. (2018) estimate that 62% of
the variation in upward mobility is due to causal effects, i.e. moving at birth to an area with
1 percentile higher predicted outcomes would increase a given child's rank in adulthood by 0.62
percentiles.31 Second, the treatment effect in Figure 4d understates the gains a given child would
obtain by moving from a low to high-opportunity area because only 37.9% of families were induced
to move to high-opportunity neighborhoods by the CMTO treatment.
   Adjusting for these two factors, we estimate that the causal effect of the moves induced by the
                                                          0.62
CMTO treatment for a child who moves at birth is 1.6 ×          2.6 percentiles. This corresponds
                                                          37.9
to an increase in annual household income of approximately $3,000 when children are in their
mid-thirties, which is approximately 8.4% of the mean income of children growing up in families
at the 25th percentile of the national income distribution in low-opportunity areas in Seattle and
King County. Assuming that individuals obtain a 8.4% income gain throughout their lives and an
annual income growth rate of 1% per year, we project an undiscounted total lifetime income gain
of $214,000. This is equivalent to $85,000 in present value at birth with a 2% discount rate.32
    As another benchmark, note that children growing up in 75th percentile families in Seattle
end up 13.6 percentiles higher in the income distribution as adults than those growing up in 25th
percentile families in Seattle. Moving to a high-opportunity area reduces this 13.6 percentile gap in
              2.6
outcomes by        = 19.1% . That is, moving from the average low-opportunity to high-opportunity
              13.6
area within Seattle reduces the gap in income between children from low- and high-income families
by about 20%.
    If the children who move to high-opportunity areas as a result of the CMTO treatment go on
to earn more as predicted, the incremental income tax revenue from the higher earnings would
offset the up-front service cost of the program (excluding the downstream costs of higher voucher
payments).33 We estimate that the treatment effect of the program on the present value of income
  31. Chetty et al. (2018) obtain a very similar estimate when focusing on the subset of families induced to move to
low-poverty areas by receiving a housing voucher in the Moving to Opportunity experiment, supporting the application
of this 62% figure in our study population.
  32. See Appendix Table 5 for step-by-step details on these calculations. The corresponding estimates for individual
earnings (excluding spousal income) are a 2.1 percentile gain, translating to approximately $1,800 (7%) per year in
a lifetime earnings gain of $133,000.
  33. We emphasize that the service cost of the program does not incorporate the costs of higher voucher payments
that are generated by families in the treatment group moving to more expensive neighborhoods and the fact that
voucher payments are indexed to local rents in SHA and KCHA (see Section VII below). While these higher voucher


                                                         23
tax revenue for children who move at birth is $6,000 (discounted at 2%), which is larger than the
average program service cost of $2,660.
    In Figure 6, we analyze the distribution of treatment effects on upward mobility by plotting the
probability density function of upward mobility for families in the treatment group vs. the control
group. Consistent with the results in Figure 4d, the distributions for the treatment group are shifted
significantly to the right relative to that for the control group. Families who moved to opportunity
did not simply gravitate to lower-opportunity areas within the set of neighborhoods designated as
"high opportunity." In particular, some treatment group families moved to the highest-upward-
mobility neighborhoods in the county ­ areas where no one would have moved absent the services
(as shown by the near-zero density in the control group in the upper right tail).34

V.C      Subgroup Heterogeneity

The effectiveness of programs that seek to reduce barriers to moving could potentially vary sig-
nificantly across subgroups that face different types of barriers (e.g., racial/ethnic minorities who
may face discrimination). In Figure 7, we evaluate whether this is a concern by analyzing the
heterogeneity in the CMTO treatment effect on the rate of moves to high-opportunity areas across
subgroups.
    Panel A of Figure 7 replicates Figure 4a separately for non-Hispanic Black head-of-households,
non-Hispanic whites, and all other racial and ethnic groups. The CMTO treatment generated
large increases in moves to higher opportunity areas of at least 30 percentage points across all of
these groups.35 The significant gains among black families show that the CMTO treatment has
substantial effects even in the presence of any racial discrimination that may exist in the housing
market (Kain and Quigley 1975). Conversely, the large treatment effects among white families
show that the low rate of opportunity moves among voucher holders is not due solely to racial
discrimination.
    Panel B of Figure 7 splits the sample into families with household incomes below vs. above


payment costs are an additional expense borne by the government, they may vary across jurisdictions and could
potentially be reduced by limiting the extent to which payment standards are increased in more expensive areas ­ an
important direction for future research on optimizing the cost effectiveness of CMTO-type interventions.
  34. In light of this result, an interesting question for future work is whether one might be able to further amplify
the impacts of the CMTO intervention on upward mobility by setting the threshold used to define "high-opportunity"
areas at a higher level, thereby encouraging more families to move to the highest-opportunity neighborhoods.
  35. These changes in neighborhood choice are likely to improve long-term outcomes for all of these subgroups as
well: for instance, Chetty et al. (2018) show that black children who move to areas with higher levels of upward
mobility on average have higher earnings in adulthood, even if the neighborhoods to which they move have relatively
few black families.


                                                         24
$19,000 per year (the median in the CMTO experimental sample). We find substantial treatment
effects in both of these groups, demonstrating that the program yields benefits even for the most
disadvantaged households.
   In Table 2, we estimate analogous treatment effects for several other subgroups of the population
by cutting the data on various baseline characteristics. In every one of the 37 subgroups considered
in the table, we find a highly statistically significant treatment effect on the rate of opportunity
moves of at least 30 percentage points. These groups include immigrants vs. U.S. natives, those
with or without English as their primary language, and families with more or less optimistic views
at baseline of moving to an opportunity area. There are no significant changes in overall lease-up
rates in any of the subgroups (Appendix Table 6), consistent with the patterns in Figure 4b for the
full sample.
   In sum, the CMTO intervention generates highly robust increases in moves to opportunity
across subgroups of the population.

V.D     Trade-offs on Other Dimensions of Unit Quality

Do the families induced to move to higher-opportunity areas by the CMTO program make sacrifices
on other dimensions of neighborhood or housing quality? To answer this question, we estimate
treatment effects on a variety of unit- and neighborhood-level characteristics.
   Figure 8a shows that the distance moved (and thereby distance back to one's prior neigh-
borhood) is similar for treatment and control families who leased up. Figure 8b shows that the
treatment also did not induce families to move to smaller housing units; if anything, families in the
treatment group lease slightly larger units than those in the control group (though the difference is
not statistically significant). Housing units rented by treatment group families are also quite similar
to those of the control group in terms of age, household appliances, and access to air conditioning
(Appendix Table 7, Panel B).
   Treatment group families move to neighborhoods whose characteristics are generally associated
with higher neighborhood quality ­ lower poverty rates, more college graduates, more two-parent
families, and higher scores on standard Kirwan indices of opportunity (Appendix Table 7, Panel
A). This is because treatment group families who moved to high-opportunity areas ended up in
neighborhoods that are fairly representative of high-opportunity areas in terms of observable char-
acteristics (Appendix Table 8). Because high-opportunity areas tend to have lower poverty rates,
more two-parent families, etc. (Chetty et al. 2018), the treatment produces gains on these dimen-


                                                  25
sions.
    In short, the moves to opportunity induced by the CMTO treatment did not require families
to make sacrifices in terms of observable neighborhood amenities or housing quality. One reason
this might be the case is that Seattle and King County offer higher payments for more expensive
neighborhoods, allowing families to access more expensive units in high-opportunity areas. Indeed,
Panel C of Figure 8 shows that treatment group families move to units with monthly rents that are
$188 higher on average than families in the control group. Given the structure of payment standards,
this marginal cost is entirely borne by the housing authority rather than the families themselves:
the treatment had no significant impact on families' out-of-pocket rent payments (Appendix Table
7). Understanding the trade-offs that would be induced by CMTO-type programs in a setting
without tiered payment structures is an interesting direction for further work.

V.E      Persistence and Neighborhood Satisfaction

Are the families who moved to high-opportunity areas as a result of the CMTO treatment satisfied
with their new neighborhoods and likely to stay there after moving? A key concern in any mobility
program is that moves to higher-opportunity areas may be short-lived, especially since many families
have not experienced these areas before and could revise their preferences after living there. In this
section, we examine these issues by analyzing whether families choose to stay in high-opportunity
areas after moving and using survey data to assess neighborhood satisfaction.
    We begin by evaluating whether families who moved to high-opportunity neighborhoods stay
there when their lease comes up for renewal. We have data on where families live up to February 6,
2020. Since most leases last for one year, we focus on families who leased up a unit before January
7, 2019, which gives them at least 1 year and 1 month to make second moves within our sample
window. Since families who lease up very quickly after receiving a voucher are a selected subsample,
we further restrict the sample to families who received vouchers before September 1, 2018. Among
the families who received their vouchers before September 1, 2018 and eventually leased up, around
90% leased a unit before January 7, 2019, limiting the scope for selection bias.36
    Figure 9a plots the fraction of families within this sample who initially leased a unit in a

  36. We can fully eliminate selection bias by comparing the fraction of families who live in high-opportunity areas
without limiting the sample to those who leased up before January 7, 2019, as in Figure 9. In Appendix Figure 5, we
see that CMTO increased the fraction of families living in high-opportunity areas by about 40 percentage points both
in February 2019 and February 2020, demonstrating that the intervention leads to sustained increases in exposure to
high-opportunity neighborhoods. The drawback of this estimate is that it does not isolate the rate of persistence in
new neighborhoods among families who moved because the change between February 2019 and 2020 is partly driven
by a small fraction (10%) of new lease-ups that occurred between those two points.


                                                        26
high-opportunity area alongside the fraction who live in a high-opportunity area as of February 6,
2020. The treatment effect of CMTO is highly persistent: families in the treatment group are 41
percentage points more likely to be living in a high-opportunity area after at least one year and
one month on lease, as compared with 45 pp when they first leased-up.37 This is because more
than 80% of families in both the control and treatment group renew their lease in the unit they
first leased (Figure 9b). These findings suggest that at least in the short-run ­ after one year of
experience in their new neighborhoods ­ families induced to move to opportunity by the CMTO
intervention do not exhibit a strong desire to move to the lower-opportunity neighborhoods they
would otherwise have chosen, consistent with Darrah and DeLuca (2014). One factor that may have
contributed to these high rates of persistence is that the families who moved to high-opportunity
areas in CMTO chose such neighborhoods without being required to do so to use their vouchers
(and hence are a selected subsample who exhibit a preference for such areas). In contrast, the
families in the Moving to Opportunity experimental group were required to move to low-poverty
areas to use their vouchers.
    To assess persistence over longer horizons and gauge the preferences of infra-marginal house-
holds (i.e., those who are not close to the margin of moving again), we supplement the short-term
persistence measures with survey data on neighborhood satisfaction. As part of the qualitative data
collection, we surveyed 130 randomly chosen families who had leased up units using their vouchers
about their satisfaction with their new neighborhoods. On average, these surveys were conducted
6 months after families had moved. As discussed in Section IV.B, families who responded to these
surveys are representative of the full sample on observable characteristics and there is no evidence
of selective attrition by treatment status. We therefore believe that inferences drawn from this
smaller subgroup of respondents are likely to yield unbiased estimates of treatment effects in our
broader experimental sample.
    Families in the treatment group express much greater satisfaction with their new neighborhoods
than control group families. At the end of their qualitative interviews, families were asked, "Which
of the following statements best describes how satisfied you are with your current neighborhood?,"
with five potential answers ranging from "very satisfied" to "very dissatisfied." Figure 10a shows
that the treatment increased the share of families who reported being "very satisfied" with their new
neighborhoods by 18.7 percentage points (s.e. = 10.1, p = 0.066), from 45.5% in the control group


  37. Households in the sample (i.e., who were issued a voucher before September 1, 2018 and leased-up before January
7, 2019), had been in their new units for 1 year and 4 months on average by Feb 6, 2020.


                                                         27
to 64.2% in the treatment group (see Appendix Figure 6 for the full distribution of responses).
    Families were also asked, "Which of the following statements best describes how you feel about
staying in your current neighborhood?," with five potential answers ranging from "very sure I want
to stay" to "very sure I want to move to a different neighborhood." Treatment group families are
17.4 percentage points (s.e. = 9.8, p = 0.076) more likely to say they are "very sure" about wanting
to stay in their new neighborhood (Figure 10b). In light of prior evidence that these subjective
assessments of satisfaction and persistence are highly predictive of subsequent move rates (Clark
and Ledwith 2006; Basolo and Yerena 2017), these findings suggest that treatment group families
will be more likely to stay in their new neighborhoods than typical housing voucher recipients in
the long run.
    To further explore the mechanism underlying these improvements in neighborhood satisfaction,
in Figure 11 we disaggregate the measures of satisfaction (Panel A) and likelihood of staying (Panel
B) by whether families moved to high-opportunity areas or not. In both the treatment and control
groups, families who moved to high-opportunity areas report much higher levels of satisfaction
and likelihoods of staying.38 These differences emerge only post-move: families in all four groups
report similarly low levels of satisfaction (Panel C) and low probabilities of staying (Panel D) in
their neighborhoods at the point of the baseline survey prior to randomization. Although the
comparisons in Figure 11 are based on endogenous choices rather than experimental variation, they
suggest that the key determinant of satisfaction is the neighborhoods in which families live rather
than a direct effect of the CMTO services themselves. In particular, the treatment effect on the the
fraction of families who report being very satisfied (18.7 %) is similar to what one would predict
based on the difference in satisfaction between families who moved to high vs. low opportunity
areas within the control group multiplied by the treatment effect on the fraction who move to
high-opportunity areas (59.7 ×43.1 = 25.7).39
    In sum, the sharp increases in neighborhood satisfaction and high levels of persistence in the
new neighborhoods allay the concern that the CMTO treatment may have steered families into

  38. The gains in satisfaction associated with moving to a high-opportunity area are slightly larger in the control
group than the treatment group, perhaps reflecting the fact that the few families who moved to high-opportunity
areas in the control group strongly preferred them to begin with, whereas the CMTO treatment induced families with
slightly weaker preferences to move as well.
  39. These findings also help address the concern that survey responses may be driven by social desirability bias,
whereby families in the treatment group might feel obliged to say positive things about the program and their
neighborhoods to the interviewers. To mitigate any such biases, interviewers (a) stressed that they were independent
from the PHAs and would not share their responses with the PHAs and (b) sought to develop rapport with families
at the beginning of the interviews ­ starting with an open invitation to "Tell us the story of your life" ­ before asking
CMTO-specific questions.


                                                           28
new neighborhoods that end up being a poor fit after they arrive. Instead, these findings suggest
that there are significant barriers to mobility that prevent low-income families with vouchers from
moving to higher-opportunity areas that they actually prefer ex-post.

V.F    Implications for Models of Neighborhood Choice

In this section, we formalize what we can learn from the experimental results about the role of
preferences vs. barriers in standard models of neighborhood choice.
   We begin by considering a frictionless model of the housing market in which all households live
in the neighborhoods that maximize their utility. In this setting, our treatment effect estimates
yield tight bounds on families' preferences for low vs. high-opportunity areas. We illustrate the
intuition for these bounds in Figure 12 and present algebraic derivations using a canonical model
of neighborhood choice with heterogeneous preferences in Appendix D. On the x-axis of Figure 12,
we plot a family's net willingness to pay (WTP) for a non-opportunity neighborhood. Formally,
the WTP is the indirect utility of moving to a non-opportunity neighborhood minus the indirect
utility of moving to an opportunity neighborhood, taking into account rental costs as well as the
baseline subsidies provided by the HCV program. Larger values on the x-axis correspond to stronger
preferences for non-opportunity neighborhoods (e.g., because of other amenities or proximity to
family).
   What is the distribution of WTP to move to a non-opportunity area in the population of CMTO
participants? Given that 17.6% of the control group that leased up moved to an opportunity
neighborhood (Figure 4c), a frictionless model inferring preferences from choices would imply that
only 17.6% of families leasing up with vouchers prefer living in opportunity neighborhoods. This
value is depicted by the open circle on the figure, where the y-axis shows the fraction of families
with WTP below a given level x (i.e., the CDF of the WTP distribution).
   To further characterize the distribution of WTP, note that in a purely frictionless model, the
services provided by CMTO could be purchased in the market at marginal cost, and hence would
be valued at most at $2,660 ­ the marginal cost of the CMTO program (see discussion in Appendix
D). Hence, the fact that 60.7% of families who lease up in the treatment group move to high-
opportunity areas would imply that 60.7% of households prefer living in opportunity neighborhoods
when provided the equivalent of a $2,660 subsidy to move to such areas. Put differently, 60.7% of
families have a WTP for low-opportunity areas below $2,660 ­ i.e., most families do not have a
strong distaste for high-opportunity areas. This value is depicted by the solid circle in Figure 12.


                                                 29
   Connecting these two points, as shown by the solid portion of CDF plotted in Figure 12, a
frictionless model would imply that 43.1 % of families who apply for housing vouchers have a WTP
for low-opportunity areas between $0 and $2,660. That is, the only way to rationalize our findings
in a model where families live in their preferred neighborhoods is that a large group of families
happen to be close to indifferent between high- and low-opportunity areas and thus are swayed by
the relatively low-cost CMTO intervention.
   This explanation, however, runs counter to two other experimental results documented above.
First, we find nearly uniform treatment effects across various subgroups of the population (Table 2).
It is unlikely that all of these subgroups would happen to have a distribution of WTP that places a
large mass of families close to indifference across neighborhoods. Second, families who are induced
to move to opportunity areas experience large increases in neighborhood satisfaction (Figure 10a),
contradicting the view that these families are close to indifference across neighborhoods.
   Our experimental findings thus challenge traditional economic models of residential sorting and
spatial equilibrium in which households are indifferent between locations given costs and amenities
(e.g., Rosen 1979; Roback 1982). A more plausible explanation for these findings is that some
families actually have a high WTP to move to opportunity but are prevented from doing so by
barriers they cannot easily address themselves through market services. More broadly, our findings
suggest that models in which preferences are the primary driver of neighborhood choice may not
provide an accurate account of what drives residential segregation, especially among low-income
families, consistent with evidence from other settings such as the Gautreaux Project in Chicago
(Charles 2003; DeLuca and Rosenbaum 2003; Desmond and Shollenberger 2015; DeLuca, Wood,
and Rosenblatt 2019).
   Although we focus on tenant preferences in our model, the same logic would hold in a generalized
model that permits heterogeneity in landlord preferences over tenants. In particular, any landlord
preference to rent to non-voucher holders in high-opportunity areas must be small enough to be
overcome by the CMTO treatment for 43% of families. Hence, strong preferences among landlords
over tenants' backgrounds are also unlikely to explain the segregation of low-income families into
lower-opportunity areas, consistent with Garboden et al. (2018).
   One reduced-form way to model barriers to neighborhood choice is as monetary search costs
that families pay to find housing, as is common in the modern urban economics literature (e.g.,
Wheaton 1990; Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan 2007; Kennan and Walker 2011; Galiani, Murphy,
and Pantano 2015). The sharp increases in neighborhood satisfaction from moving to opportunity


                                                 30
suggest that the search costs needed to rationalize our full set of experimental results must be
quite large, persistent, neighborhood-specific, and independent of distance moved.40 It is critical
to unpack what these search costs are and develop models that specify their structure explicitly
in order to understand how to reduce these costs and help families find housing in their preferred
neighborhoods. To this end, the rest of the paper focuses on characterizing the barriers families
face and the mechanisms through which CMTO reduced those barriers.


VI      Qualitative Evidence on Mechanisms

In this section, we explore the mechanisms underlying the treatment effects documented above
by presenting qualitative evidence from interviews with 161 families conducted between December
12th, 2018 and February 26th, 2020. These 161 families were randomly sampled from the study
population, stratified by PHA, treatment status, and voucher status (leased-up or still searching).
We oversampled families in the treatment group to maximize our power to learn about treatment
mechanisms. We successfully completed interviews with approximately 80% of the sample we
randomly selected for inclusion in the qualitative study (Appendix Table 2). As discussed in Section
IV.B, families who participated in these interviews are representative of the full study population on
observable characteristics and response rates were nearly identical across the treatment and control
groups. We then systematically coded the nearly 8,000 pages of transcripts from these interviews to
measure the prevalence of various themes and identify recurring patterns. Details on the methods
used to collect and code the data are given in Appendix C.
    We interviewed participants using an in-depth narrative approach, building on prior qualita-
tive research of mobility programs (Darrah and DeLuca 2014; DeLuca, Clampet-Lundquist, and
Edin 2016). We asked families about their lives broadly, such as their residential history, family
dynamics, and children's schooling. We also elicited information about the barriers that families
faced in moving to high-opportunity areas and the components of CMTO that were most useful in
addressing those barriers.41 This qualitative design is fruitful because it allows us to both identify
the prevalence of mechanisms we had postulated ex-ante and uncover new mechanisms that we
had not anticipated. This is especially helpful because supplementary analyses (reported in Section
  40. One prominent example of such a cost is racial discrimination by landlords, which has been incorporated into
models of housing search since at least Kain and Quigley (1975). While racial discrimination may be an important
barrier, it is worth noting that we find equally large treatment effects of the CMTO intervention for white families,
suggesting that it is not the sole barrier at play. In addition, our finding that the treatment did not affect distance
moved (Figure 8a) challenges standard parameterizations of search costs, which simply scale with distance moved.
  41. We also conducted interviews with control group members to understand why the absence of CMTO supports
makes opportunity moves so difficult.


                                                          31
VII below) suggest that some of the primary mechanisms we expected would matter ex-ante ­
namely financial assistance and provision of information about high-opportunity areas ­ do not in
fact appear to explain CMTO's impacts by themselves. Our qualitative results suggest that such
financial and informational resources are only effective when delivered through supportive meetings
with CMTO staff and deployed strategically by the staff at critical points of the search process.
    We structure our qualitative analysis in three parts. We begin with a descriptive characterization
of the families in the sample that sheds light on the challenges they face in searching for housing.
We then describe five key mechanisms that emerge in treatment group families' descriptions of
how CMTO helped them overcome these challenges. Finally, we show how the combination of
these mechanisms and the ability to customize the treatment to each family's particular needs was
central to the program's success, drawing on both the interviews and quantitative evidence from
our case management system on service utilization.

VI.A      Who are the Families Applying for Housing Vouchers?

Our conversations with families revealed several deeper dimensions of economic disadvantage and
barriers to housing search beyond the measures in the baseline survey data summarized in Table
1. A substantial share of the families (45%) report struggling with a major health problem, includ-
ing children with significant physical, mental or emotional needs. 29% had experienced domestic
violence.42 Many parents in the qualitative study describe their own childhoods as having been
traumatic and attribute current struggles with depression, anxiety, phobias, and anger to histories
of family "chaos," as one mother described it.
    Caregiving responsibilities and own health issues make maintaining consistent employment dif-
ficult for a large share of the household heads. Perhaps as a result of these factors, the families have
histories of housing insecurity and instability. Nearly one-fifth (19%) of the families we interviewed
had been evicted, and nearly half (49%) had been homeless in the past. The majority of household
heads (78%) had been previously "doubled-up," living in the homes of family members or friends.
    When we asked families to tell us about their residential histories, their accounts often included
descriptions of repeated denials when applying for rental housing, largely arising from credit prob-
lems. For example, one of the participants we met, Sandra, the mother of a thirteen-year old boy
with significant health problems, had not received her voucher yet at the point of our conversation.
Sandra told us she felt despondent about ever find housing in Seattle because of her poor credit
 42. These rates are likely lower-bound estimates, since they were voluntarily shared with interviewers. Had we asked
directly about domestic violence or struggles with mental health, these numbers would likely be higher.


                                                         32
history. She was frustrated and said, "I wish they'd do a criminal background check instead of a
credit [check]--I have no crimes."43
    Although they were desperate to secure housing, many families began the CMTO program
anxious about their prospects for finding it in the tight Seattle area housing market. The CMTO
parents were generally interested in moves to high-opportunity areas and believed such moves would
benefit both their children and themselves. However, they were pessimistic about the prospect of
landlords in such areas being willing to rent to them.
    Overall, the interviews paint a picture of families that have extremely limited time and resources
to devote to housing search. These findings are consistent with significant "scarcity" in mental
bandwidth in the terminology of Mullainathan and Shafir (2013), amplifying the scope for small
frictions and barriers to affect families' behavior.

VI.B      Five Mechanisms Underlying the CMTO Treatment Effects

Overall, treatment group families who moved to high-opportunity areas reported very positive
experiences with the CMTO program. 72% reported largely positive experiences, 25% reported
mixed or moderately positive experiences, and only 1% (one case) was largely negative in their
description of the CMTO process.
    We identified the specific mechanisms through which CMTO helped families move to high-
opportunity areas by first reading entire interview transcripts and observing which mechanisms
emerged as most salient from families' accounts of their experiences with CMTO. We then coded
all transcripts for these mechanisms and then recorded the frequency with which families mentioned
various themes. Families discussed five broad mechanisms: (1) emotional support from the program
staff that increased families' confidence about their ability to find housing; (2) increased excitement
about moving to high-opportunity neighborhoods; (3) a streamlined search process that reduced
demands on families' time and cognitive bandwidth; (4) brokering between the program staff and
landlords; and (5) strategically targeted short-term financial assistance.44 The rest of this section
illustrates these five mechanisms by presenting examples from specific interviews.




  43. This and other quotes included below were selected because they are representative of the modal experience
reported by treatment group families who leased up in opportunity areas with the program. To protect families'
identities, all names used below are pseudonyms chosen by respondents.
  44. Some of these mechanisms were anticipated in previous work identifying program components that led to suc-
cessful lease-ups in opportunity areas for the families in the Baltimore Housing Mobility Program (DeLuca and
Rosenblatt 2017).


                                                      33
Mechanism 1: Emotional Support

To learn about families' experiences with CMTO, we asked an open-ended question in our interviews
­ "tell me about CMTO" ­ before probing about any of the program specific details. Many families
responded by describing how emotionally supported they felt by the program staff, how confident
the program had made them feel, and how relieved they were when they began to realize what kind
of support they were going to receive. 61% of families who leased up in opportunity areas reported
that they felt support from CMTO staff.
   Families frequently used words like "blessing," "relief," and "miracle" to describe the CMTO
program. One mother even referred to a CMTO search assistance staff member as an "angel."
Katie, a 23-year-old mother living in North Seattle, told us that CMTO helped her "get a voice,"
and feel more confident dealing with property managers and negotiating her needs. She said, "I
kind of got to start speaking up and not being so scared... you can't lose your Section 8 for speaking
out." Dee, a mother of five, explained that without CMTO she would not have had "the courage to
even apply for this house" she was living in when we met her, given her credit history.
   Jackie, a former therapist with a nine-year-old son, told us in powerful terms how she felt when
she realized what the CMTO program would provide:
     "a light bulb went on. . . it was this whole flood of relief. . . it was just the supportive
     nature of having lots of conversations with [CMTO staff] about, that they could call
     the landlords, that they - just about all the different programs. And, you know, helping
     pay the deposit was immense. That saved me, because I don't know how I would have
     done that. Yeah, just, you know, personally, mentally, emotionally, and financially, in
     every way, they were supportive. . . they just sort of swooped in."
   Many families noted that the CMTO staff members' consistent communication and support
were critical to keeping them motivated throughout the search process. Mona, a mother of two
who moved to the Bellevue area, said "[the search assistance staff member] was on top of everything
on me. If it wasn't for her, I honestly think I would have lost my Section 8 because nobody was
willing to give us an opportunity." Tina, who moved to North Seattle with her sons, excitedly told
us, "wow this program, like they're with you at all times, they help you they're there to guide you."
   These accounts differed from what we heard from control group members, like Arya, who wished
she had more support when looking for housing for herself and her nine-year-old daughter. Arya
described having a difficult time during a recent visit to an apartment leasing office, "could I get
somebody to meet me there that might just sit there with me to, you know, provide that ­ I
don't know, like, to explain the paperwork to me more or to be a second ear also. Because yeah,
sometimes, I just ­ I have communication issues like understanding the person and I feel rushed

                                                 34
because I can't get ­ I don't have the time to just get it out. So, I wanted somebody to come with
me and [the PHA] emailed me back that they don't provide that service."

Mechanism 2: Increased Motivation to Move to Opportunity

In addition to the support they felt from the CMTO staff, many families also reported that they
became more motivated to participate in the program because of the possibility of moving to a high-
opportunity area. They recalled learning about the benefits for their children's long-term success
during the initial study intake process and throughout their meetings with CMTO search assistance
staff. Many reported feeling "excited" by the prospect of living somewhere that, as Hiba, a mother
of three, told us, "there is research they've shown. . . [there] are more opportunities, there are more
graduations from school. . . That is what we are looking for." Melinda, a mother with a two-year
old son, was clear that she was "tired of living around chaos," and became quite emotional when
she heard that the program was about more than just providing housing assistance. She explained,
"She [the CMTO staff member] made me cry when she kind of explained to me what the program
does, like it's not just we pay your rent . . . it's for to make sure that not only you are in a good area
but your kid can grow up in a good area and be successful it's like it made me so happy to think
that my son is going to be in a area that can just help him be a good part of society." Overall, 78%
of the treatment group families who moved to high-opportunity areas referenced their knowledge
of research showing that moves to these areas would benefit their children. Nearly one-third (31%)
of these families reported that their motivation to move was specifically driven by a desire to live
in a higher-opportunity area.
   Several families reported that the CMTO staff pitched the program more as a question of what
families want for themselves, and what their vision for the future is, rather than a set of rules or
requirements. This framing made some families feel like they were treated with care and respect,
and that they were part of the process--neither forced into it nor isolated from it, in contrast to
some of their experiences with other social service agencies. During our ethnographic observations of
CMTO meetings, we watched as families were provided with a considerable amount of information
and maps detailing all of the resources and amenities available in high-opportunity neighborhoods.
Then the conversation between parents and the search assistance staff became an interactive and
customized discussion of how those resources could fit into their bigger plan for themselves and
their children. Dee told us, "[the CMTO staff member] broke down the neighborhoods in ways
that I never would have looked at." Given how unpredictable housing situations had been for many


                                                   35
CMTO families, this was the first time some of them had the bandwidth and guidance to think
these things through (see DeLuca, Wood, and Rosenblatt (2019) on reactive moves). Ashley, who
was homeless before she and her daughter moved with CMTO, explained:
     "It was good because it gave you a breakdown of what you needed to do, questions you
     need to ask, things you need to think about like school district, grocery stores, public
     transportation. . . after that, I'm like, "Well, these are things that are really important
     to me." And you didn't think about ­ you don't think about how something so simple is
     so important. . . So, now, when I came into this [move], I knew what I wanted. I wanted
     something close for all these things and something for my daughter."
   While many families spoke of a greater motivation to move to high-opportunity areas ­ perhaps
starting to realize that this was a feasible, attainable goal ­ remarkably few (<3%) framed their
CMTO experience in terms of simply receiving more information about the existence of such areas.
Indeed, many families pointed out that they were already well aware that some neighborhoods
offered much better opportunities for their kids. Sami, a mother of four school-aged children, told
us, "I always like think to move like Bellevue or I always heard like that I have friends here for they
-- they just move for their kids to school, I always heard like [Bellevue] school is better than Seattle
area, . . . so I always wish to move here if I can afford it, so that's when I get the voucher and when
CMTO told me that you have to do that [to get the additional assistance], that was my wish I
was like, yeah." Overall, we find little evidence in the qualitative interviews that the provision of
information ­ a mechanism that has received increasing attention in economics in recent years ­ is
itself a central driver of changes in the neighborhoods where CMTO families ended up moving.

Mechanism 3: Streamlining the Search Process

Parents who participated in CMTO were juggling a number of things alongside their housing
searches--including child care, multiple jobs, the fallout from domestic violence, and anxiety about
becoming homeless. The many moving parts of the search process--from online searches to the
landlord calls, apartment visits, security deposit paperwork, background checks, applications, in-
spections, and voucher payment paperwork--were often overwhelming for parents. It also took
precious time away from their children. As Lisa, who moved with her children to the Lake City
area of Seattle, said, "it was like me staring at my phone [to do online housing searches] like while
he's playing around and the less I have. . . to do that takes away from like me focusing on him or
the other things that I need to do is the better."
   The CMTO staff locators were able to reduce this stress and streamline the search process by
giving families clear guidance on what to do. 73% of families who moved to opportunity areas


                                                  36
mention that their housing search and lease-up processes were made simpler, quicker and less
overwhelming by the assistance they received from CMTO staff. Some families also referred to a
"plan" that they worked on with the CMTO search assistance staff. Others mentioned doing their
"homework" to search for places, practice their landlord phone call script, and write down their
attempts to find housing in their "search log."
   The program also reduced the tax of fruitless and demoralizing housing searches by directly
providing listings of rental units that were owned by landlords and property management companies
with whom the CMTO staff had built relationships. The CMTO staff built trust with property
owners and managers and increased the information these housing providers have about families,
thus reducing the influence of "Section 8" stereotypes. Melinda explained how the list of referrals
she received from her housing locator made it easier to find the place she moved into:
     "She gave me a list of apartments that CMTO worked with and I just based my search
     off of that list, so, cuz I was nervous about my credit and I just didn't wanna go through
     a whole bunch of denials if, you know, they're familiar with this program, then it'll be
     easier for me to get in. . . I don't think I would've tried out here honestly without them
     giving me like the areas that they feel like are more opportunities."

Mechanism 4: Landlord Brokering

The CMTO staff played a key role in facilitating relationships between prospective tenants and
landlords, both in preparing the tenants before they met landlords and in participating in con-
versations with landlords themselves. 61% of the families interviewed reported that CMTO staff
helped negotiate directly with landlords on their behalf during some part of the process.
   One key element of housing search preparation was the creation of a "rental resume," a docu-
ment that families could use to present themselves to landlords. The essays helped families explain
the circumstances surrounding barriers to housing, like poor credit histories, evictions or unem-
ployment. Some families felt empowered by creating their rental resumes to help move beyond past
barriers and achieve their hoped-for future through opportunity moves. The resumes also allowed
the housing search assistance staff to better describe families in their conversations with prospective
landlords.
   Nicole, who moved with her 5-year-old son, described in detail how the rental resume seemed to
make a big difference to the leasing company she ended up working with, despite her spotty credit
history:
     "Some landlords, you know, your credit could get denied like here like mine did and
     they could like you based on that [rental resume] and then, [ask] you [for] a higher

                                                  37
      deposit and that's what happened here. . . .because I had that credit resume explaining
      the four derogatory marks on my credit, how they got there, how long they've been
      there, what I'm doing to dispute them, how I'm getting them off if I'm on a payment
      plan like. . . And because of that, staff was just like, "Well, I mean, you seem smart, you
      seem like you're prepared, these things on your credit don't seem like a big deal..." And
      sure enough, she was like, "Just give her a chance, just higher deposit." So, that, it
      helped."
   Many families also mentioned how valuable it was to have the housing search assistance staff
directly speak with landlords on the CMTO participants' behalf. The staff lent families additional
credibility during difficult conversations or when landlords seem on the edge of not accepting fam-
ilies. Lakeisha, a house cleaner who moved with her 9-year-old daughter, noted that having the
CMTO housing search assistance staff represent her when talking with landlords "felt like it's a
reference." Dee's CMTO staff person helped her move into a unit with a landlord who had never
rented to a voucher holder before. She recounted the sales pitch the CMTO staff used to explain
how the program worked and ended up benefiting both the landlord and the family:
     "She did the inspection, she did a lot of talking to the landlord and getting them to
     understand the program helping him figure out how to get started with the program or
     Section 8 and all, that was her. She worked with us and worked with the landlord. . . and
     did very good with helping a first time ever landlord, this is his first time even hearing
     about Section 8. . . .an opportunity for him to help us in a sideline kind of way, he doesn't
     really have to do anything except for say yes and we're glad that we can help with this
     people move into this neighborhood to better resources and stuff for their kids, that was
     his contribution to my kids' future."

Mechanism 5: Short-Term Financial Assistance.

Finally, many families remarked that the customized financial assistance they received from CMTO
mattered for removing upfront roadblocks. 81% of the families we interviewed mentioned receiving
financial assistance as part of the CMTO program. As Booth, a mother of two, said pointedly,
"Well, if I had money for a security deposit, I'd [already] be paying rent somewhere." Lou explained
how CMTO financial assistance made it easier for him and his wife by covering a number of upfront
expenses, "CMTO, they help with the deposit, and you know, moving costs, if you have to bring
stuff out of storage and things like that, and Section 8 pays for your first and last month rent. . . .
You can move in without any hassle, so it really makes, makes it a lot easier to just focus on finding
a place."
   Importantly, the interviews suggest that it is not just providing uniform lump-sum short-term
financial assistance ­ as one would do in a more standardized program ­ that makes the program
effective. Rather, it is the fact that the CMTO staff deploy funds strategically at the points at

                                                  38
which it is easiest to lose hope and lose landlords. Such timely financial assistance included paying
rental application fees, paying "holding" fees so families don't lose their units while applications are
being processed, clearing up old utility bills or paying for new ones, and providing more generous
security deposits for families with a past eviction or poor credit record. For example, Stive, a father
of two, explained:
     "She [the CMTO search assistance staff member] paid security deposit, I gave her the
     access to my personal page in the [website] of the home, of this apartment complex.
     And yes, it was really helpful it was quick, because I was so afraid [of losing the place]
     when I find it out that I have to make a decision about [taking the apartment], and
     in the same time I have to pay security deposits and a couple fees [when] I don't have
     resources."

VI.C     Customization of Services to Families' Needs

The CMTO staff facilitated lease-ups in opportunity areas by combining several of the five ap-
proaches discussed above, depending upon each family's specific needs. For example, the emotional
and psychological support keeps families connected to the program and optimistic about the end
result of the process, which is necessary to motivate their individual housing search efforts, and
to get them to the point where the CMTO staff can do the work of connecting with landlords in
opportunity areas and completing the lease-up process. The customization of CMTO services ­
with nonprofit staff being able to flexibly respond to each family's specific situation and needs ­
appears to be crucial to its success. For instance, Jennifer, a mother of four, noted that the CMTO
staff "understood the situation that I was in" and helped her accordingly.
   Although many families mentioned several of the five mechanisms described above in their
interviews, the intensity with which they used each component of the CMTO program varied
greatly. This is borne out by data on service utilization from our case management system, which
tracked the duration and nature of each of the contacts between CMTO staff and families. We
report statistics on rates of service utilization in Appendix Table 9a. CMTO treatment group
families who moved to a high-opportunity area received 7.05 hours of staff time on average, but
there was substantial heterogeneity in the utilization of these services, with an interquartile range of
about 4 hours to 9 hours. Similarly mean financial assistance for treatment group families leasing
up in opportunity areas was $1,983 dollars, with an interquartile range of $958 to $3009. 47%
of these families found the unit they moved into through a direct referral to a landlord found by
CMTO staff, but 53% identified the units they moved into on their own. Different families also
used different subsets of these services: for instance, the correlation between the number of hours


                                                  39
of staff time used and the amount of financial assistance used is 0.19 (Appendix Table 9d).
    When we talked to families in the control group, we virtually never heard them discuss receiv-
ing this kind of customized assistance, although several mentioned that they wished they had it.
Christina, the mother of a six-year-old daughter, described how much she struggled to find housing
herself:
      "I went through [local housing provider agency] to see if they could help me find an
      apartment. Nobody really helps you find an apartment. They just tell you that they
      like can help you get into it or they tell you that they can help you find one but they
      don't end up doing that cuz they have a lot of people that they're working with. . . I
      found this place [on my own]. I have sent emails back and forth begging to get in
      here. . . my application was sitting downstairs approved for like two days while I'm still
      in cars and outside with my daughter trying to figure it out. I could've been in here at
      an empty apartment at least with warmth. So, I ended up getting accepted for here.
      [Local non-profit housing provider] ended up paying for the move in fees and stuff like
      that which was a blessing but I feel like maybe if they could be more personal with
      their clients that they're accepting and taking on that I feel like that would help with
      the homeless situation a lot."
    In sum, the CMTO program appears to have had large impacts through a combination of
mechanisms that addressed each family's specific challenges, while also negotiating with landlords
who might not otherwise rent to a family with a voucher. In light of the findings on scarcity of
bandwidth in Section VI.A, one way to summarize the program's mechanism is that it provides
emotional and other support that enables families to optimize over neighborhood choice as posited
in traditional economic models, thereby allowing them to realize their inherent preference for higher
opportunity areas (Harvey et al. 2019; DeLuca and Jang 2020). We believe that the fact that the
intervention cannot be easily codified into a standardized set of protocols applied to all families
underlies its efficacy. The customization of services may also have been beneficial in reducing
program costs, as families who did not need certain components of the services (e.g., help with
landlords or security deposit assistance) took up less resources from those parts of the program.
The general lesson may be that having a highly motivated case worker support each family in
overcoming the barriers they face can help them make much more effective use of housing assistance
programs (and perhaps other public programs more generally).


VII        Alternative Policies to Increase Moves to Opportunity

In this section, we compare the impacts of the CMTO program to other, more standardized policies
that aim to help families move to higher opportunity areas: financial incentives and information
provision. We estimate the effects of financial incentives by analyzing the impacts of reforms

                                                 40
implemented in Seattle and King County that increased voucher payment standards in certain
high-rent and high-opportunity neighborhoods. We examine the effects of information provision
in relation to the treatment effects of CMTO by comparing our experimental results to estimates
from other studies that evaluated the effects of information provision using randomized trials.

VII.A     Effects of Financial Incentives

One prominent approach to help families move to higher-opportunity neighborhoods is to offer
higher voucher payments in higher-rent or higher-opportunity neighborhoods within a metro area.
This is perhaps the most natural approach to reduce monetary search costs in standard economic
models of neighborhood choice. It is also a policy, termed Small Area Fair Market Rents, that has
gained popularity among housing authorities in recent years.
   We estimate the effects of such financial incentives on families' neighborhood choices by ana-
lyzing two payment standard reforms. The first, implemented by KCHA in March 2016, increased
payment standards in selected neighborhoods that had higher rents and scored higher in Kirwan
indices of opportunity. The second, implemented by SHA in April 2018, effectively increased pay-
ment standards in exactly the same areas that we designated as "high opportunity" in CMTO.
We analyze the impacts of these reforms using difference-in-difference designs, as in Collinson and
Ganong (2018).
   KCHA Increase in Payment Standards in High-Rent Areas. King County moved from a two-tier
to a five-tier payment standard system in March 2016. The reform increased voucher payments
in areas with higher rents. Appendix Figure 7 shows the resulting changes in payment standards
across King County, which ranged from reductions of $220 per month in a few neighborhoods up
to increases of $595 in the most expensive areas.
   We use the PHAs' historical administrative data to analyze how the neighborhood location
choices of families in KCHA changed around the reform relative to families in SHA. SHA did not
enact any changes in its policies at the same time and hence serves as a natural counterfactual.
   Figure 13a plots the fraction of families who move to high-opportunity areas (as defined based
on our CMTO designation in Section III) by the month in which families were issued their vouchers.
To reduce noise, we group months into pairs of two in this and subsequent figures. The fraction
of families who leased up in high-opportunity areas fluctuates around 20% both before and after
the reform, which is marked by the dashed vertical line. In particular, there is no evidence of an
increase in the rate of moves to high-opportunity neighborhoods in KCHA (the "treatment" group


                                                41
for the purposes of this quasi-experiment) relative to SHA (the "control" group).
    Under the identification assumption that trends in KCHA and SHA would have remained similar
absent the reform, we can estimate the causal effect of the KCHA payment standard reform on
the rate of moves to high-opportunity areas using a standard difference-in-difference regression
specification. We compare the rate of moves to high-opportunity areas in KCHA and SHA in the
eight months before vs. after the policy change by running OLS regressions of the form:


                        yi =  + 1 KCHAi + 2 P osti + 3 KCHAi × P osti + i ,                                      (2)

where yi is an indicator for moving to a high-opportunity neighborhood, KCHAi is an indicator
for receiving a voucher from KCHA (rather than SHA), and P osti is an indicator for being issued
a voucher in or after March 2016. We estimate that the causal effect of the reform on the rate of
moves to high-opportunity areas is a statistically insignificant 3 =-3.6% (s.e. = 5.8), as shown in
Column 1 of Table 4. Controlling for family size and other covariates does not affect this estimate
significantly (Column 2).45 Hence, the KCHA reform increased the rate of opportunity moves by
at most 7.7pp at the top of the 95% confidence interval ­ substantially smaller than the CMTO
treatment effect of 37.9%, shown by the dashed line in Figure 13a as a reference. Indeed, only
17.5% of KCHA families with children moved to high-opportunity areas in the eight months after
the payment standard increase, far below the 53.0% rate achieved through the CMTO program in
King County.
    Our analysis of the KCHA reform shows that raising payment standards in more expensive
neighborhoods ­ as is typically done in SAFMR policies ­ does not necessarily induce families to
move to higher-opportunity areas.46 One interpretation of this result is that financial incentives
have smaller impacts on neighborhood choice than the customized services offered through CMTO.
An alternative interpretation is that incentivizing families to move to more expensive neighborhoods
  45. Analogous DD specifications using median rents as the dependent variable suggest that the SAFMR reform
induced families to move to more expensive areas (Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4), consistent with Collinson and
Ganong (2018), although the estimates are somewhat imprecise and hence not statistically significant.
  46. In contrast with this finding, Collinson and Ganong (2018) find that SAFMRs induced moves to higher-quality
neighborhoods in Dallas, where quality is defined as an index of tract-level poverty rate, test scores, unemployment
rate, the share of children with single mothers, and the violent crime rate. By contrast, we find that SAFMRs in King
County had no impact on either an index of neighborhood quality similar to that used by Collinson and Ganong or
the Opportunity Atlas measures of upward mobility. One explanation for the different results is that the correlation
between rents and upward mobility is 0.56 in Dallas, significantly higher than the 0.18 correlation in King County.
The tighter link between rents and opportunity in Dallas might increase the impacts of SAFMRs on opportunity
moves there. That said, Collinson and Ganong kindly replicated their analysis using the Opportunity Atlas measure
of upward mobility and found an impact on the mean predicted rank of children with parents at the 25th percentile
of 0.86 percentiles. Although this is a significant gain, it is still considerably smaller than the impact of CMTO,
supporting the view that financial incentives have much smaller effects than customized mobility services.


                                                         42
does not induce moves to opportunity because rents are not very highly correlated with upward
mobility in King County (Figure 1b). To distinguish between these explanations, we now turn to
a second quasi-experiment.
   SHA Increase in Payment Standards in High-Opportunity Areas. In March 2018, SHA intro-
duced a Family Access Supplement (FAS) that effectively increased payment standards in areas
that were designated as "high opportunity" in the CMTO study. If a family moved to an opportu-
nity area and the unit rent exceeded the voucher payment standard by an amount that would cause
the household to pay more than 40% of their income, the FAS paid for the unit's rent minus 40%
of the family's income (subject to a maximum, which was $400 for 2 bedroom units). For families
who moved to an opportunity area, this additional rental support amounted to $144 per month on
average.
   The FAS was initiated at the same time as a pilot phase of the CMTO intervention prior to the
CMTO experiment. It continued throughout the pilot and the experiment, effectively providing
families in the control group higher payments to move to high-opportunity areas than they would
have received had they gotten their vouchers before March 2018. The FAS was restricted to families
with at least one child under 18. We therefore estimate the impact of the FAS by comparing families
with children to families without children in SHA.47
   Figure 13b plots the fraction of families moving to high-opportunity areas before and after the
introduction of the FAS (shown by the dashed line) for households with vs. without children.
During the CMTO pilot phase (shown in the shaded region), all families with children received
CMTO services. The fraction of families moving to high-opportunity areas trended similarly prior
to the CMTO pilot and the FAS payment standard reform. During the pilot, the rate of moves to
opportunity for those with children spiked up to 80%, while the rate of such moves for the those
without children (who were untreated) remained steady. After the pilot, the rate of opportunity
moves (based on data for the CMTO control group) fell precipitously for families with children.
   Under the identification assumption that the rate of opportunity moves for families with vs.
without children would have remained similar after March 2018 in the absence of the FAS, we can
infer that the SHA reform caused a small increase in the rate of moves to high-opportunity ar-
eas. Using a standard difference-in-differences specification comparing the rate of high-opportunity
moves among families with vs. without children in SHA in the six months before March 2018 vs.


  47. We do not use KCHA as a counterfactual here because KCHA itself was implementing its CMTO pilot at the
same time that SHA introduced the FAS.


                                                    43
the six months after May 2018 (after the CMTO pilot ended, using only families in the CMTO
control), we estimate that the FAS increased the rate of opportunity moves by 13.8 pp (s.e. = 5.1),
as shown in Column 5 of Table 4. This is roughly one-third the size of the CMTO treatment effect.
    The FAS has a recurring monthly cost of $144 on average for families who move to high-
opportunity areas, which amounts to $12,100 over 7 years (the average period for which families
use their vouchers). This is substantially larger than the cost of CMTO mobility services, which
are about $5,010 per family that moved to a high-opportunity area. We therefore conclude that
financial incentives have significantly smaller impacts per dollar of expenditure than customized
mobility services even when targeted directly to high-opportunity areas.
    Although these findings show that standardized financial incentives by themselves have lim-
ited impacts on the fraction of families who move to opportunity, there could potentially be an
interaction effect whereby the mobility services in CMTO were more effective because the housing
authorities were offering enhanced payment standards that enabled families to move to more ex-
pensive, higher-opportunity neighborhoods. While we do not have direct experimental evidence on
what the treatment effects of CMTO would be in the absence of such tiered payment standards, we
find that 34% of the treatment group families who moved to high-opportunity areas leased up units
that they would have been able to afford even in the absence of the enhanced payment standards
described above (i.e., in the absence of the FAS supplement in SHA and under the pre-March-2016
two-tier system in KCHA). This finding suggests that CMTO mobility services would have substan-
tial impacts even in the absence of differential payment standards across neighborhoods, though
further work is necessary to quantify how effective the program would be in such settings.48

VII.B      Effects of Information Provision

Another alternative to customized housing search assistance is to provide information in a more
standardized manner. Bergman, Chan, and Kapor (2019) randomized the provision of information
to families about the quality of schools associated with rental units on GoSection8.com, a housing
search platform widely used by voucher holders. They find small positive impacts of this low-cost
intervention on the fraction of families who move to areas with better schools, with treatment
effects considerably smaller than those induced by CMTO. Families who received the information
treatment moved to neighborhoods with schools scoring 0.1 standard deviations (SD) better on
  48. This 34% figure should be interpreted as a lower bound on the fraction of families one would be observe moving
to a high-opportunity area with the CMTO treatment in the absence of the higher payment standards since many
families would presumably still move to high-opportunity areas, but choose less expensive units than the ones they
chose given current policies.


                                                        44
state tests on average. By contrast, the CMTO intervention induced treatment group families to
move to neighborhoods with schools scoring 0.5 SDs higher on state tests. Moreover, using data
from the Opportunity Atlas, Bergman et al. estimate that the effect of the additional information
on predicted household income rank is 16% as large as the CMTO impact on upward mobility
shown in Figure 4d.
   Schwartz, Mihaly, and Gala (2017) report results from a randomized trial in Chicago in which
families receiving housing vouchers were given $500 of financial assistance and light-touch mobility
counseling services to move to a high-opportunity area (defined based on a composite index of
poverty rates, job access, and other characteristics). The counseling services offered in the Chicago
trial were largely informational and "client-led" as opposed to the more intensive counselor-led
services offered in CMTO. They find that these treatments had no impact on the rate of high-
opportunity moves: less than 12% of families moved to high-opportunity neighborhoods even with
these incentives and supports.
   Supplementary evidence from our own data further supports the view that standardized infor-
mation provision is unlikely to be adequate to induce moves to opportunity. The CMTO treatment
increased the fraction of families living in high-opportunity Census tracts substantially (48 pp)
even among families who lived in high-opportunity areas at baseline (Table 2). Since these families
presumably were familiar with these neighborhoods to begin with, this finding weighs against the
view that a lack of information is the central reason families do not move to opportunity. Further-
more, 72% of families report that they feel "good" or "very good" about moving to an opportunity
neighborhood in the baseline survey, before the CMTO intervention began, again suggesting that
they do not lack information about such areas.
   Together, the results in this section suggest that the mechanisms through which the CMTO
intervention works are not simply the provision of financial incentives or information about high-
opportunity areas. These findings are consistent with the qualitative evidence discussed above, and
suggest that customized support in the search process and help in engaging landlords are likely to
be pivotal elements in the program's success.


VIII      Conclusion

Low-income families tend to live in neighborhoods that offer limited prospects for upward income
mobility, amplifying the persistence of poverty across generations. This paper has shown that
this pattern of segregation is not driven by deep-rooted preferences among tenants or landlords.

                                                 45
Rather, low-income families live in such areas primarily because of barriers that prevent them from
moving to higher-opportunity neighborhoods ­ barriers that can be overcome through short-term
assistance in the housing search process. These findings challenge canonical economic models of
neighborhood choice in which residential sorting patterns are determined primarily by families'
preferences and call for greater modeling of the underlying structure of search costs. The findings
also advance canonical sociological models of neighborhood choice and residential mobility, in which
barriers such as discrimination have received greater emphasis (D. S. Massey and N. A. Denton
1993; Yinger 1995; South and Crowder 1997), because they reveal that some of the barriers families
face can be overcome through a modest amount of assistance in the housing search process.49
    More broadly, our findings suggest that the growing economic segregation of American cities
(Reardon and Bischoff 2011) is not an inevitable consequence of preferences (either among tenants
or landlords), but rather a trend that can be addressed through modest changes in public policies.
In particular, redesigning rental assistance programs to provide customized search assistance in
addition to existing financial support could reduce segregation and thereby increase upward mobility
significantly. Such programs could have little net cost to taxpayers, as the costs of the up-front
services could be offset by the increased tax revenue paid by children who earn more when they
grow up.
    Going forward, it would be useful to replicate the CMTO program implemented in Seattle and
King County in other cities to understand whether the program can be scaled nationally with the
same level of effectiveness. In parallel, recognizing that not all families can move to opportunity,
we also hope to identify place-based investments that can improve outcomes for residents of lower-
opportunity areas.




  49. These conclusions are in line with Krysan and Crowder's (2017) discussion of policies to break the cycle of
segregation.


                                                       46
References
Acevedo-Garcia, Dolores, Nancy McArdle, Erin F. Hardy, Unda Ioana Crisan, Bethany Romano,
    David Norris, Mikyung Baek, and Jason Reece. 2014. "The Child Opportunity Index: Improving
    Collaboration Between Community Development And Public Health." PMID: 25367989, Health
    Affairs 33 (11): 1948­1957. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2014.0679. eprint: https://doi.org/10.
    1377/hlthaff.2014.0679. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2014.0679.

Anderson, Elijah. 1990. Streetwise: Race, class, and change in an urban community. University of
    Chicago Press.

Andrews, Isaiah, Toru Kitagawa, and Adam McCloskey. 2019. Inference on Winners. NBER Work-
    ing Paper 25456. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, January. https://www.nber.
    org/papers/w25456.

Basolo, Victoria, and Anaid Yerena. 2017. "Residential mobility of low-income, subsidized house-
    holds: a synthesis of explanatory frameworks." Housing Studies 32 (6): 841­862.

Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan. 2007. "A Unified Framework for Measuring
    Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods." Journal of Political Economy 115 (4): 588­638.

Becker, Howard S, Blanche Geer, Everett C Hughes, and Anselm L Strauss. 1961. Boys in white:
    Student culture in medical school. New Brunswick. NJ: Transaction Books.

Bergman, Peter, Eric Chan, and Adam Kapor. 2019. "Housing Search Frictions: Evidence from
    Detailed Search Data and a Field Experiment."

Boyd, Melody, and Stefanie DeLuca. 2017."Fieldwork with in-depth interviews: How to get strangers
    in the city to tell you their stories." Methods in social epidemiology: 239­253.

Burawoy, Michael. 1979. Manufacturing consent. Changes in the labor process under monopoly
    capitalism. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Charles, Camille Zubrinsky. 2003. "The Dynamics of Racial Residential Segregation." Annual Re-
    view of Sociology 29:167­207.

      . 2005. "Can we live together? Racial preferences and neighborhood outcomes." The geography
    of opportunity: Race and housing choice in metropolitan America 45.

Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R Jones, and Sonya R Porter. 2018. The
    Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility. Working Paper, Working
    Paper Series 25147. National Bureau of Economic Research, October.

Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2018a. "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
    Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3): 1107­
    1162.



                                                47
Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2018b. "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
    Mobility II: County-Level Estimates." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3): 1163­1228.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. "The Effects of Exposure to Better
    Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment."
    American Economic Review 106 (4): 855­902.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emanuel Saez. 2013. "The Economic Impacts
    of Tax Expenditures: Evidence from Spatial Variation Across the U.S." SOI Whitepaper.

Chyn, Eric. 2018. "Moved to opportunity: The long-run effects of public housing demolition on
    children." American Economic Review 108 (10): 3028­56.

Clark, William AV. 2008. "Reexamining the moving to opportunity study and its contribution to
    changing the distribution of poverty and ethnic concentration." Demography 45 (3): 515­535.

Clark, William AV, and Valerie Ledwith. 2006. "Mobility, housing stress, and neighborhood con-
    texts: evidence from Los Angeles." Environment and Planning A 38 (6): 1077­1093.

Collinson, Robert, Ingrid Gould Ellen, and Jens Ludwig. 2015. "Low-income housing policy." In
    Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, 2:59­126. University of
    Chicago Press.

Collinson, Robert, and Peter Ganong. 2018. "How Do Changes in Housing Voucher Design Affect
    Rent and Neighborhood Quality?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10 (2): 62­
    89.

Cunningham, Mary K, and Susan J Popkin. 2002. CHAC Mobility Counseling Assessment. Final
    Report. Technical report. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.

Darrah, Jennifer, and Stefanie DeLuca. 2014. ""Living here has changed my whole perspective":
    How escaping inner-city poverty shapes neighborhood and housing choice." Journal of Policy
    Analysis and Management 33 (2): 350­384.

Davis, Morris A, Jesse Gregory, and Daniel A Hartley. 2018. "The Long Run Effects of Low Income
    Housing on Neighborhood Composition."

Davis, Morris A, Jesse Gregory, Daniel A Hartley, and Kegon Tan. 2017. "Neighborhood choices,
    neighborhood effects and housing vouchers." FRB of Chicago Working Paper No. WP-2017-2.

DeLuca, Stefanie, Susan Clampet-Lundquist, and Kathryn Edin. 2016. Coming of Age in the Other
    America. Russell Sage Foundation.

DeLuca, Stefanie, and Christine Jang. Forthcoming 2020. "Decision-making in the Housing and
    Neighborhood Selection Process." City and Community.




                                               48
DeLuca, Stefanie, and James E Rosenbaum. 2003. "If low-income blacks are given a chance to live
    in white neighborhoods, will they stay? Examining mobility patterns in a quasi-experimental
    program with administrative data." Housing Policy Debate 14 (3): 305­345.

DeLuca, Stefanie, and Peter Rosenblatt. 2017. "Walking away from the wire: Housing mobility and
    neighborhood opportunity in Baltimore." Housing Policy Debate 27 (4): 519­546.

DeLuca, Stefanie, Holly Wood, and Peter Rosenblatt. 2019. "Why poor families move (and where
    they go): Reactive mobility and residential decisions." City & Community 18 (2): 556­593.

Desmond, Matthew, and Tracey Shollenberger. 2015. "Forced displacement from rental housing:
    Prevalence and neighborhood consequences." Demography 52 (5): 1751­1772.

Deutscher, Nathan. 2018."Place, Jobs, Peers and the Importance of the Teenage Years: Exposure Ef-
    fects and Intergenerational Mobility." Australian National University, unpublished manuscript.

Edin, Kathryn, and Laura Lein. 1997. Making ends meet: How single mothers survive welfare and
    low-wage work. Russell Sage Foundation.

Emerson, Michael O, Karen J Chai, and George Yancey. 2001. "Does race matter in residential
    segregation? Exploring the preferences of white Americans." American Sociological Review:
    922­935.

Fahle, Erin M, Benjamin R Shear, Demetra Kalogrides, S Reardon, Richard DiSalvo, and Andrew
    D Ho. 2017. "Stanford education data archive."

Faurschou, Ebbe. 2018. "Quasi-experimental evidence of neighbourhood exposure effects in Den-
    mark." PhD diss., University of Copenhagen.

Feins, Judith, Debra McInnis, and Susan J Popkin. 1997. Counseling in the moving to opportunity
    demonstration program. Technical report. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Galiani, Sebastian, Alvin Murphy, and Juan Pantano. 2015. "Estimating neighborhood choice mod-
    els: Lessons from a housing assistance experiment." American Economic Review 105 (11): 3385­
    3415.

Garboden, Philip ME, Eva Rosen, Stefanie DeLuca, and Kathryn Edin. 2018. "Taking stock: What
    drives landlord participation in the housing choice voucher program." Housing Policy Debate
    28 (6): 979­1003.

Harvey, Hope, Kelley Fong, Kathryn Edin, and Stefanie DeLuca. 2019. "Forever Homes and Tem-
    porary Stops: Housing Search Logics and Residential Selection." Social Forces.




                                               49
HUD. 2016. Establishing a More Effective Fair Market Rent System; Using Small Area Fair Market
    Rents in the Housing Choice Voucher Program Instead of the Current 50th Percentile FMRs,
    November. https : / / www . federalregister . gov / documents / 2016 / 11 / 16 / 2016 - 27114 /
    establishing-a-more-effective-fair-market-rent-system-using-small-area-fair-
    market-rents-in-the.

Kain, John F, and John M Quigley. 1975. "Racial Discrimination in Urban Housing Markets." In
    Housing markets and racial discrimination: A microeconomic analysis, 56­91. NBER.

Kennan, John, and James R Walker. 2011. "The effect of expected income on individual migration
    decisions." Econometrica 79 (1): 211­251.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. "Experimental Analysis of
    Neighborhood Effects." Econometrica 75 (1): 83-119 75 (1): 83­119.

Krysan, Maria, and Michael DM Bader. 2009. "Racial blind spots: Black-white-Latino differences
    in community knowledge." Social Problems 56 (4): 677­701.

Krysan, Maria, and Kyle Crowder. 2017. Cycle of segregation: Social processes and residential
    stratification. Russell Sage Foundation.

Lalibert´
        e, Jean-William P. 2018. "Long-term Contextual Effects in Education: Schools and Neigh-
    borhoods." University of Calgary, unpublished manuscript.

Lareau, Annette, and Kimberly Goyette. 2014. Choosing homes, choosing schools. Russell Sage
    Foundation.

Liebow, Elliot. 1967. Tally's corner: A study of Negro streetcorner men. Little, Brown.

Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, Jeffrey R.
    Kling, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2012. "Neighborhood Effects on the Long-Term Well-Being of
    Low-Income Adults." Science 337 (6101): 1505-1510.

Massey, D., and N. Denton. 1987. "Trends in the Residential Segregation of Blacks, Hispanics, and
    Asians: 1970-1980." American Sociological Review 52 (6): 802­825. http://www.jstor.org/
    stable/2095836.

Massey, Douglas S, and Nancy A Denton. 1993. American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making
    of the Underclass [in English]. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. isbn: 0674018206
    9780674018204 0674018214 9780674018211.

Mazzara, Alicia, and Brian Knudsen. 2019. Where Families With Children Use Housing Vouchers,
    January. https://www.cbpp.org/research/housing/where- families- with- children-
    use-housing-vouchers.

Metzger, Molly W. 2014. "The reconcentration of poverty: Patterns of housing voucher use, 2000
    to 2008." Housing Policy Debate 24 (3): 544­567.


                                                50
Mogstad, Magne, Joseph P Romano, Azeem M Shaikh, and Daniel Willhelm. 2020. Inference for
    Ranks with Applications to Mobility Across Neighborhoods and Academic Achievement Across
    Countries. Working Paper 2020-03. Stanford University, March. https://statistics.stanf
    ord.edu/sites/g/files/sbiybj6031/f/2020-03.pdf.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Eldar Shafir. 2013. Scarcity: Why having too little means so much.
    Macmillan.

Reardon, S, and Kendra Bischoff. 2011. "Income Inequality and Income Segregation." American
    Journal of Sociology 116 (4): 1092-1153.

Rinzler, Dan, Philip Tegeler, Mary K Cunningham, and Craig Pollack. 2015. "Leveraging the power
    of place: Using pay for success to support housing mobility." Federal Reserve Bank of San
    Francisco Community Development Investment Center Working Paper 2015-04.

Roback, Jennifer. 1982. "Wages, rents, and the quality of life." Journal of Political Economy 90 (6):
    1257­1278.

Rosen, Sherwin. 1979. "Wage-Based Indices of Urban Quality of Life." In Current Issues in Urban
    Economics, edited by Peter Mieszkowski and Mahlon Straszheim, 74­104. Baltimore: Johns
    Hopkins Univ. Press.

Sampson, Robert J. 2012. Great American City: Chicago and the Enduring Neighborhood Effect.
    University of Chicago Press.

Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, Jens Ludwig, Lawrence F. Katz, Lisa A. Gennetian, Greg J. Duncan, Ronald C.
    Kessler, Emma Adam, Thomas McDade, and Stacy Tessler Lindau. 2011. Moving to Oppor-
    tunity for Fair Housing Demonstration Program: Final Impacts Evaluation. Washington, DC:
    U.S. Department of Housing / Urban Development, Office of Policy Development / Research.
    http://www.huduser.org/publications/pdf/MTOFHD_fullreport_v2.pdf.

Sard, Barbara, Mary K Cunningham, and Robert Greenstein. 2018. Helping Young Children Move
    out of Poverty by Creating a New Type of Rental Voucher. US Partnership on Mobility from
    Poverty.

Schelling, Thomas C. 1971. "Dynamic models of segregation." Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1
    (2): 143­186.

Schwartz, Heather L, Kata Mihaly, and Breann Gala. 2017. "Encouraging residential moves to
    opportunity neighborhoods: An experiment testing incentives offered to housing voucher re-
    cipients." Housing Policy Debate 27 (2): 230­260.

Sharkey, Patrick. 2013. Stuck in Place: Urban Neighborhoods and the End of Progress Toward Racial
    Equality. University of Chicago Press.




                                                 51
South, Scott J, and Kyle D Crowder. 1997. "Escaping distressed neighborhoods: Individual, com-
    munity, and metropolitan influences." American Journal of Sociology 102 (4): 1040­1084.

Turner, Margery Austin, Rob Santos, Diane K Levy, Doug Wissoker, Claudia Aranda, and Rob
    Pitingolo. 2013. Housing discrimination against racial and ethnic minorities 2012: Executive
    summary. U.S. Department of Housing, Urban Development, Policy Development, and Re-
    search.

Wheaton, William C. 1990. "Vacancy, search, and prices in a housing market matching model."
    Journal of Political Economy 98 (6): 1270­1292.

Yinger, John. 1995. Closed doors, opportunities lost: The continuing costs of housing discrimination.
    Russell Sage Foundation.




                                                 52
Online Appendix

A      Algorithm for Constructing Opportunity Maps

We defined opportunity areas through a collaborative effort between the researchers and the staff of
the Seattle and King County housing authorities. Here, we summarize the process through which
we arrived at the final maps shown in Figure 2a.
    Constructing Predictions of Upward Mobility by Census Tract. We begin from a preliminary
version of the measures of upward mobility later published in the Opportunity Atlas (at the time the
experiment began, the final Opportunity Atlas estimates had not yet been released). In particular,
using data provided in Chetty et al. (2013), we define upward mobility as the average household
income rank in 2015 at age 30-35 for children who grew up in the 1980-1985 birth cohorts. To
construct these measures, we focus on children who did not move across Census tracts before age
23 during our sample window and assign these children to the childhood Census tracts in which
they grew up. For each tract in Seattle and King County, we then regress children's income ranks
on their parents' income ranks. Finally, we construct the predicted value from the OLS regression
at the 25th percentile, which we denote by yt in tract t; yt represents a raw estimate of upward
mobility for children who grow up in tract t.
    We then construct a forecast model that incorporates several additional pieces of information
to reduce sampling error in the raw estimates of upward mobility.50 To begin, we regress yt on a
vector of tract characteristics, Xt :
                                           yt = Xt + t
where Xt consists of the following variables: poverty rates in 2010; average family income at age
22 for children in the 1986-93 cohorts who grew up in families with incomes at the 25th percentile
(i.e., upward mobility measured at an earlier age for slightly later non-overlapping cohorts); average
college "quality" (the average earnings of the children who attended the college attended by the
child in question) for children in the 1986-91 cohorts who grew up in families with incomes at the
25th percentile; mean 4th grade average math and reading test scores for children who received free
or reduced-price lunches averaged from 2015 to 2016; and an indicator for whether or not the tract
is within the city of Seattle. We weight the regression by the precision (inverse of variance) of the
raw upward mobility estimates, yt .
     Next, we form the predicted values yt     ^ t for each tract and the residuals x = yt - y x . We
                                           x = X
                                                                                      t            t
estimate the signal to noise ratio of the residuals using the estimated standard error of yt (treating
the covariates as known). We use the ratio of estimated signal to total variance,     ^ t , in each tract
to form a forecast of upward mobility:

                                                  y    ^ t+
                                                  ^t = X   ^t       x
                                                                    t

These forecasts are the best linear predictors (mean-squared-error-minimizing) of upward mobility
given data on Xt and yt when constraining the coefficient vector  to be constant across tracts,
as discussed in Section V of Chetty and Hendren (2018b). Intuitively, they shrink yt toward the
  50.
   This noise-reduction procedure was especially important with the preliminary Opportunity Atlas estimates because
we had smaller samples at the time; in the final Opportunity Atlas data, the reliability of the raw tract-level estimates
of upward mobility is 0.91 (Chetty et al. 2018, Table IIa), making the forecasting procedure below less important
going forward.



                                                           53
predicted value based on the covariates, with the optimal shrinkage rate depending upon the degree
of noise in the estimate of yt .
    Defining High-Opportunity Areas. Using our predictions of upward mobility, we define opportu-
nity neighborhoods as the set of tracts whose forecasted upward mobility y     ^t falls in approximately
the top 20% of tracts in the city of Seattle (for the Seattle Housing Authority) and the top 40%
of tracts in King County excluding Seattle (for the King County Housing Authority). We use
different thresholds across the jurisdictions because there are more neighborhoods that have high
levels of predicted upward mobility outside the city of Seattle than within the city boundaries. We
then consider making adjustments this initial definition to account for three issues: (1) changes in
neighborhoods over time, (2) geographic discontinuities, and (3) the existence of tracts that already
have large concentrations of voucher holders.
    To evaluate neighborhood change, we obtain publicly available school-level test-score data for
children in each tract for recent cohorts from the state of Washington. We evaluate trends in
both average test scores and test scores for children on free and reduced price lunch. Although
some rapidly gentrifying neighborhoods (particularly in central Seattle) experienced rapid growth
in mean test scores overall, the average test scores conditional on free and reduced price lunch status
changed much less. We therefore conclude that although neighborhood compositions are changing
over time, there is little clear evidence that neighborhood effects on upward mobility of low-income
children have changed systematically even in rapidly gentrifying areas. We therefore proceed with
our original forecasts, y^t , without making any adjustments to account for neighborhood change.
    The algorithmic definition of high-opportunity neighborhoods occasionally produces "holes"
where a given tract is classified as low-opportunity while those surrounding it are classified as
high-opportunity (or vice versa). We work with the housing authorities to fill these holes and cre-
ate geographic continuity using qualitative assessments of how people perceived "neighborhoods"
on the ground and how sharply upward mobility varied across the areas in question. Lastly, we
exclude a few tracts that already had a large concentration of voucher holders, based on the idea
that additional services were not necessary to facilitate moves to such areas.

B     Program Costs

This appendix describes how we estimate the cost of the CMTO program and compares the cost
of CMTO to the costs of other housing mobility programs. There are several important contextual
factors that may affect how transferable the cost estimates below are to other housing markets
and settings. In particular, both the Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) and financial assistance
(e.g., security deposits) are in part driven by high housing costs in the Seattle metropolitan area.
In contrast to some other mobility programs, we provided no post-move services to families in
CMTO. Finally, CMTO services were implemented by a local non-profit who provided services at
a regional level across both housing authorities; the availability of similar non-profits in other areas
may differ.
B.A     Costs of the CMTO Program

In Panel A of Table 3, we estimate the average up-front cost of CMTO services per voucher issued at
$2,661. This cost figure sums three components, detailed in Panel B and discussed in further detail
below: financial assistance, the cost of program services, and costs associated with administering
CMTO incurred by the public housing authorities. When characterizing the services offered to the
CMTO treatment group, we find the per-issuance cost to be the most natural measure of the cost of
the program as it reflects the actual outlay of funds for each family and is not driven by outcomes


                                                  54
that may be affected by the experiment itself (e.g., lease-up rates). However, when estimating total
expenditures for a projected number of lease-ups (and when comparing to other interventions that
report only this metric), practitioners may find it useful to consider the per leased-up voucher cost,
which divides average cost per issuance by the lease-up rate. For the CMTO treatment group, the
lease-up rate was 87%, resulting in a per-lease cost of CMTO of $3,045. A third cost metric that
may be useful is the average cost per move to a high-opportunity neighborhood. We calculate this
cost measure by inflating cost-per-lease-up by the fraction of leased-up households who moved to
a high-opportunity neighborhood.51 In CMTO, 61% of treatment-group families who leased up
moved to a high-opportunity area, resulting in a cost per opportunity move of $5,006.
    To put these costs into context, we calculate the average lifetime housing assistance payment
(HAP) expenditure for an average control-group family ($1,422/month) over seven years (a typical
voucher duration for families with children at KCHA and SHA historically). The up-front CMTO
program cost of $2,661 is 2.2% of this seven-year HAP cost.
    Panel B of Table 3 reports mean costs for each of the three components that are reflected in
the total cost estimates discussed above. In what follows, we explain how each of these estimates
are constructed.
    Financial Assistance Costs. Using the case-management database described in Section 4, we
estimate an average financial assistance payment of $1,043 (across all treatment group households
issued vouchers). The standard deviation is $1,253 and the maximum payment is $4,630. These
expenses include security deposits (average $811/voucher issued), pro-rated rent ($72/voucher),
renter's insurance ($40/voucher), screening fees ($46/voucher), administrative fees ($44/voucher),
holding fees ($23/voucher), and a miscellaneous category of expenses ($8/voucher). As some of the
financial assistance components are contingent on leasing up in an opportunity area, costs for the
average family leasing up in an opportunity area are significantly higher (approximately $1,899).
    The housing authorities provide some security deposit assistance to all families issued vouchers,
even those in the control group. To account for control-group security deposit usage, we estimate
the fraction of the control group that uses security deposit assistance by PHA (73% for KCHA and
9% for SHA) along with the average security deposit expense by PHA. We estimate that the PHAs
spend an average of $274 on security-deposit assistance per voucher issued to control group families
­ a cost that would have been paid even in the absence of the CMTO program. Therefore, when
calculating the incremental CMTO program costs, we subtract $274 from the mean gross financial
assistance of $1,043.
    Program Service Costs. We estimate program services costs per issuance to be $1,500. We arrive
at this estimate by calculating the (fixed) annual cost to administer the program and dividing by
the number of vouchers we estimate to be a feasible annual load for that staffing level (264).
We estimate the feasible annual load based on the PHAs' estimation that the program staff were
operating at steady-state peak capacity from September to November 2018. Their workload during
these months reflected an average of 22 issuances per month in the months prior, leading to an
annual load of 264 issuances per year.
    The fixed program costs include salary and benefits for four full-time staffers, half of one
full-time manager, and one full-time administrative assistant, as well as various costs incurred
by the program contractors: mileage and training costs ($2,000/month), materials and supplies
($1,000/month), overhead such as utilities ($2,500/month), interpreter costs ($600/month), and
other miscellaneous costs ($1,000/month) including cell phones, postage, and insurance. The total

  51. Note that this approach does not use average costs conditional on moving to an opportunity neighborhood
because some service costs are incurred for all families issued vouchers, regardless of whether they ultimately move
to opportunity or not.


                                                        55
annual cost is $396,092, which we divide by 264 families to arrive at a per-family cost of $1,500.52
    PHA Administrative Costs. We estimate the marginal costs for administration of the CMTO
program per issuance to be $392. This category consists of salary and benefits for two PHA
project managers spending 50% of their time managing CMTO service implementation divided by
264 annual voucher issuances. Although many other PHA staff worked on CMTO (including an
estimated 5% of a senior manager's time), we follow standard capital budgeting practices by not
including their time as a CMTO cost because these PHA labor costs would likely have been incurred
by the PHAs anyway even without the CMTO project. We exclude start-up costs (PHA staff
development time, piloting, grant writing time, etc.) from PHA administration costs to estimate
the cost of administering a similar program going forward.
    Housing Assistance Payment Costs. Since SHA and KCHA offer families tiered payment stan-
dards based on neighborhood rental costs and many high-opportunity areas fall in higher tiers, the
CMTO program increases the annual voucher payments made by the housing authorities by inducing
more families to move to high-opportunity areas. In Panel C of Table 3, we estimate this incre-
mental cost as the difference between average treatment-group HAP expenditures ($1,641/month)
and average control-group HAP expenditures ($1,422/month) among households who leased up.
This results in a monthly difference of $219 additional HAP expenditure on the treatment group
over that of the control group ($2,626/year). We also report the incremental HAP cost relative to
the control group mean in percentage terms (15.4%), a measure that may be more transferable to
lower-cost housing markets than Seattle.
B.B     Comparison with Costs of Other Mobility Programs

Appendix Table 1 compares the cost of the CMTO program with the costs of other mobility
programs. Overall, the cost of the CMTO program is similar to that of other mobility programs
(many of which either required moves to high-opportunity neighborhoods or had much smaller
impacts on the fraction of families moving to opportunity). Below, we provide details on our
sources of these estimates.
    Feins, McInnis, and Popkin (1997) estimate the average cost of the counseling provided to the
original MTO experimental group per opportunity move to be $3,077. Assuming their estimates
are in 1997 dollars, adjusting for inflation with the CPI implies an MTO program cost of $4,814 in
2018 dollars. Cunningham and Popkin (2002) evaluate the Housing Opportunity Program (HOP), a
mobility program funded by the Chicago Public Housing Authority. While Cunningham and Popkin
(2002) do not provide cost estimates, Schwartz, Mihaly, and Gala (2017) report a nominal cost per
opportunity move for HOP of $3,528 ($4,925 in 2018 dollars, assuming the original estimates are
in 2002 dollars).
    Rinzler et al. (2015) use cost data from the Baltimore Housing Mobility Program (BHMP) to
model costs per opportunity move for a hypothetical housing mobility pay-for-success program of
$3,235 in 2015 dollars ($3,427 in 2018 dollars). Program costs as defined in their model consist of
mobility program services, including counseling, housing search assistance, and landlord engage-
ment. BHMP resulted from a court order desegregating Baltimore public housing and has several
programmatic differences from CMTO, such as not offering financial assistance but offering post-
move support and requiring families to move to an opportunity neighborhood. Administrative costs
for administering the HCV program are not included in cost estimates. Costs estimates are calcu-

  52. Some of the staff time was spent on research-specific asks, such as entering data into the MIS system. We have
been conservative and included this time in our cost estimates, noting that a similar program without a research
component would probably still have an administrative burden and possibly face other costs the staff did not happen
to incur, such as paid family leave, etc.


                                                        56
lated as BHMP's total expenditure divided by their total number of lease-ups. One complication
in comparing this estimate to CMTO's cost per lease-up is that differences in cost per lease could
be driven by differences in lease-up rates.
    Schwartz, Mihaly, and Gala (2017) evaluate a mobility program by the Chicago Regional Hous-
ing Choice Initiative intended to provide light-touch counseling (and no financial assistance) using
a randomized controlled trial. In 2017 dollars, they estimate a counseling cost per opportunity
move of $2,869 ($2,939 in 2018 dollars).
    Sard, Cunningham, and Greenstein (2018) propose a hypothetical HCV program that would
include mobility services and a home-visiting program. The mobility services would include housing
search assistance, credit repair, opportunity area education, and landlord-tenant mediation. They
estimate a cost of $4,500 per issuance for such a program.

C    Qualitative Study: Methods

This appendix provides further information on the methods used in the qualitative component of
the study, described in Section VI.
     Sample Definition. To create the sample for the qualitative interviews, we stratified by housing
authority (SHA, KCHA), treatment status (treatment, control), and lease up status (leased up, still
searching as of March 2019). If the participant had not yet received a voucher or received a voucher
but was still searching for housing, we categorized them as "still searching." We then randomly
selected participants from each stratum. Appendix Table 2 shows the number and percentage of
participants we selected from each category.
     The sampling frame heavily weighted treatment group participants and participants who were
still searching for housing to ensure that we would be able to collect data about the housing
search process. In all, we sampled 149 treatment households (67% of the treatment group) and 53
control households (25% of the control group). Of these targeted families, 80% responded and were
successfully interviewed.
     Recruitment. The qualitative research team was led by Stefanie DeLuca and comprised five
graduate students and nine undergraduate students from Johns Hopkins University. Many of the
students had previous qualitative research experience, and several had experience working on hous-
ing mobility programs specifically. Eight graduate students from the University of Washington were
also hired to help with data collection. We also employed a local research firm, MEF Associates,
to assist with ongoing data collection. In all, 30 people conducted interviews since the project's
beginning.
     The majority of interview respondents were recruited through phone calls, although some re-
sponded to recruitment letters we sent through mail and email. Once we made contact, most people
(91%) agreed to an interview immediately or agreed to schedule one at a more convenient time. The
biggest barrier to recruitment was disconnected phone numbers and incorrect addresses, reflecting
the financial and housing precarity of program participants.
     Our sample included some families with limited English proficiency, reflecting the diversity
of program participants. To address language barriers, families chose one of three translation
options to complete an interview, whichever they felt most comfortable with: a neighbor, friend,
or family member; a third-party in-person language interpretation service; or a third-party phone
interpretation service.
     Most interviews were conducted in respondents' homes. If the respondent was not comfortable
meeting with our team at home, interviews were conducted at other locations they chose, such as
local libraries or McDonald's restaurants. The semi-structured interviews lasted anywhere between


                                                 57
one and four hours, with most interviews lasting approximately two hours. Respondents were asked
about their personal life ­ residential history, children's schools, employment and education history,
and health ­ as well as their experiences working with the PHAs and (if in the treatment group)
the CMTO program. All interviews were recorded and transcribed. The respondents were paid $50
for their time.
    Narrative Interviewing. Our methods are derived in part from a long tradition in the social
sciences, especially the work of urban sociologists who developed methods of observing social life and
the ways individuals make meaning of their everyday routines (Anderson 1990, Becker et al. 1961,
Burawoy 1979, Edin and Lein 1997, Liebow 1967). Specifically, we used narrative interviewing
techniques, a semi-structured approach to interviewing that uses open-ended questions to allow a
wide range of responses to emerge, with targeted follow-up questions to ensure all interviews covered
the same material (see DeLuca, Clampet-Lundquist, and Edin (2016) and Boyd and DeLuca (2017)
for more on this method). These interviews create a natural, in-depth conversation, rather than a
clinical series of questions and short answers.
    Interviews are conducted without copies of the interview guide visible. Interviewers instead
memorize a detailed interview protocol (with a shorthand notecard nearby for review of interview
topics if needed), and the interviews are recorded. This allows the interviewers to focus on the
respondent, making eye contact and not causing distraction by flipping through paper and writing
notes. The approach communicates to respondents that we are focused entirely on hearing their
story and perspective, rather than on simply going through a list of specific questions by rote.
Previous work has shown that more detailed stories and unexpected answers are more likely to
emerge from this approach, especially issues unanticipated by the researchers (in sharp contrast to
forced choice response survey questions).
    We start our interviews with a broad question: "Tell me the story of your life." This gives the
respondents the sense that we are interested in the whole story of who they are. Further, the
opening directive signals to them that we want them to talk--a lot--and that this is not a survey.
Rather than merely documenting the events of our research participants' lives, the interviewing
approach provides a setting in which respondents reveal how they see things, what they feel is
important, how they make decisions, how they have made sense of their past and imagine their
future. Respondents can then answer in their own words, without worrying about giving a "wrong"
answer or saying too much. The protocol not only enriches the study findings by allowing for a
broad range of answers, but it also reduces stress and the chances that respondents will feel coerced
to say particular things.
    In-depth interviewing can be especially effective for creating rapport and developing trust for
stigmatized groups, such as low-income families receiving housing vouchers. By conducting in-
terviews with empathy and non-leading, non-judgmental questions, respondents are often put at
ease, and may feel less scrutinized. If respondents have some control over the way they can answer
questions, and feel that the interviewer is truly interested in them and lets them speak at length,
they may feel comfortable to open up more candidly.
    Analysis. The research team used themes from previous research, fieldnotes, and transcripts
of the interviews to create a codebook for the data set. These included codes for the five themes
identified in the paper, such as whether respondents mentioned feeling supported by CMTO staff,
whether CMTO staff worked with landlords on respondents' behalf, and whether respondents men-
tioned receiving financial assistance for their move. Descriptions of the codes for the five mechanisms
are as follows:
    Mechanism #1 ­ Communication and Emotional Support. This code covers the experiences that
treatment respondents have with the CMTO staff that foster a sense of psychological or emotional
support, often as a result of what they describe as frequent and encouraging communication and

                                                  58
check-ins from the staff. These communications foster a sense that the staff are accessible, responsive
and able to help when and how respondents need to be helped so that they can find housing. This
code also describes instances in which families report that the services CMTO provided for them
gave them a sense of emotional support, "boost" of confidence, happiness, relief, reduced stress
(the last component overlaps at time with Mechanisms 3-5). Segments include instances when
families tell us that they feel like someone has "your back," that they aren't doing this alone, that
someone can vouch for them, and that their housing search and lease-up process would not have
been possible without the CMTO staff's help. Some of this includes reports that CMTO staff
had catered to families' individual needs, and that CMTO staff asked them what they "wanted"
what "their vision" was for their family. For some respondents, this includes the process of creating
a rental resume to feel confident and better positioned to communicate with landlords, and for
others this includes mentions of how well the CMTO staff explained everything so that they could
understand the process and feel capable of searching in opportunity areas. In sum, this code reflects
the work that CMTO staff do that keeps families feeling optimistic about their chances of leasing
up, and prevents families from dropping out of the CMTO program when things get difficult or
take longer than expected.
     Mechanism #2 - OA Motivation. This code covers specific language that respondents use to
describe their personal desire to move to and live in an opportunity area, and excitement about the
fact that the CMTO program is focused on helping families live in higher opportunity neighbor-
hoods. This code is more specific than just mentions of opportunity areas, and includes respondents'
discussing the benefits of living in an opportunity area as an important part of their residential
decision-making and housing search processes.
     Mechanism #3 - Streamlining. This code covers any discussion of how the CMTO staff stream-
lined the search process for respondents to make finding a home with the voucher easier, especially
at difficult points in the housing search and lease-up process. This code may include segments on
how respondents had very little "bandwidth" to do the kind of housing search they would have liked
and that CMTO made doing this search possible. In these cases, not having enough "bandwidth"
means that because there are so many things to attend to and not enough time, money or support,
it is very difficult to focus on the housing search, applications and other paperwork, or contacting
landlords (because parents are searching for work, juggling child care, going to work, coping with
health problems, transportation issues, etc.) This code includes concrete actions that CMTO staff
took that simplified/reduced the overwhelming aspects of the process of getting housing and can
include housing unit referrals, neighborhood tours, and discussion of advice/guidance that CMTO
staff provided on how to search for housing (that then actually made their searches more effective).
This code also includes discussions of how CMTO staff accelerated the process for landlords as well
by expediting inspections, filling out paperwork, calling landlords for unit visits, signing onto the
tenant portal for an apartment complex on behalf of a tenant. This code might include respondents
expressing sentiments such as: "I just handed it over to them after I said yes/landlord said yes and
they did everything else!" (This code can overlap with Mechanisms #4 and #5).
     Mechanism #4 - Brokering. This code covers respondents' reports of CMTO program staff
serving as a broker between them and landlords/property managers during the housing search,
application, or lease up process. Examples of this include CMTO staff communicating directly
with landlords and other institutional representatives and/or customizing the financial assistance
for each family's circumstances based specifically on their communication with landlords to get
them moved in (examples include utility bills, rental insurance, bigger security deposits for those
with eviction/credit issues, holding fees, etc.) It also includes CMTO staff talking on behalf of
respondents to landlords during a point in the process that can sometimes be demoralizing and/or
a point of `exit' for landlords (when landlords waver about renting to a family with a history of poor

                                                  59
credit). Families might mention that the staff "vouched" for them or served as actual references.
This code also includes people talking about finding their own units, but then CMTO staff stepping
in and taking care of the next steps to make it happen on the landlord or property managers' side
(some of this overlaps with Mechanism #3, to the extent that activities that streamline also make
landlords happier and more likely to agree to rent the unit to the CMTO family).
    Mechanism #5 - Short-Term Financial Assistance. This code covers any description of the
financial assistance given by CMTO staff that helps respondents move into their units. This as-
sistance may be used for security deposits, application/holding fees, moving costs, previous rent
balances, or renter's insurance. The code includes not only what the financial assistance was used
for, but also when, and why it worked in that instance (likely to overlap with Mechanisms #3 and
#4), to indicate how it was strategically deployed by CMTO staff.
    A team of coders then used this codebook to identify the prevalence of the five themes described
above in individual interviews with treatment group families who had moved to high-opportunity
areas. This team consisted of 13 members, 9 from Johns Hopkins University who did the initial
coding and 4 from the University of Washington who also coded the same interviews so that we could
estimate inter-coder reliability. Two groups of coders analyzed treatment cases for the prevalence of
the five mechanisms as well as other general aspects of voucher moves (e.g. satisfaction). Incidents
of discrepancy between the coders' judgments ­ which occurred in fewer than 25% of the cases ­
resulted in another review of the transcript and consultation with DeLuca to make a determination
as to whether a mechanism or mechanisms were indeed present or absent for particular respondents
and/or whether the code definitions themselves needed to be clarified or refined.
    Ethnographic Observations. Although we focus in Section VI on information obtained directly
from our family interviews, our fieldwork also included other elements of observation that support
our conclusions. Every time we interviewed families, we spent hours in their homes, talking to
other household members and friends as they came and went, playing with children, meeting neigh-
bors, and watching neighborhood activities. During recruiting, we drove repeatedly up and down
neighborhood streets, knocking on doors, and eating at local fast-food places during breaks. We
gave people rides so that they could errands, dropped people off at the social service agencies so
they could apply for utility assistance, and we took them to lunch or dinner, sometimes with other
family members. In other words, the interviews are part of a larger set of fieldwork practices, and
we took detailed notes on all of those as well.
    Researchers digitally recorded initial impressions of the interviews immediately after the in-
terviews occurred, and wrote fieldnotes for each interview. Fieldnotes describe everything that
happened during an interview visit, including: the setting (usually the housing unit and neigh-
borhood blocks surrounding the house); what participants were like (e.g., attire, demeanor); inter-
actions with other family members; any other information that was not recorded (warm-up and
exiting conversations); and conversations that took place over the course of the interview itself. The
post-interview fieldnotes also provide a summary of the interview, with a focus on central research
questions.
    Analyses in the paper are also informed by the following ethnographic data: three in-person
observations of families with CMTO staff at their initial one on one meetings; attendance at two
CMTO staff meetings; four informational meetings with all of the CMTO family and housing search
assistance team members (two by phone and two in person); four in-person meetings with CMTO
study intake staff at both SHA and KCHA; one informational meeting with staff from the KCHA
voucher program; and over two years of weekly phone meetings with PHA and CMTO research
partners, MDRC implementation researchers, and J-PAL staff.




                                                 60
D     Economic Model of Neighborhood Choice

In this appendix, we derive the bounds on willingness to pay discussed in Section V.F in a canonical
model of neighborhood choice with heterogeneous preferences.
    Consider a frictionless discrete choice framework in which family i chooses neighborhood type
j  {H, L} corresponding to high-opportunity and low-opportunity neighborhoods, respectively,
to maximize their indirect utility of living in neighborhood j . The indirect utility of living in
neighborhood j for family i is
                                             uij = ij - Pj                                       (3)
where ij is the idiosyncratic preference that household i has for neighborhood j and Pj is the cost
of living in neighborhood j . We normalize the coefficient on costs to one so that preferences  are
interpretable in dollar terms.
    Families choose the neighborhood type that maximizes their indirect utility and therefore move
to an opportunity neighborhood whenever

                                                uiH > uiL                                        (4)
                                    iH - iL             >          P                             (5)
                                marginal benefit of H       marginal cost of H

where P = PH - PL denotes the marginal cost of moving to neighborhood H . Absent any additional
resources, the share of families moving to an opportunity neighborhood sH is

                              sH = Pr(j  = H ) = Pr(iH - iL > P ).                               (6)

In this framework, the fact that 17.6% of families in the control group who lease up move to
high-opportunity areas implies that s ^H = 0.176. That is, 82.4% of families have utility of living
in the high-opportunity neighborhood that is less than the cost of living in a high-opportunity
neighborhood, i.e. have a net willingness-to-pay for low-opportunity areas that is positive: W T Pi =
iL - iH + P > 0.
    Now consider the CMTO treatment group. For this group, the indirect utility of moving to
neighborhood j is

                                        uT
                                         ij = i Sj - Pj + ij ,                                   (7)
where Sj is a variable representing the cost of the moving assistance services offered by the public
housing authority for households moving to neighborhood j , including security-deposits and search
assistance services. In the CMTO experiment, SL = 0 and SH = $2,660. The coefficient i
governs the translation of the dollar value of these services to utility. In an environment with
no frictions where these services can be purchased in the market for their average cost, we would
expect i  1: families should value the services at most at their marginal cost, as they would have
already purchased them otherwise.
    Treatment-group families choose to move to a high-opportunity neighborhood when

                                               uT     T
                                                iH > uiL                                         (8)
                                        iH - iL > P - i SH                                       (9)

and hence the share of treatment-group families that lease up who move to an opportunity neigh-



                                                    61
borhood is
                                       sT
                                        H = Pr(iH - iL > P - i SH ).                                            (10)
For the CMTO treatment group, s      ^T
                                      H = 0.607, meaning that 60.7% of families preferred high-
opportunity neighborhoods after they were provided with the services targeted at high-opportunity
areas. Given i  1, we can infer these 60.7% of families have a net willingness to pay (WTP) for
low-opportunity areas that is less than $2,660, i.e., W T Pi = iL - iH + P < $2,660.53
   Putting together these two bounds, we infer that

               Pr(W T Pi  [0, SH ]) = Pr(iH - iL - P  [-SH , 0]) > sT
                                                                    H - sH = 0.431,                             (11)

if i  1. That is, the frictionless model implies that 43.1% of families have net WTP for a low-
opportunity area between $0 and $2,660, i.e., a large mass of families are close to indifferent between
high- and low-opportunity neighborhoods as shown in Figure 12.
    In an environment where families face frictions in housing search or other constraints (e.g.,
a lack of liquidity to pay for services up front), the value of the CMTO services i could be
greater than one. In this setting, choices can no longer be directly translated into preferences
(WTP). In particular, some families may have very high WTP for high-opportunity areas yet are
prevented from moving to such areas (absent CMTO-type services) due to frictions in the housing
search process. As discussed in the text, we believe that such a model is more likely to match our
experimental results, and hence view unpacking and modeling the structure of these search frictions
as a valuable direction for further work.




  53. Of course, not everyone in the treatment group received exactly $2,660 in services. Appendix B discusses
heterogeneity in services take-up and notes that the maximum cost of financial services taken up was $4,630. A
conservative upper bound for the cost of CMTO services (replacing $1,043 with $4,630 in Table 3) would therefore
be $6248. However, we focus on the average cost of around $2,660 as it better represents the overall expense required
to support the treatment effects we see here.


                                                         62
                                                                        Table 1
                                       Summary Statistics and Balance Tests for Households in Experimental Sample
                                                                                                                                                       P-Value of
                                                                Pooled                    Control                            Treatment
                                                                                                                                                           T-C
                                                                 Mean           Mean        SD           N          Mean         SD          N         Difference
                                                                  (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)            (8)
A. Head of Household Demographics

Age (years)                                                       34.2          34.2         8.9       208           34.2        7.6        222          0.962
Annual Household Income ($)                                      19667         19517       12433       207          19806      13348        222          0.886
% Speak English (w/o Translator)                                  81.6          80.3        39.9       208           82.9       37.8        222          0.512
% Born Outside the U.S.                                           35.0          34.3        47.6       207           35.6       48.0        222          0.750
% Black Non-Hispanic                                              49.3          49.8        50.1       205           48.9       50.1        219          0.908
% White Non-Hispanic                                              24.5          22.9        42.1       205           26.0       44.0        219          0.475
% Hispanic                                                         8.5           9.3        29.1       205            7.8       26.8        219          0.618
% Asian Non-Hispanic                                               6.6           6.3        24.4       205            6.8       25.3        219          0.856
% Female Head of Household                                        79.8          75.7        43.0       202           83.6       37.1        214         0.048**
% Married Head of Household                                       12.0          11.9        32.4       202           12.1       32.7        214          0.790
% Less than High School Grad                                      21.6          27.8        44.9       205           15.8       36.6        221         0.004***
% High School Degree                                              31.9          33.2        47.2       205           30.8       46.3        221          0.528
% Attended Some College                                           41.5          32.7        47.0       205           49.8       50.1        221         0.000***
% BA or more                                                       4.9           6.3        24.4       205            3.6       18.7        221          0.186
% Homeless                                                        13.3          14.5        35.3       207           12.2       32.8        222          0.494
% Currently Working                                               56.4          59.9        49.1       207           53.2       50.0        222          0.146
% Works Full-Time (Over 35 Hours/Week)                            28.2          30.4        46.1       207           26.1       44.0        222          0.282
% Commute > 30 min to Work                                        34.2          34.7        47.8       124           33.6       47.4        116          0.830
% with Car and Driver's License                                   63.8          59.9        49.1       207           67.4       47.0        221          0.104
Number of Children                                                 2.2           2.2         1.4       208            2.2        1.4        222          0.756
Children's Average Age                                             6.6           6.6         4.0       200            6.7        3.8        217          0.793

B. Neighborhood-Related Questions
% Starting in High-Opportunity Tract                              12.5          12.2        32.8       164           12.7       33.4        173           0.887
% Satisfied with Current Neighborhood                             50.9          47.9        50.1       194           53.6       50.0        207           0.261
% Would Leave Neighborhood if Got Voucher                         53.5          57.5        49.6       193           49.8       50.1        207           0.133
% Feel They Could Find Place in New Neighborhood                  54.6          57.3        49.6       185           52.0       50.1        198           0.310
% Could Pay for a Move                                            28.7          32.4        46.9       207           25.2       43.5        222           0.116
% Good with Moving to Racially Diff Neighborhood                  78.7          83.5        37.2       206           74.2       43.8        221          0.017**
% Good with Moving to Specific Neighborhood in
                                                                  71.8          72.5        44.8       207           71.2       45.4        222           0.699
Opportunity Area
% Considering Different School for Any Child                      58.6          61.4        48.8       158           56.1       49.8        173           0.367
% Unsatisfied with Any Child's Current School                     15.1          16.5        37.2       158           13.9       34.7        173           0.536
% Primary Motivation to Move is Schools                           42.7          43.0        49.6       207           42.3       49.5        222           0.890
% Primary Motivation to Move is Safety                            21.7          20.3        40.3       207           23.0       42.2        222           0.476
% Primary Motivation to Move is Bigger/Better Home                15.6          15.0        35.8       207           16.2       36.9        222           0.726

C. Characteristics of Origin Neighborhood (Census Tract)
Predicted Mean Household Income Rank (p=25)                       43.9          44.0        4.1        205           43.7       4.2         219           0.477
Incarceration Rate (p=25)                                          2.1           2.1         1.4       205            2.2        1.4        219           0.282
Teen Birth Rate (Women; p=25)                                     23.1          23.2         8.2       205           23.1        7.8        219           0.922
% in Poverty (2016 ACS)                                           16.6          15.9        10.2       205           17.2        9.8        219           0.161
% Black (ACS 2013-2017)                                           11.5          11.6        11.0       205           11.5       10.1        219           0.932
% Low-Inc. 3rd Graders Proficient in Math (2015)                  41.3          41.6        11.5       201           41.0       11.9        214           0.569
% in Extreme Poverty (Rate > 40%) Tract (2016 ACS)                 2.6           2.9        16.9       205            2.3       15.0        219           0.736


                           F-Test                                            F-Statistic P-Value        N
                                                                               1.182      0.216        430


Notes: This table presents baseline summary statistics for the 430 households who were issued a voucher in the CMTO experiment. We present means for the full
sample and means, standard deviations, and counts for the treatment and control groups separately. In Column 8, we show the p-value for a test of the difference
between treatment and control group means, estimated by regressing the relevant outcome variable on the treatment group indicator and an indicator for being in the
Seattle or King County housing authority (since randomization was within PHA). The outcomes in Panels A and B come from the baseline survey administered as
part of this study, complemented with administrative data from the PHAs at the time of voucher issuance (in particular, annual household income, race and ethnicity,
head of household marital status and gender come from PHA administrative data); see Appendix Table 10 for definitions of these variables. The first three variables
of Panel C show Census tract-level measures of mean household income rank, incarceration rates and teen birth rates for children whose parents were at the 25th
percentile of the national household income distribution drawn from the Opportunity Atlas (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones, and Porter 2018). The remaining rows
of Panel C are obtained from publicly available ACS data and the Stanford Education Data Archive (for the math proficiency variable). The number of observations
varies across outcomes because of non-response. We report an omnibus test of balance by regressing treatment status on all baseline variables in the table,
controlling for PHA, and compute the F-statistic from a test of the variables' joint significance. To preserve the full sample in that regression, we replace missing
values in each variable with a constant and add an indicator variable for an outcome being missing. The resulting F-statistic and p-value are shown at the bottom of
the table. All regressions use robust standard errors. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                         Table 2
                                   Heterogeneity of Treatment Effects on Fraction who Move to High-Opportunity Areas
                                                                                   Share Moving to High-Opportunity Area (%), Unconditional on Lease-Up

                                                                                    Control      Treatment      Treatment
                                                                                                                                  SE           N         P-Value
                                                                                     Mean          Mean           Effect
                                                                                       (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)

A. Pooled and by Housing Authority

All Families                                                                          15.1           53.0          37.9           4.2         427       0.000     ***
All Families (Controls)                                                               15.1           52.8          37.7           4.5         427       0.000     ***
Seattle Housing Authority                                                             11.9           53.0          41.1           6.0         201       0.000     ***
King County Housing Authority                                                         18.3           53.3          35.0           5.9         226       0.000     ***

B. By Head of Household Demographic Characteristics

Black Non-Hispanic                                                                    10.9           47.6          36.7          5.8          208       0.000     ***
White Non-Hispanic                                                                    19.6           62.3          42.7          9.0          103       0.000     ***
Other Race/Ethnicity                                                                  19.6           56.0          36.4          8.6          111       0.000     ***
Born Outside the U.S.                                                                 12.7           50.4          37.7          6.7          150       0.000     ***
Born in the U.S.                                                                      16.5           55.8          39.2          5.3          276       0.000     ***
English Isn't Primary Language                                                        12.8           56.8          44.0          9.5           80       0.000     ***
English Is Primary Language                                                           15.8           52.4          36.6          4.7          346       0.000     ***
20 Years or More in Seattle/King County                                               15.1           51.4          36.3          6.5          183       0.000     ***
Less Than 20 Years in Seattle/King County                                             15.3           54.3          39.1          5.6          243       0.000     ***
Started in High Opportunity Tract                                                     25.0           72.6          47.6          13.5          42       0.000     ***
Didn't Start in High Opportunity Tract                                                12.7           45.7          33.0          4.9          293       0.000     ***
Income  $19,000 (Sample Median)                                                       16.8           53.4          36.6          6.0          219       0.000     ***
Income > $19,000 (Sample Median)                                                      13.6           52.8          39.2          6.0          207       0.000     ***
No College                                                                            9.8            53.2          43.5          5.7          226       0.000     ***
Some College or More                                                                  24.1           52.4          28.3          6.7          197       0.000     ***
Currently Working                                                                     12.9           45.1          32.2          5.6          242       0.000     ***
Currently Not Working                                                                 18.8           61.5          42.8          6.5          184       0.000     ***
Uses Child Care                                                                       18.8           44.8          26.0          6.2          211       0.000     ***
Doesn't Use Childcare                                                                 11.7           60.9          49.2          5.6          215       0.000     ***

C. By Perceptions About Moving at Baseline

Feels Good About Moving to an Opportunity Area                                        17.6           53.1          35.5           5.1         306       0.000     ***
Doesn't Feel Good About Moving to an Opportunity Area                                 8.9            53.4          44.5           7.4         120       0.000     ***
Satisfied With Current Neighborhood                                                   14.1           55.1          41.0           5.9         203       0.000     ***
Unsatisfied/Indifferent With Current Neighborhood                                     17.2           50.8          33.6           6.4         195       0.000     ***
Sure Wants to Leave Current Neighborhood                                              17.6           56.5          38.9           6.1         211       0.000     ***
Sure Wants to Stay in Current Neighborhood or Indifferent                             13.4           48.6          35.2           6.2         186       0.000     ***
Feels Good About Moving to Racially Different Neighborhood                            14.8           54.7          39.9           4.8         333       0.000     ***
Feels Bad/Indifferent About Moving to Racially Different Neighborhood                 17.6           49.0          31.3           9.5          91       0.001     ***
Sure Could Pay for Moving Expenses                                                    14.9           63.1          48.1           7.7         123       0.000     ***
Not Sure Could Pay for a Moving Expenses                                              15.3           50.1          34.8           5.0         303       0.000     ***
Sure Could Find a New Place                                                           16.3           51.5          35.1           6.2         207       0.000     ***
Not Sure Could Find a New Place                                                       16.7           54.6          37.9           6.7         173       0.000     ***

D. By Children Characteristics

Mean Children Age at or Above Median (6.3 years)                                      15.2           51.9          36.7           6.1         207       0.000     ***
Mean Children Age Below Median (6.3 years)                                            15.3           52.6          37.3           6.0         207       0.000     ***
More than 2 Children                                                                  13.4           44.2          30.7           7.1         137       0.000     ***
2 Children or Fewer                                                                   15.9           58.4          42.5           5.1         290       0.000     ***
Considering Different Schools                                                         12.6           52.5          39.9           6.1         192       0.000     ***
Not Considering Different Schools                                                     16.4           52.5          36.1           7.6         137       0.000     ***


Notes: This table reports treatment effects by subgroup, estimated using a regression of an indicator for leasing up in a high-opportunity area on the treatment
group indicator and a PHA fixed effect. In row 2, we additionally control for the baseline characteristics shown in Table 1. We exclude 3 households whose
voucher was transferred to a different PHA in this table. See Appendix Table 10 for definitions of the variables used to construct the subgroups. All regressions use
robust standard errors. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                       Table 3
                                     Creating Moves to Opportunity Program Costs

                                                                                                       Average Cost
A. Total Costs

Cost of CMTO services per issuance                                                                         $2,661
Cost of CMTO services per family leased                                                                    $3,045
Cost of CMTO services per opportunity move                                                                 $5,006
Cost of CMTO services per family issued / 7-year HAP costs per leased family                                2.2%

B. Costs by Service Category

Cost of CMTO financial assistance per issuance                                                             $1,043
Cost of CMTO program services per issuance                                                                 $1,500
Cost of PHA CMTO administration per issuance                                                                $392
Cost savings of PHA services paid by CMTO                                                                  ($274)

C. Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) Costs
Incremental HAP cost per lease per year                                                                    $2,626
Incremental HAP / average HAP costs per leased family                                                      15.4%


Notes: This table reports average cost metrics for the CMTO program. Panel A reports four measures of average total CMTO
service costs: per voucher issued, per family leased up, per opportunity move completed, and per family issued as a
percentage of 7-year housing assistance payment (HAP) voucher costs for one family. The last measure is defined as the
cost of CMTO services per issuance divided by the average HAP cost for the control group over seven years (a conservative
estimate of the average voucher duration for families with children) in KCHA and SHA. Panel B reports average costs by
category. Financial assistance costs include security deposits, adminstrative fees, holding fees, pro-rated rent, renter's
insurance, and screening fees. Program services include costs paid to the Navigator service providers, which include costs
for staff, management, administrative assistance, mileage, overhead, and materials. PHA administration costs per issuance
consist of a project manager at each PHA spending 50% time managing CMTO service implementation. In Panel A, Cost of
CMTO services per issuance consists of all CMTO programmatic costs listed in Panel B, excluding the average control group
security deposit assistance of $274 that would have been provided by the PHAs regardless of CMTO, as part of existing PHA
policy. Panel C reports the incremental HAP expenditure for the treatment group relative to the control group per family that
leased up, driven by the fact that treatment group families leased units in more expensive areas on average, which had higher
HAP payments because of the tiered payment standards used in KCHA and SHA. The last row shows incremental HAP
expenditure as a share of the average HAP cost per family leased in the control group.
                                                                  Table 4
                Impacts of Financial Incentives: Difference-in-Difference Estimates Based on Payment Standard Reforms

Reform:                          KCHA 5 Tier Voucher Payment Standard Reform                         SHA Family Access Supplement

                                   % Moving to High            Median 2 BR Rent in           % Moving to High          Median 2 BR Rent in
Outcome:                              Opportunity              Destination Tract ($)           Opportunity             Destination Tract ($)
                                    (1)         (2)              (3)          (4)             (5)        (6)             (7)          (8)

DD Estimate                       -3.59         -4.70            55.92        70.52         13.79***     13.82***        -22.31      -11.84
                                  (5.75)        (6.21)          (49.23)      (52.05)         (5.11)       (5.26)        (74.14)      (76.50)


Controls (Fixed Effects):
Number of Children                                X                             X                           X                           X
Month Voucher Issued                              X                             X                           X                           X

Sample                           KCHA and SHA Voucher Recipients with Children                         All SHA Voucher Recipients
Observations                       533           528              325          323             534         534            414         414

Notes: This table shows difference-in-difference estimates of the effects of changes in payment standards on the rate at which families move to
higher-opportunity or more expensive neighborhoods using the OLS regression specification in equation (2). Columns 1-4 estimate the effects of
KCHA's 5-tier voucher payment standard introduced in March 2016, which increased payment standards in more expensive neighborhoods. We
treat KCHA as the "treatment" group and SHA as the "control" group and use data on households with children who were issued a voucher in either
KCHA or SHA between July 2015 and November 2016 to estimate these specifications. Columns 5-8 estimate the effects of SHA's Family Access
Supplement (FAS), which provided higher payments for families with children moving to areas designated as "high opportunity" in CMTO and was
introduced in February 2018. These specifications use data on households in SHA with and without children who were issued a voucher between
August 2017 and October 2018, excluding those issued a voucher between February and April 2018, which is when the CMTO pilot took place (see
Figure 11 and Section 7a for details). The dependent variable in Columns 1-2 and 5-6 is an indicator for moving to a "high opportunity"
neighborhood, as defined in Figure 2 in the CMTO experiment. The dependent variable in Columns 3-4 and 7-8 is the median rent for two-bedroom
units (based on the 2011-2015 American Community Survey) in the tract where households leased up, restricting the sample to households who
leased up before their voucher expired. The odd numbered columns show the raw difference-in-difference estimates using the specification in
equation (2), without any additional controls. The even numbered columns add a set of indicator variables for the number of children in the
household and the month in which the voucher was issued. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                    Appendix Table 1
                                        Costs of CMTO vs. Other Mobility Programs
                                                                                    Estimated
                 Program                                  Cost Metric                 Cost               Source

1. Creating Moves to Opportunity              Cost per family issued                 $2,661      Table 3
2. Creating Moves to Opportunity              Cost per opportunity move              $5,006      Table 3
3. Moving to Opportunity                      Cost per opportunity move              $4,814      Feins et al. (1997)
4. Housing Opportunity Program                Cost per opportunity move              $4,925      Schwartz et al. (2017)
6. Baltimore Housing Mobility Program         Cost per opportunity move              $3,427      Rinzler et al. (2015)
7. Chicago Regional Housing Choice            Cost per opportunity move              $2,939      Schwartz et al. (2017)
Initiative
8. Hypothetical Mobility Program              Cost per family issued                 $4,500      Sard, Cunningham,
                                                                                                 and Greenstein (2018)


Notes: This table reports cost metrics for CMTO and other mobility programs. Costs in rows 3 and 4 and rows 6 and 7 have
been adjusted for inflation to 2018 dollars using the CPI. See Appendix B for details on how these costs were computed.
                                                         Appendix Table 2
                                         Qualitative Study Sampling and Response Rates

                                             Treatment         Control          Total N     N / Target Sample      N / Number
                                                                                                   Size            Contacted
                                                 (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)                 (5)
A. Sampling Targets
Still Searching (as of April 2019)           71 (100%)        24 (25%)            95
Leased up                                     78 (50%)        29 (20%)            107
Total Targeted                               149 (67%)        53 (25%)            202

B. Recruitment
Interviewed                                      119              42             161               80%                 85%
Refusals                                         13                4             17                8%                  9%
Contact, No Interview Yet                         9                2             11                5%
No Contact/Bad Contact Info                       8                5             13                6%

C. Response Rate by Treatment Status
N Interviewed / Target Sample Size              80%              79%


Notes: This table shows the sampling scheme and response rates for the qualitative study sample. Panel A shows the number and
percentage of participants who were randomly targeted for participation in the qualitative study from each group, based on their
treatment status and lease-up status as of April 15, 2019 for households in the Seattle Housing Authority and April 23, 2019 in the
King County Housing Authority. Panel B shows the number of households who we were able to successfully interview within this
group; the number who refused; and the number whom we attempted to contact but were not yet able to interview or rearch. Column 4
shows the number of households in each of these categories as a share of all households targeted, and Column 5 shows household
interviews and refusals as a share of households with whom we had some contact. Panel C shows the percentage of households
interviewed as a share of the number of households targeted by treatment group.
                                                                  Appendix Table 3
                                       Summary Statistics for Households in Qualitative Sample vs. Full Sample

                                                                                             Qualitative            Not in Qualitative         P-Value of
                                                                                                                                                Qual vs.
                                                                  Full Sample                 Sample                     Sample
                                                                                                                                               Non-Qual
                                                                 Mean        N             Mean         N            Mean          N              Diff.
                                                                  (1)       (2)             (3)        (4)            (5)         (6)             (7)

A. Head of Household Demographics

Age                                                              34.21      430           34.24       161            34.19       269             0.973
Annual Household Income ($)                                      19667      429           19739       161            19623       268             0.724
% Speak English (w/o Translator)                                 81.63      430           83.85       161            80.30       269             0.304
% Born Outside the U.S.                                          34.97      429           34.78       161            35.07       268             0.858
% Black Non-Hispanic                                             49.29      424           53.13       160            46.97       264             0.304
% White Non-Hispanic                                             24.53      424           21.88       160            26.14       264             0.356
% Hispanic                                                        8.49      424            8.13       160             8.71       264             0.709
% Asian Non-Hispanic                                              6.60      424            7.50       160             6.06       264             0.522
% Female Head of Household                                       79.81      416           84.52       155            77.01       261             0.050*
% Married Head of Household                                      12.02      416           10.97       155            12.64       261             0.365
% Less than High School Grad                                     21.60      426           18.63       161            23.40       265             0.145
% High School Degree                                             31.92      426           31.68       161            32.08       265             0.851
% Attended Some College                                          41.55      426           44.72       161            39.62       265             0.347
% BA or more                                                      4.93      426            4.97       161             4.91       265             0.917
% Homeless                                                       13.29      429           13.66       161            13.06       268             0.909
% Currently Working                                              56.41      429           51.55       161            59.33       268             0.148
% Works Full-Time (Over 35 Hours/Week)                           28.21      429           26.09       161            29.48       268             0.597
% Commute > 30 min to Work                                       34.17      240           36.14        83            33.12       157             0.617
% with Car and Driver's License                                  63.79      428           62.73       161            64.42       267             0.691
Number of Children                                                2.21      430            2.19       161             2.23       269             0.623
Children's Average Age                                            6.62      417            6.63       158             6.62       259             0.861

B. Neighborhood-Related Questions

% Starting in High-Opportunity Tract                             12.46      337            13.49      126           11.848       211             0.701
% Satisfied with Current Neighborhood                            50.87      401            50.00      150           51.394       251             0.809
% Would Leave Neighborhood if Got Voucher                        53.50      400            52.67      150           54.000       250             0.666
% Feel They Could Find Place in New Neighborhood                 54.57      383            57.14      147           52.966       236             0.460
% Could Pay for a Move                                           28.67      429            29.19      161           28.358       268             0.994
% Good with Moving to Racially Diff Neighborhood                 78.69      427            74.38      160           81.273       267             0.125
% Good with Moving to Specific Neighborhood in
                                                                 71.79      429            67.08      161           74.627       268             0.160
Opportunity Area
% Considering Different School for Any Child                     58.61      331            59.52      126           58.049       205             0.883
% Unsatisfied with Any Child's Current School                    15.11      331            19.05      126           12.683       205             0.142
% Primary Motivation Schools                                     42.66      429            39.13      161           44.776       268             0.252
% Primary Motivation Safety                                      21.68      429            19.25      161           23.134       268             0.283
% Primary Motivation Bigger/Better Home                          15.62      429            19.88      161           13.060       268             0.070*

C. Characteristics of Origin Neighborhood (Census Tract)
Predicted Mean Household Income Rank (p=25)                      43.87      424            44.07      158            43.76       266             0.428
Incarceration Rate (p=25)                                         2.15      424             2.10      158             2.18       266             0.572
Teen Birth Rate (Women; p=25)                                    23.14      424            22.43      158            23.56       266             0.156
% in Poverty (2016 ACS)                                          16.58      424            17.07      158            16.29       266             0.546
% Black (ACS 2013-2017)                                          11.54      424            11.79      158            11.40       266             0.749
% Low-Inc. 3rd Graders Proficient in Math (2015)                 41.30      415            41.22      153            41.35       262             0.976
% in Extreme Poverty Tract (2016 ACS)                             2.59      424             1.90      158             3.01       266             0.340


                          F-Tests                                                       F-Statistic P-Value N
                 Unconditional on Lease-up                                                0.892      0.661 430
                  Conditional on Lease-up                                                 0.776      0.833 356


Notes: This table compares the households in the qualitative sample to the households in the full experimental sample. The qualitative sample is
composed of all households successfully interviewed for the qualitative study. The set of households not in the qualitative sample is defined as all
households in the experimental sample who are not included in the qualitative sample. In the last column, we show the p-value for a test of the
difference between the qualitative and non-qualitative-sample means, estimated by regressing the relevant outcome variable on the an indicator for
being in the qualitative sample along with the PHA indicator. We report an omnibus test of balance between the two samples by regressing the
qualitative sample indicator on all variables shown in the table, plus a PHA indicator, and compute the resulting F-Statistic for the joint significance of
these variables (excluding the PHA indicator). We do so in two ways: first, for all households who were issued a voucher, and second restricting the
sample to households that either leased-up and were not part of the qualitative study or leased-up and were interviewed for the qualitative study after
lease-up. See Table 1 and Appendix Table 10 for definitions of the variables. All regressions use robust standard errors. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1
                                                                 Appendix Table 4
                                            Summary Statistics for Households in the Qualitative Sample
                                                                                                                                           P-Value of
                                                                                    Control                      Treatment
                                                                                                                                               T-C
                                                                               Mean            N              Mean           N             Difference
                                                                                (1)           (2)              (3)          (4)                (8)

A. Head of Household Demographics

Age                                                                            32.24          42              34.94        119              0.031**
Annual Household Income ($)                                                  19047.62         42            19983.19       119               0.782
% Speak English (w/o Translator)                                               83.33          42              84.03        119               0.898
% Born Outside the U.S.                                                        33.33          42              35.29        119               0.831
% Black Non-Hispanic                                                           57.14          42              51.69        118               0.603
% White Non-Hispanic                                                           19.05          42              22.88        118               0.568
% Hispanic                                                                      9.52          42               7.63        118               0.753
% Asian Non-Hispanic                                                            2.38          42               9.32        118               0.069*
% Female Head of Household                                                     92.68          41              81.58        114              0.041**
% Married Head of Household                                                     9.76          41              11.40        114               0.615
% Less than High School Grad                                                   26.19          42              15.97        119               0.243
% High School Degree                                                           30.95          42              31.93        119               0.987
% Attended Some College                                                        38.10          42              47.06        119               0.303
% BA or more                                                                    4.76          42               5.04        119               0.953
% Homeless                                                                     19.05          42              11.76        119               0.332
% Currently Working                                                            54.76          42              50.42        119               0.565
% Works Full-Time (Over 35 Hours/Week)                                         28.57          42              25.21        119               0.573
% Commute > 30 min to Work                                                     26.09          23              40.00         60               0.328
% with Car and Driver's License                                                52.38          42              66.39        119               0.126
Number of Children                                                              2.10          42               2.22        119               0.533
Children's Average Age                                                          5.24          42               7.13        116              0.003***

B. Neighborhood-Related Questions

% Starting in High-Opportunity Tract                                           12.12          33              13.98         93               0.780
% Satisfied with Current Neighborhood                                          46.15          39              51.35        111               0.647
% Would Leave Neighborhood if Got Voucher                                      56.41          39              51.35        111               0.662
% Feel They Could Find Place in New Neighborhood                               62.50          40              55.14        107               0.458
% Could Pay for a Move                                                         33.33          42              27.73        119               0.599
% Good with Moving to Racially Diff Neighborhood                               83.33          42              71.19        118               0.052*
% Good with Moving to Specific Neighborhood in Opportunity Area                66.67          42              67.23        119               0.967
% Considering Different School for Any Child                                   70.00          30              56.25         96               0.169
% Unsatisfied with Any Child's Current School                                  20.00          30              18.75         96               0.888
% Primary Motivation Schools                                                   35.71          42              40.34        119               0.603
% Primary Motivation Safety                                                    16.67          42              20.17        119               0.541
% Primary Motivation Bigger/Better Home                                        19.05          42              20.17        119               0.897

C. Characteristics of Origin Neighborhood (Census Tract)

Predicted Mean Household Income Rank (p=25)                                    44.50          41              43.92        117               0.425
Incarceration Rate (p=25)                                                       1.92          41               2.16        117               0.320
Teen Birth Rate (Women; p=25)                                                  21.34          41              22.81        117               0.337
% in Poverty (2016 ACS)                                                        15.75          41              17.53        117               0.302
% Black (ACS 2013-2017)                                                        11.37          41              11.94        117               0.722
% Low-Inc. 3rd Graders Proficient in Math (2015)                               41.99          39              40.96        114               0.624
% in Extreme Poverty Tract (2016 ACS)                                           4.88          41               0.85        117               0.269


                                 F-Tests                                     F-Statistic   P-Value     N
                        Unconditional on Lease-up                              0.854        0.708     161
                         Conditional on Lease-up                               0.739        0.850     130


Notes: This table replicates the summary statistics in Table 1, but restricts the sample to families who participated in the qualitative survey defined
in Appendix Table 3. In addition to the F-Statistic of joint significance using all families who participated in the qualitative study, we show a second
F-Statisctic restricting the sample to households who leased-up and were interviewed after lease-up if they participated in the qualitative study. All
regressions use robust standard errors. See Table 1 for further details. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                         Appendix Table 5
                                         Calculation of Lifetime Earnings Impact of CMTO

(1) Average Upward Mobility (in ranks) in control group destinations                                                        44.53
(2)   [Translated to 2015 USD]                                                                                           $35,955

(3) Treatment effect (TOT) on Tract-Level Upward Mobility (in ranks)                                                         4.25

(4) Estimated causal effect of move from birth [ = 62% of (3)]                                                               2.64

(5) Expected Upward Mobility (in ranks) for treated [ = (1) + (4) ]                                                         47.17
(6)   [Translated to 2015 USD]                                                                                           $38,955

(7) Causal effect of CMTO on yearly income at age 34 (2015 USD) [ = (6) - (2) ]                                           $3,001

(8) Avg family income at age 34 (2015 USD, from ACS)                                                                     $64,160

(9) Undiscounted income over the lifecycle from ACS, assuming 1% income growth (2015 USD)                             $4,585,149

(10) Impact as % of avg family income in ACS [ = (7) / (8) ]                                                               4.68%

(11) Causal treatment effect on undiscounted lifetime income (USD) [ = (10) * (9) ]                                     $214,436

(12) Avg undiscounted income over the lifecycle for low-income children in Seattle area (2015 USD)                    $2,539,340

(13) Impact as % of avg low-income lifetime earnings in Seattle area [ = (11) / (12) ]                                     8.44%

(14) Discounted income over the lifecycle from ACS, 1% income growth (2015 USD)                                       $1,825,930

(15) Causal treatment effect on discounted lifetime income (USD) [ = (10) * (14) ]                                       $85,394

Notes: This table outlines the steps we use to translate our estimated treatment effects into lifetime earnings effects for the
children whose families moved to high-opportunity neighborhoods as a result of CMTO. We estimate the impact on incomes for
a child that moved to a high-opportunity neighborhood at birth. Row (1) presents the average level of upward mobility in the
destination tracts to which families in the control group moved using data from the Opportunity Atlas (i.e. the family income rank
at age 34 of children in the 1978-83 birth cohorts, based on their childhood neighborhood, for families at the 25th percentile of
the parental income distribution). Row (2) translates this level into 2015 USD by mapping this percentile to dollars using the
national income distribution for 31-37 year olds in 2014-2015. Row (3) presents the treatment effect of CMTO on upward
mobility for those who moved to an opportunity neighborhood (TOT). Row (4) multiplies this effect by 62%, based on the
estimate from Chetty et al. (2018) that children who move at birth to a neighborhood with 1 rank higher upward mobility grow up
to have an income rank that is 0.62 units higher. Row (5) presents the sum of this effect and the control group mean. Row (6)
translates this into 2015 USD using the same approach as in Row (2). Row (7) computes the difference in expected income
levels between the treated and untreated groups. Row (8) reports the mean family income (individual income plus spousal
income for married couples, to match our measure of family income in the Opportunity Atlas) from the 2015 ACS at age 34.
Row (9) presents the undiscounted sum of mean family income in the 2015 ACS, summing across all ages and assuming 1%
wage growth from birth. Row (10) computes the percentage impact on incomes by dividing (7) by (8). Row (11) computes the
impact on lifetime undiscounted income assuming the percentage impact on income over the life cycle is constant. Row (12)
reports an estimate of the undiscounted mean family income over the lifecycle for children born to parents in the 25th percentile
of the national income distribution who grew up in a low-opportunity area in Seattle and King County. We estimate this value by
mutiplying the mean income for children growing up in low-income (25th percentile) families in low-opportunity areas in Seattle
and King County by row (9) divided by row (8). Row (13) reports the earnings gain from moving to a high-opportunity area as a
percentage of mean income for children growing up in low-income families in low-opportunity areas in Seattle and King County
by dividing (11) by (12). Rows (14) and (15) compute the impact on discounted lifetime income. Row (14) reports mean lifetime
income in the ACS discounted over the life cycle at 2%, assuming 1% income growth from birth. Row (15) reports the impact on
discounted lifetime income, again assuming the percentage impact over the life cycle is constant.
                                                         Appendix Table 6
                                       Heterogeneity of Treatment Effects on Lease-up Rates

                                                                                             Lease-up Rates (%)

                                                                         Control   Treatment Treatment
                                                                                                            SE     N      P-Value
                                                                          Mean       Mean      Effect
                                                                           (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)   (5)        (6)

A. Pooled and by Housing Authority

All Families                                                               85.9       87.3        1.5      3.3    427      0.662
All Families (Controls)                                                    85.9       87.0        1.1      3.4    427      0.739
Seattle Housing Authority                                                  85.1       86.0        0.9      5.0    201      0.864
King County Housing Authority                                              86.5       88.5        2.0      4.4    226      0.655

B. By Head of Household Demographic Characteristics

Black Non-Hispanic                                                         87.1       90.3         3.2     4.5    208      0.479
White Non-Hispanic                                                         84.8       85.4         0.6     7.0    103      0.927
Other Race/Ethnicity                                                       85.7       84.2        -1.6     6.9    111      0.823
Born Outside the U.S.                                                      85.9       89.2         3.3     5.4    150      0.538
Born in the U.S.                                                           85.7       87.0         1.3     4.2    276      0.758
English Isn't Primary Language                                             87.2       92.9         5.8     6.9     80      0.403
English Is Primary Language                                                85.5       86.0         0.6     3.8    346      0.876
20 years or more in Seattle/King County                                    88.4       86.3        -2.0     4.9    183      0.678
Less than 20 years in Seattle/King County                                  83.9       88.0         4.1     4.5    243      0.363
Started in High Opportunity Tract                                          95.0       95.5         0.5     6.8     42      0.946
Didn't Start in High Opportunity Tract                                     85.9       86.1         0.2     4.1    293      0.969
Income  $19,000 (sample median)                                            85.1       86.0         0.8     4.8    219      0.865
Income > $19,000 (sample median)                                           87.4       89.3         1.9     4.5    207      0.664
No College                                                                 85.4       87.5         2.1     4.6    226      0.651
Some College or More                                                       86.1       86.9         0.8     4.9    197      0.874
Currently Working                                                          87.9       87.2        -0.7     4.3    242      0.864
Currently Not Working                                                      82.5       87.5         5.0     5.4    184      0.354
Uses Child Care                                                            86.1       85.2        -0.9     4.9    211      0.853
Doesn't Use Childcare                                                      85.4       88.2         2.8     4.7    215      0.555

C. By Perceptions About Moving at Baseline

Feels Good About Moving to an Opportunity Area                             86.5       91.1         4.6     3.6    306      0.197
Doesn't Feel Good About Moving to an Opportunity Area                      83.9       78.2        -5.7     7.2    120      0.426
Satisfied With Current Neighborhood                                        85.9       87.5         1.6     4.8    203      0.739
Unsatisfied/Indifferent With Current Neighborhood                          87.9       86.7        -1.2     4.9    195      0.807
Sure Wants to Leave Current Neighborhood                                   88.0       87.5        -0.4     4.6    211      0.927
Sure Wants to Stay in Current Neighborhood or Indifferent                  86.6       86.2        -0.3     5.0    186      0.944
Feels Good About Moving to Racially Different Neighborhood                 87.6       87.1        -0.4     3.7    333      0.907
Feels Bad/Indifferent About Moving to Racially Different Neighborhood      76.5       87.5        11.0     8.7     91      0.205
Sure Could Pay for Moving Expenses                                         82.1       85.8         3.8     6.7    123      0.577
Not Sure Could Pay for a Moving Expenses                                   87.6       87.9         0.3     3.8    303      0.935
Sure Could Find a New Place                                                85.6       89.2         3.7     4.6    207      0.425
Not Sure Could Find a New Place                                            87.2       86.3        -0.9     5.2    173      0.866

D. By Children's Characteristics

Mean Children Age at or Above Median (6.3 years)                           81.8       86.0         4.2     5.1    207      0.410
Mean Children Age Below Median (6.3 years)                                 89.8       88.0        -1.7     4.5    207      0.697
More than 2 Children                                                       88.1       84.8        -3.3     6.0    137      0.587
2 Children or Less                                                         84.8       88.9         4.1     4.1    290      0.311
Considering Different Schools                                              83.2       84.6         1.4     5.4    192      0.792
Not Considering Different Schools                                          86.9       84.9        -2.0     5.9    137      0.741


Notes: This table replicates Table 2 using an indicator for leasing up anywhere using one's voucher as the outcome instead of leasing
up in a high-opportunity area. See Table 2 for details. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                       Appendix Table 7
                                              Treatment Effects on Neighborhood and Housing Unit Characteristics
                                                                                                              Standard      Treatment     Standard Error of
                                                                        Control                                Error of      Effect in    Treatment Effect
                                                          Control      Standard    Treatment     Treatment    Treatment     Standard         in Standard
                                                           Mean        Deviation     Mean          Effect       Effect      Deviations        Deviations

A. Neighborhood Characteristics                             (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)        (6)               (7)
Distance
Mean Commute Time in 2000 (Minutes)                        29.65          3.33       28.35        -1.30***          0.32      -0.39             0.10
% Commute < 15 Mins                                        16.26          7.64       17.46         1.20**           0.61       0.21             0.10
Distance to City Hall of Largest City in CZ (Miles)        11.69          7.64       10.70         -0.99*           0.55      -0.13             0.07

Resident Demographics
% White (2017)                                            49.18         18.70        56.23         7.06***          1.70       0.38             0.09
% Black (2017)                                            11.39          9.21         8.21        -3.18***          0.79      -0.35             0.09
% Hispanic (2017)                                         13.44          8.87        10.63        -2.81***          0.77      -0.32             0.09
% Foreign-Born (2016)                                     24.84         10.39        24.43          -0.40           0.97      -0.04             0.09
% Married (2010)                                          46.36          9.71        49.19         2.83***          0.95       0.29             0.10
% of Children with Single Parents (2013-2017)             33.21         12.79        29.52        -3.69***          1.31      -0.29             0.10
% >= College Education (2017)                             36.67         17.39        46.38         9.71***          1.75      0.56              0.10
Population Density (2010, # People per Square Mile)      2,492.26      1,296.74     2,377.04      -115.23          125.50     -0.09             0.10

Tract Income and Other Characteristics
Median HH Income (2017)                                    67,347        22,229      79,956     12608.81***        2,661      0.57              0.12
% Labor Force Participation (2010)                          0.70          0.06        0.70         -0.00            0.01      -0.05             0.10
% Poverty (2017)                                           14.68          8.09       13.27        -1.41*            0.79      -0.17             0.10
Median Home Value (2010)                                  342,214       103,733     403,067     60853.20***        12,279     0.59              0.12
Census Mail Response Rate                                  76.37          4.47       77.34        0.97**            0.44      0.22              0.10
Theil Index of Racial Segregation                           0.12          0.05        0.12        -0.01*            0.00      -0.15             0.09
# Jobs For No HS Degree, 1 Mile Radius                     161.54        380.86      186.94        25.40           34.06       0.07             0.09

Children's Long-Term Outcomes
Predicted Mean Individual Income Rank (p=25)               46.47          3.02       47.75        1.28***           0.33       0.42             0.11
Predicted Mean Household Income Rank (p=25)                44.53          3.58       46.14        1.61***           0.39       0.45             0.11
Predicted Mean Household Income Rank for White
                                                           46.97                                                                                0.11
Children (p=25)                                                          4.43        47.81         0.84*            0.49       0.19
Teenage Birth Rate for Women (p=25)                        21.10         7.86        16.55        -4.55***          0.79      -0.58             0.10
Incarceration Rate (p=25)                                   2.04         1.30         1.61        -0.43***          0.13      -0.33             0.10

Other Indices of Opportunity
Kirwan Overall Child Opportunity Score                     -0.12          0.38        0.10        0.22***           0.04      0.58              0.10
Kirwan Educational Subscore                                -0.24          0.57        0.11        0.35***           0.06      0.62              0.11
Kirwan Health/Environment Subscore                          0.00          0.32        0.10        0.10***           0.03      0.31              0.09
Kirwan Social/Economic Opportunity Subscore                -0.14          0.55        0.08        0.21***           0.05       0.39             0.10
HUD Transit Index                                          82.11          9.29       81.91         -0.20            0.80      -0.02             0.09
Environmental Health Index                                 10.27         14.28       11.12         0.85             1.36      0.06              0.10

B. Unit Characteristics
Square Feet                                              1,257.17       651.88      1,298.99        41.82          80.75       0.06             0.12
Year Built                                               1,985.18       22.71       1,980.99        -4.19           3.17      -0.18             0.14
Household Appliance Index                                  0.63          0.36         0.63           0.00           0.03       0.00             0.09
Baths                                                      1.97          0.71         2.04           0.07           0.09       0.10             0.13
Share With Air Conditioning                                9.38         29.30         7.38          -2.00           3.04      -0.07             0.10
Total Rent Paid to Owner                                 1,824.57       544.35      2,012.86     188.29***         56.66      0.35              0.10
Rent Paid by PHA                                         1,422.34       612.58      1,658.22     235.87***         60.33      0.39              0.10
Utilities Paid (estimate by PHAs)                         138.66        89.24        170.42       31.76***          8.57      0.36              0.10
Total Out of Pocket Expenditures (Tenant)                 489.70        371.12       472.37        -17.33          55.67      -0.05             0.15


Notes: This table shows the effect of the CMTO treatment on a variety of neighborhood and unit characteristics. Each row of the table reports the mean and
standard deviation of the relevant outcome in the treatment and control groups as well as an estimate from a separate OLS regression of neighborhood and
housing unit characteristics on an indicator for treatment status. All regressions include a PHA indicator and use robust standard errors. The control group
mean is a raw mean while the treatment group mean is constructed as the control mean plus the treatment effect estimate. Panel A shows treatment effects on
neighborhood characteristics unconditional on lease-up. Panel B shows treatment effects on unit characteristics for the subsample who leased up because
these characteristics are only available for those who leased up. The Household Appliance Index is the sum of six indicators for common appliances observed
in the rental listings: microwaves; refrigerators; washers; dryers; dishwashers; and garbage disposal. For the distance moved variable, distances were
computed using tract centroids, so households who move to the same tract as their origin tract are indicated as having moved 0 miles. Distance moved was
topcoded at 50 miles, and households that did not lease up were coded as having moved 0 miles. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                   Appendix Table 8
                                              Neighborhood Characteristics of High vs. Low Opportunity Areas

                                                                      Tract Means, Weighted by Num. of. Children in
                                                                             Below Median Income Families
                                                                                                                         High-Opportunity
                                                                                       Non-High-           High-         Tracts Moved Into
                                                                                       Opportunity       Opportunity         By CMTO       Z-Score for
                                                                       All Tracts        Tracts            Tracts           Participants     (4)-(3)
                                                                           (1)            (2)               (3)                  (4)           (5)
Distance
Mean Commute Time in 2000 (Minutes)                                      29.01            29.62             26.86             27.08              0.05
% Commute < 15 Mins                                                      17.47            17.14             18.65             18.12             -0.08
Distance to City Hall of Largest City in CZ (Miles)                      11.84            12.21             10.51             9.53              -0.14

Resident Demographics
% White (2017)                                                          53.81             51.16             63.17             63.01             -0.01
% Black (2017)                                                          9.11              10.74             3.35              4.48               0.13
% Hispanic (2017)                                                       12.78             14.36             7.20              7.28               0.01
% Foreign-Born (2016)                                                   24.19             23.99             24.90             23.82             -0.09
% Married (2010)                                                        50.24             48.29             57.14             53.48             -0.34
% of Children with Single Parents (2013-2017)                           29.61             32.60             19.05             22.57              0.25
% >= College Education (2017)                                           39.33             34.21             57.46             58.80              0.07
Population Density (2010, # People per Square Mile)                    2174.42           2255.41           1887.98           2081.69             0.12


Tract Income and Other Characteristics
Median HH Income (2017)                                                 75,986.53         68,269.98        103,276.59         98,259.67         -0.17
% Labor Force Participation (2010)                                      69.80             69.82             69.76             70.35              0.10
% Poverty (2017)                                                        13.00             14.32              8.35              9.97              0.19
Median Home Value (2010)                                               366,668.91        334,382.78        481,908.56        479,475.22         -0.02
Census Mail Response Rate                                               77.29             76.57             79.84             78.47             -0.25
Theil Index of Racial Segregation                                        0.13             0.14               0.12              0.11             -0.20
# Jobs For No HS Degree, 1 Mile Radius                                  189.62           199.07             156.21            170.26             0.04

Children's Long-Term Outcomes
Predicted Mean Individual Income Rank (p=25)                             46.73            45.70             50.37             49.74             -0.16
Predicted Mean Household Income Rank (p=25)                              45.50            44.16             50.27             48.54             -0.37
Teenage Birth Rate for Women (p=25)                                      19.67            22.06             11.25             10.79             -0.06
Incarceration Rate (p=25)                                                1.92             2.11              1.28              1.20              -0.05

Other Indices of Opportunity
Kirwan Child Opportunity Index - Overall Score                           -0.04            -0.15             0.34              0.37               0.06
Kirwan Child Opportunity Index - Educational Subscore                    -0.13            -0.31             0.51              0.54               0.04
Kirwan Child Opportunity Index - Health/Environment Subscore             0.05              0.02             0.16              0.20               0.16
Kirwan Child Opportunity Index - Social/Economic Subscore                -0.05            -0.17             0.35              0.36               0.02
HUD Transit Index                                                        79.56            79.72             78.99             81.00              0.18
Environmental Health Index                                               13.22            12.50             15.53             14.21             -0.07


Notes: This table shows neighborhood characteristics for different groups of Census tracts. The first three columns show means (weighted by the number
of people in the 2000 Decennial Census with below median income) for all tracts, low-opportunity tracts, and high-opportunity tracts, respectively. The
fourth column shows means for high-opportunity tracts to which CMTO participants moved, weighted by the number of CMTO participants who moved to
each tract. The final column shows the Z-score of the difference between the weighted average for all high opportunity tracts and the weighted average of
high opportunity tracts to which CMTO families moved. Data on commute times come from the 2000 Decennial Census (mean commute time) and from
the 2012-2016 ACS (% commute time < 15 min), resident demographics and tract income from the ACS; children's long-term outcomes from the
Opportunity Atlas; and other indices of opportunity from The Kirwan Child Opportunity Index constructed by The Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and
Ethnicity and from HUD's Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Data and Mapping Tool (AFFH-T).
                                                         Appendix Table 9
                                 Intervention Dosage: Treated Households' Usage of CMTO Services
                                                                               Moved to Non-High-             Moved to High
                                                               Pooled           Opportunity Tract            Opportunity Tract

                                                         N        Mean            N       Mean             N         Mean
                                                        (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)         (6)

A. Usage of Search Assistance Services

Total hours in contact with non-profit or PHA staff     222        5.98          76       4.46            118        7.05
Hours in contact non-profit or PHA staff per month      222        1.35          76       1.04            118        1.70
Percent that received search assistance                 222       97.75          76       96.05           118        98.31
Percent that received rental application coaching       222       91.44          76       86.84           118        94.92
Percent that did a neighborhood tour                    222       17.57          76       11.84           118        22.88
Percent that visited locations with non-profit staff    222       21.17          76       11.84           118        29.66

B. Linkage to Units and Landlords

Percent linked to a unit through the MIS system          222      45.95          76       7.89            118        79.66
Percent linked to a unit of a landlord contacted by non-
profit staff                                             222      27.48          76       5.26            118        46.61

C. Financial Assistance

Percent that received any financial assistance (%)      222       65.32          76       28.95           118        96.61
Total amount of assistance among families that
                                                        141       1642           21        252            113         1983
received financial assistance ($)
Percent that received screening fee assistance (%)      222       57.21          76       26.32           118        84.75
Amount of screening fee assistance among families
                                                        126        80            20        65              99            81
that received screening fee assistance ($)
Percent that received deposit assistance (%)            222       51.80          76       3.95            118        93.22
Amount of deposit assistance among families that
                                                        112       1608           1        2200            110         1613
received deposit assistance ($)

D. Correlations Between Usage of CMTO Services Among Families who Moved to High-Opportunity Areas

                                                                 Time Meeting with         Financial        Unit Found Through
                                                                    CMTO Staff            Assistance         Housing Locator
Time Meeting with CMTO Staff                                             1
Financial Assistance                                                   0.19                    1
Unit Found Through Housing Locator                                     0.11                  -0.10                   1



Notes: This table shows service usage statistics for families in the CMTO treatment group as recorded by the housing authorities
and non-profit staff running the CMTO services. In Panel A, time meeting with CMTO staff was estimated based on the lengths of
specific interactions, which includes in-person meetings and phone calls. The share of households receiving specific services was
derived from contact logs between the non-profit staff and the households. Links to units and landlords come from the MIS platform
set up to facilitate interactions between landlords, non-profit staff, and households. Financial assistance includes assistance to
defray moving costs, such as screening fees, security deposits, and holding fees. In Columns 1 and 2, we pool all families in the
treatment group. In Columns 3 and 4, we restrict the sample to treatment group families who moved to non-high-opportunity tracts.
In Columns 5 and 6, we restrict the sample to treatment group families who moved to high-opportunity tracts. Panel D shows
Pearson correlations between usage of different CMTO service categories among families in the treatment group who moved to
high-opportunity areas.
                                                                   Appendix Table 10
                                                    Baseline Survey Questions and Coding of Variables

                                                             Survey Instrument Reference                                 Variable Coding Details

A. Baseline Variables
                                              Q7. Is an interpreter or translation service being used for
% Speak English
                                              survey administration?
% Born Outside the U.S.                       Q10. In what country were you born?
                                                                                                             = Grade 9 or less OR Grade 10 or grade 11
                                              Q22. What is the highest level of education that you have
% Less than High School Grad                                                                                 OR Attended grade 12 but did not receive high
                                              completed?
                                                                                                             school diploma or GED certificate
                                              Q22. What is the highest level of education that you have
% High School Degree                                                                                         = GED certificate OR High school diploma
                                              completed?
                                              Q22. What is the highest level of education that you have      = Some college or Associate's or two-year
% Attended Some College
                                              completed?                                                     degree
                                              Q22. What is the highest level of education that you have
% BA or more                                                                                                 = Four-year college degree or higher
                                              completed?
% Homeless                                    Q14. Where do you currently live?                              = Homeless or in a group shelter
% Currently Working                           Q15. Are you currently working for pay?
                                                                                                             = 31 to 45 minutes OR 46 minutes to one hour
% Commute > 30 min to Work                    Q17. How long does it take you to get to your job?
                                                                                                             OR More than one hour
                                              Q19. Do you have a valid driver's license? AND Q20. Do
% with Car and Driver's License
                                              you have access to a car that runs?
                                              Q32. Which of the following statements best describes
% Satisfied with Current Neighborhood                                                                        = Very satisfied OR Somewhat satisfied
                                              how satisfied you are with your current neighborhood?

                                              Q33. Which of the following statements best describes          = Somewhat sure I want to move to a different
% Would Leave Neighborhood if Got
                                              how you feel about staying in your current neighborhood if     neighborhood OR Very sure I want to move to
Voucher
                                              you receive a voucher?                                         a different neighborhood
% Feel They Could Find Place in New           Q47: How sure are you that you could find a home in a
                                                                                                             = Very sure OR Fairly sure
Neighborhood                                  new neighborhood in [Seattle/King County]?
                                              Q50. How sure are you that you will be able to pay for any
% Could Pay for a Move                                                                                       = Very sure OR Fairly sure
                                              moving expenses?
                                              Q43. How would you feel about moving to a neighborhood
% Good with moving to Racially Diff
                                              where almost all of the other residents are of a different     = Very good OR Good
Neighborhood
                                              race or ethnicity than your own?
                                              Q36. If a home or apartment were to be available, how
                                              would you feel about moving to ___? Would you feel...
% Good with Moving to Specific                                                                               = Very good OR Good [in at least one of the
                                              AND Q39. How would you feel about moving to ___? AND
Neighborhood in Opportunity Area                                                                             questions]
                                              Q42. How would you feel about moving to neighborhoods
                                              ___?
Number of Children                            Remind me how many children do you have?
Children's Average Age                        Q53. What is the child's age?
% Considering Different School for Any        Q58. Are you currently considering transferring him/her to
                                                                                                             = Yes [for at least one child]
Child                                         a different school (or Pre-K/Pre-school program)?
% Unsatisfied with Any Child's Current        Q57. How satisfied are you with his/her current school (or     = Somewhat unsatisfied OR Very unsatisfied
School                                        Pre-K/Pre-school program)?                                     [for at least one child]
                                              Q13. How long have you lived in the Seattle or King
20 years or more in Seattle/King County
                                              County area in your lifetime?
                                              Q27. What types of child care do you use for your child or
Uses Child Care
                                              children? (Check all that apply)
Feels Good About Moving to an                 see % Good with Moving to Specific Neighborhood in
Opportunity Area                              Opportunity Area
Sure Wants to Leave Current
                                              see % Would Leave Neighborhood if Got Voucher
Neighborhood
Sure Could Find a New Place                   see % Feel They Could Find Place in New Neighborhood


B. Public Housing Authority Data

                                              3k. Use code or codes at bottom of page that the family
% Black / Hispanic / Latino / White           says best indicates each household member's race.
                                              Select as many codes as appropriate

Income < $19,000                              19h:The total dollar amounts listed in column 19f.             Note: 19f is income minus exclusions


Notes: This table presents definitions of the variables, which come from the baseline survey and from PHA administrative data (HUD form 50058).
The baseline questionnaire can be found here.
                     FIGURE 1: The Geography and Price of Opportunity in Seattle
                                                                                  A. Upward Mobility by Census Tract in Seattle and King County



                                                                                                                                          25 most common tracts
                                                                                                                                          where voucher holders
                                                                                                                                          leased units before the
                                                                                                                                          CMTO experiment



                                                                                                                                         Mean Household
                                                                                                                                         Income Rank in Adulthood
                                                                                                                                             > 57 ($51k)




                                                                                                                                             48 ($40k)




                                                                                                                                             < 36 ($27k)


                                                                                   This map must be printed in color to be interpretable

                                                                                          B. Upward Mobility vs. Median Rent, by Tract
                                                                           $56K
                                                                            60
                                 Mean Household Income Ranks of Children
                                 with Low-Income (25th Percenctile) Parents




                                                                                                                        Newport


                                                                                            Woodinville
                                                          $42K
                                                           50
                                           $31K




                                                                                        Federal Way
                                            40




                                                                                                                 West Kent
                            $21K
                             30




                                                                            $500                 $1,000          $1,500          $2,000              $2,500
                                                                                                      Median 2-Bedroom Rent in 2015

Notes: The map in Panel A shows the Opportunity Atlas estimates of upward mobility, defined as the mean predicted
household income rank in 2014-15 for children whose parents were at the 25th percentile of the national household income
distribution (an income of $27,000) for children in the 1978-1983 birth cohorts. This measure is estimated separately in each
tract as described in Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones, and Porter (2018). To facilitate interpretation of the percentile ranks,
we also show the dollar value corresponding to each percentile shown in the legend based on the income distribution of children
in the 1978-83 birth cohorts. Green dots show the 25 most common tracts where families with children leased units using
a Housing Choice Voucher administered by the King County or Seattle housing authorities in 2015-2017, before the CMTO
experiment (based on voucher household shares of the total tract population in 2010). Panel B presents a scatter plot of
upward mobility in each tract vs. median rent for two-bedroom, renter-occupied units surveyed in the 2011-2015 American
Community Survey. The inner numbers on the vertical axis show the Opportunity Atlas estimates of mean household income
ranks depicted in Panel A, while the outer numbers on the vertical axis convert those ranks to 2015 dollars based on the
income distribution for children in the 1978-83 birth cohorts. The darker points show 18 of the 25 tracts highlighted in Panel
A, which include Federal Way and West Kent (seven of the 25 most common tracts are not shown due to missing rental data).
The black best-fit line is estimated using a regression of upward mobility on median rent for two-bedroom homes, weighted by
the number of children growing up in households below the 50th percentile of the national income distribution in each tract.
Woodinville and Newport, denoted by hollow points, are examples of tracts with rents comparable to Federal Way and West
Kent but offer much better prospects for upward mobility for children.
                           FIGURE 2: Definition of High-Opportunity Neighborhoods
                                                                 A. CMTO High-Opportunity Neighborhoods


                                                  Shoreline
                                                                                                        Cottage
                                                                                                         Lake
                                                        Lake City                Inglewood
                    Seattle City                                                                                                            High-Opportunity
                                                          Northeast
                    Boundary                 Ballard
                                                           Seattle                                    Redmond
                                                                                                                                            Area
                                            Magnolia
                                                         Capitol
                                                          Hill                          Bellevue


                                              West              Rainier
                                             Seattle            Valley                              Cougar
                                                                                      Newport       Mountain      Issaquah



                                                       Burien
                                                                            Tukwila


                                                                                       East Hill
                                                                          Kent
                                                            Des
                                                           Moines
                                                                                        Lea Hill,
                                                  Federal                               Auburn
                                                   Way




                                                         B. Comparing Alternative Measures of Opportunity


                        Opportunity Atlas Upward Mobility                                                                     Kirwan Child Opportunity Index




           < 36                     48                              > 57                                          < 0.53 SD       0.35 SD          > 0.80 SD
           ($27k)                  ($40k)                          ($51k)

                                                  Population-Weighted Correlation Across Tracts: 0.30
                                              These maps must be printed in color to be interpretable



Notes: Panel A shows the tracts designated as high-opportunity areas in the CMTO experiment, which are shown in blue
cross-hatch. Panel B compares upward mobility as defined in the Opportunity Atlas (replicating Panel A of Figure 1) to
the Kirwan Child Opportunity Index. The Kirwan Child Opportunity Index is constructed by The Kirwan Institute for the
Study of Race and Ethnicity and combines 19 components measured between 2007 and 2013 from three subject domains
(Educational Opportunity, Health and Environmental Opportunity, and Social and Economic Opportunity), into a single
index. The population-weighted correlation between the two measures across tracts in King County is 0.30.
                                          FIGURE 3: CMTO Program Structure
                                                       A. Key Elements of the Intervention




                                          · High-opportunity area education to increase families' knowledge about
                                            high-opportunity areas.
              CUSTOMIZED                  · Rental application coaching to increase families' competitiveness for rental
                 SEARCH                     units by addressing credit history and preparing a narrative.
              A S S I S TA N C E          · Housing locator services to help families identify suitable units in high-
                                            opportunity areas.



                                          · Cultivate relationships with landlords in designated high-opportunity
               INCREASED                    areas to create housing opportunities for CMTO families.
               LANDLORD                   · Expedite lease-up processes by completing PHA required documents and
              ENGAGEMENT                    conducting housing inspections more quickly.
                                          · Insurance fund to mitigate risks of property damage.




              SHORT-TERM                · Grants to defray move-in expenses, such as application fees and security
               FINANCIAL                  deposits (on average $1,000).
              A S S I S TA N C E




                                                        B. Intervention Process Timeline

             Family Contacted                                                                     Unit Selected
                                                          Voucher Issued                                                  Lease
            Notified of selection                                                             Family approved by
                                                                                                                          Signed
                from waitlist                                                                   landlord for unit




                         Intake            Nonprofit Staff Meet with Families and Landlords                    Lease Up
                      Appointment                                                                     Receive paperwork and
                        Consent        Rental application coaching       Search assistance              financial assistance
                     Randomization     Opportunity area education      Landlord recruitment         (e.g. assistance for deposit)
                     Baseline survey         Visiting locations       Linking families to units

                                                                                                      PHA     Nonprofit    Family Milestone




Notes: Panel A of this figure describes the key components of the CMTO intervention. Panel B presents a stylized timeline
of the treatment intervention from the perspective of a family in the treatment group.
                                                                                 FIGURE 4: CMTO Treatment Effects on Neighborhood Choice


                                                               A. Fraction Who Lease Units in High-Opportunity Areas                                                                 B. Fraction who Leased Up Before Voucher Expiration




                                                                                                                                                                            100
                                                               60




                                                                                                               53.0%                                                                                                                      87.4%
                                                                                                                                                                                                        85.9%




                                                                                                                         Share of Households Who Have Moved
                          Share of Households Who Have Moved

                                                               50




                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                to High Opportunity Areas
                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                               30




                                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                               20




                                                                                15.1%     Historical mean
                                                                                            rate: 11.6%




                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                               0




                                                                               Control                       Treatment                                                                                 Control                          Treatment
                                                                    Difference: 37.9 pp                                                                                                    Difference: 1.5 pp
                                                                           SE: (4.2)                                                                                                              SE: (3.3)


     C. Fraction Who Lease Units in High-Opportunity Areas, Conditional                                                                                                                               D. Upward Mobility in Destination Tract
                        on Leasing Up Somewhere




                                                                                                                                                                                          50
       to High Opportunity Areas, Given They Moved




                                                                                                                                                      Mean Household Income Rank (p=25)
                                                                                                              60.7%
          Share of Households Who Have Moved




                                                                                                                                                                                          48
                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                              in Neighborhood                                                               46.1
                                                                                                                                                                                          46
                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                                                            44.5
                                                                                                                                                                                          44
                                                     20




                                                                             17.6%
                                                                                                                                                                                          42
                                                                                                                                                                                          40




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Control                        Treatment
                                                     0




                                                                            Control                         Treatment                                                                          Difference: 1.6 ranks
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SE: (0.4)
                                                                Difference: 43.1 pp
                                                                       SE: (4.6)




Notes: This figure shows the treatment effects of the CMTO program on families' neighborhood choices. Panel A presents the
treatment effect on the fraction who lease up a unit in a high-opportunity tract, as defined in Figure 2. The dashed line in
Panel A shows the fraction of voucher recipients who leased units in high-opportunity areas between 2015 and 2017. Panel B
presents the treatment effect on leasing up in any area prior to voucher expiration. Panel C presents the treatment effect on
leasing up in a high-opportunity area conditional on leasing up somewhere. Panel D presents the treatment effect on upward
mobility in the destination, as measured in the Opportunity Atlas, unconditional on lease-up (assigning upward mobility in the
origin tract to households who did not lease up). In all panels, the control mean is calculated as the mean within households
in the control group. Treatment effects, reported below each panel, are estimated using an OLS regression of the outcome on a
treatment indicator and an indicator for being in KCHA/SHA (since randomization occurred within each housing authority).
The treatment mean plotted is calculated as the control mean plus the estimated treatment effect. Standard errors reported
are robust standard errors. Panels A, B, and D use the full sample, excluding three households whose voucher was transferred
to a different public housing authority (other than KCHA/SHA). Panel C further restricts the sample to the 370 households
who leased up somewhere using their voucher before it expired. All panels focus on the outcome of the first lease-up after
voucher issuance.
                       FIGURE 5: Map of Destination Tracts for Voucher Recipients



                                                  Lake City
                                                         Inglewood
                                                                                                        High-Opportunity
                               Ballard
                                            Northeast Seattle
                                                                                                        Area
                           Magnolia
                                                  Capitol
                                                   Hill
                                                                                                        Control
                                                                    Bellevue
                                                                                                        CMTO
                                                                                                        Treatment
                          West                                                 Cougar     Issaquah
                         Seattle                                    Newport    Mountain
                                               Rainier
                                               Valley

                                   Burien
                                                          Tukwila


                                                                       East Hill
                                      Des                Kent
                                     Moines


                                                                       Lea Hill,
                           Federal                                     Auburn
                            Way




Notes: This figure presents a map of the destination tracts for families in the CMTO treatment and the control groups who
moved using their vouchers. High-opportunity areas are highlighted in blue cross-hatch. We focus on the destination tract of
the first lease-up after voucher issuance. We exclude 5 households whose vouchers were transferred to different public housing
authorities (3 households) or who used their vouchers to lease up units outside of King County (2 households). To protect
confidentiality, we add a small amount of random noise to the destination tract centroids shown in the maps.
 FIGURE 6: Distribution of Tract-Level Upward Mobility in Destinations Chosen by Treatment
                                     vs. Control Group


                                            Control
                                            Treatment




                              0.10
                              0.08
                           Density
                            0.06
                              0.04
                              0.02
                              0.00




                                     30                      40                       50                      60
                                          Upward Mobility (Predicted Income Rank in Adulthood of Child with
                                                  Parents at 25th Percentile) in Destination Tract




Notes: This figure plots the distribution of upward mobility (based on the Opportunity Atlas estimates shown in Figure 1)
in the tracts to which families in the control and CMTO treatment groups move using their vouchers. We focus on upward
mobility in the tract of first lease-up after voucher issuance, restricting the sample to households who leased up. Bandwidths
for the kernel densities are calculated to minimize integrated square error assuming the data is Gaussian and a Gaussian kernel
is used.
                                                     FIGURE 7: Heterogeneity in Treatment Effects


                                                                            A. Treatment Effects by Race and Ethnicity




                                                80
                           Percent of Households Who Moved
                                                                                                               62.3%


                                                       60
                               to High Opportunity Areas                                                                                          56.0%

                                                                                47.6%
                                          40



                                                                Diff. = 36.7                   Diff. = 42.7                       Diff. = 36.4
                                                                        (5.8)                          (9.0)                              (8.6)



                                                                                                  19.6%                            19.6%
                              20




                                                                  10.9%
                                                0




                                                                  Control Treatment               Control Treatment                 Control Treatment
                                                                  Black Non-Hispanic              White Non-Hispanic                Other Race/Ethnicity




                                                                                     B. Treatment Effects by Income
                                                70         60
                             Percent of Households Who Moved




                                                                                          53.4%                                              52.8%
                                 to High Opportunity Areas
                                               40      50




                                                                     Diff. = 36.6                                 Diff. = 39.2
                                         30




                                                                             (6.0)                                        (6.0)
                                  20




                                                                       16.8%
                                                                                                                       13.6%
                           10                   0




                                                                       Control       Treatment                         Control       Treatment
                                                                          Income < $19,000                                Income > $19,000




Notes: This figure presents estimates of treatment effects on the share of households moving to high-opportunity areas by
race/ethnicity (Panel A) and baseline income level (Panel B) of the voucher recipient. Treatment and control means are
estimated separately within each subgroup following exactly the same method used to construct the pooled estimates reported
in Panel A of Figure 4; see notes to that figure for further details. Panel A uses the 98% of participants who report their race
and Panel B uses the 99% who report their income. The cutoff used in Panel B ($19,000) to divide the two groups corresponds
to the median income of the participants in the experiment.
                                                             FIGURE 8: Treatment Effects on Neighborhood and Unit Quality



                                                                         A. Distance Moved                                                                                                                 B. Unit Size
                                            15




                                                                                                                                                                        1500
     Origin and Destination Tract Centers




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1299.0
                                                                                                                                                                                           1257.2
      Mean Distance in Miles Between




                                                                                                                            11.4
                                                              10.5




                                                                                                                                                  Square Feet of Home
                                            10




                                                                                                                                                                        1000
                                                                                                                                                                        500
                                            5
                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                            Control                                                     Treatment                                                         Control                         Treatment
                                                 Difference: 0.9 miles                                                                                                         Difference: 41.8 sq. feet
                                                        SE: (1.2)                                                                                                                     SE: (80.8)




                                                                                                                                C. Total Rent Paid to Owner
                                                                                                   2200




                                                                                                                                                                                    $2,012.86


                                                                                                                    $1,824.57
                                                                                                   1800
                                                                                Monthly Rent ($)
                                                                                                   1400
                                                                                                   1000




                                                                                                                     Control                                                       Treatment
                                                                                                          Difference: $188.29
                                                                                                                 SE: (56.7)




Notes: This figure shows treatment effects on the distance moved, square footage of the unit families lease, and the total rent
paid to the property owner for the unit. Distance is calculated as the distance between the centroid of the tract in which the
voucher recipient lived at baseline and the centroid of the tract to which they moved. We topcode distance at 50 miles to
reduce the influence of outliers. Treatment and control means are estimated among the subsample of households who leased
up following exactly the same method used to construct the pooled estimates reported in Panel C of Figure 4; see notes to
that figure for further details.
                  FIGURE 9: Persistence of Treatment Effects on Neighborhood Choice

                                                                                        A. Persistence in High-Opportunity Areas


                                                                                      Control
                                                                                                                                 64.1%
                                                                                      Treatment
                                                                                                                                                      60.0%




                                                           60
                            Percentage of Households who Live
                                in a High Opportunity Area
                                               40



                                                                                    19.1%               19.1%
                                  20                                0




                                                                                Initial Move        Feb 6, 2020               Initial Move         Feb 6, 2020
                                                                          Change in Treatment Effect from Initial Move to Feb 6, 2020: -4.1 pp
                                                                                                                                   SE: (13.3)




                                                                                                     B. Persistence in Unit
                                                                    100




                                                                                        87.2%                                                      86.8%
                            Percentage who Remain in Initial Unit

                                                                    80
                                     as of Feb 6, 2020
                                                                    60
                                                                    40
                                                                    20
                                                                    0




                                                                                       Control                                                   Treatment
                                                                          Difference: -0.4 pp
                                                                                 SE: (7.1)




Notes: This figure evaluates whether families who moved to high-opportunity neighborhoods stay there when their lease
comes up for renewal. We focus on the subset of families who were issued a voucher before September 1, 2018 and who
leased up before January 7, 2019. Panel A plots the fraction of families within this sample who initially leased a unit in
a high-opportunity area alongside the fraction who live in a high-opportunity area as of February 6, 2020. Treatment and
control means are estimated among the subsample of households who leased up following exactly the same method used to
construct the pooled estimates reported in Panel C of Figure 4; see notes to that figure for further details. Panel B shows the
fraction of households who live in exactly the same unit in which they originally leased up as of February 6, 2020. In both
panels, we exclude 4 households whose location we cannot track as of February 6, 2020 because their voucher was transferred
to another public housing authority or because they ended their participation in the voucher program entirely.
                FIGURE 10: Treatment Effects on Post-Move Neighborhood Satisfaction

                                                                          A. Satisfaction with New Neighborhood




                                                        80
                                                                                                                    64.2%




                                                        60
                            with New Neighborhood
                             Share Very Satisfied                        45.5%

                                                        40
                                                        20
                                                        0




                                                                        Control                                   Treatment
                                                             Difference: 18.7 pp
                                                                    SE: (10.1)




                                                                B. Certainty About Wanting to Stay in New Neighborhood
                                                        60




                                                                                                                    47.7%
                            Stay in New Neighborhood
                            Share Very Sure They Will

                                                        40




                                                                         30.3%
                                                        20
                                                        0




                                                                        Control                                   Treatment
                                                             Difference: 17.4 pp
                                                                    SE: (9.8)



Notes: This figure shows treatment effects using data from a follow-up qualitative survey administered to a random sample
of CMTO participants. Panel A shows treatment effects on measures of neighborhood satisfaction. Participants were asked,
"Which of the following statements best describes how satisfied you are with your current neighborhood? 1. Very Satisfied -
2. Somewhat satisfied - 3. In the middle - 4. Somewhat dissatisfied - 5. Very dissatisfied - 6. (No Answer)." Panel B presents
measures of the certainty with which participants want to stay in their new neighborhood. Participants were asked, "Which
of the following statements best describes how you feel about staying in your current neighborhood? - 1. Very sure I want to
stay - 2. Somewhat sure I want to stay - 3. In the middle - 4. Somewhat sure I want to move to a different neighborhood
- 5. Very sure I want to move to a different neighborhood - 6. (No Answer)." The outcomes in each panel are the fraction
of respondents who give an answer of "1" to the relevant question. Treatment and control means are estimated among the
subsample of households who leased up and were surveyed post-lease-up, following exactly the same method used to construct
the pooled estimates reported in Panel C of Figure 4; see notes to that figure for further details. For the full distribution of
responses to these two questions, see Appendix Figure 6.
                                            FIGURE 11: Neighborhood Satisfaction in Low vs. High-Opportunity Areas


                                                  A. Satisfaction with New Neighborhood                                                           B. Certainty about Wanting to Stay in New Neighborhood
                                  100




                                                                                                                                                 80
                                                                                                                  Control                                                                                                                          Control
                                                                       88.9%                                      Treatment                                                                                                                        Treatment
                                                                         n=9                                                                                                                       66.7%
                                       80




                                                                                                                              Percentage Very Sure They Will
                                                                                                                                                                                                    n=9
                                                                                                               73.1%




                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                Stay in New Neighborhood
             Percentage Very Satisfied
              with New Neighborhood




                                                                                                               n = 67                                                                                                                       53.7%
                                            Diff. = 59.7                                                                                                                                                                                     n = 67
                                                                                  Diff. = 30.3
                            60




                                                   (17.0)                                (10.4)                                                                         Diff. = 50.0                           Diff. = 21.6
                                                                                                                                                                               (16.2)                                 (11.1)




                                                                                                                                           40
                                                                                         42.9%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      32.1%
                    40




                                                                                          n = 28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n = 28
                                                   29.2%
                                                    n = 24




                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                               16.7%
                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                                n = 24
                                  0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                Moved to              Moved to        Moved to             Moved to                                                         Moved to             Moved to          Moved to               Moved to
                                              Non-Opp. Area           Opp. Area     Non-Opp. Area          Opp. Area                                                      Non-Opp. Area          Opp. Area       Non-Opp. Area            Opp. Area


                                            C. Satisfaction with Baseline Neighborhood                                                         D. Certainty about Wanting to Stay in Baseline Neighborhood
                          100




                                                                                                                                                         80
                                                                                                               Control                                                                                                                              Control
                                                                                                               Treatment                                                                                                                            Treatment



                                                                                                                                     Stay in Neighborhood at Baseline
                                                                                                                                      Percentage Very Sure They Will
                                    80
       with Neighborhood at Baseline




                                                                                                                                                               60
          Percentage Very Satisfied

                         60




                                                                                                                                                   40



                                                      Diff. = -1.1                              Diff. = 0.5                                                                               Diff. = -4.5                             Diff. = -2.3
                                                              (8.7)                                    (6.3)                                                                                      (7.8)                                    (6.2)
                40




                                                 26.1%                                                                                                                                                                   21.9%
                                                                      25.0%                                                                                                       20.1%                                                        19.6%
                                                                                       21.9%               22.4%
                                                                                                                                       20




                                                 n = 134                                                                                                                                              15.6%               n = 73
                                                                      n = 32                                                                                                      n = 134                                                      n = 107
      20




                                                                                       n = 73              n = 107
                                                                                                                                                                                                      n = 32
                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                              Moved to           Moved to           Moved to            Moved to                                                              Moved to             Moved to          Moved to               Moved to
                                            Non-Opp. Area        Opp. Area        Non-Opp. Area         Opp. Area                                                           Non-Opp. Area          Opp. Area       Non-Opp. Area            Opp. Area




Notes: Panels A and B of this figure present the same measures of neighborhood satisfaction and certainty about wanting
to stay as in Figure 10, further disaggregating treatment and control group differences by whether families moved to high-
opportunity areas or not. We construct these figures by plotting raw shares for each group: control group households that
moved to an area not designated as high-opportunity, control group households that moved to a high-opportunity area,
treatment group households who moved to an area not designated as high-opportunity, and treatment group households that
moved to a high-opportunity area. The differences in the outcomes between households who moved to high-opportunity areas
vs. those who did not are estimated by running separate regressions by treatment group on an indicator for having moved to
a high-opportunity area. Panels C and D replicate Panels A and B, but use data from responses to the same questions asked
in the baseline survey with reference to the neighborhoods where families were living at the point of voucher application (in
contrast with Panels A and B, which use responses given after lease-up using their voucher).
     FIGURE 12: Distribution of Preferences for High-Opportunity Neighborhoods Implied by
                                       Frictionless Model




                                                      100
               Cumulative Distribution Function (%)

                                                                                                     60.7% have WTP < $2,660 for
                                                                                                    low-opportunity neighborhood
                                                      50 60.7




                                                                  17.6% have WTP < $0 for
                                                                low-opportunity neighborhood
                                                      17.6




                                                                                                 $2,660 (cost of CMTO program)
                                                      0




                                                        -$40,000        -$20,000              $0            $20,000        $40,000
                                                                       Net Willingness to Pay for Low-Opportunity Area
                                                                     V(Low Opportunity Area) ­ V(High Opportunity Area)



Notes: This figure illustrates what we can learn about families' net willingness to pay to live in low- vs. high-opportunity
neighborhoods under the assumptions of a frictionless model of neighborhood choice in which CMTO services are valued at
their production cost (see Online Appendix D). The open circle represents the share of families in the control group who chose
to lease up in high-opportunity neighborhoods, i.e. the fraction of families who have a negative net willingness to pay to live
in low-opportunity neighborhoods. The closed circle represents the share of families in the treatment group who chose to lease
up in high-opportunity neighborhoods, i.e. the fraction of families who have a net willingness to pay to live in low-opportunity
neighborhoods below $2,660, the cost of the CMTO services they were offered. Any distribution of preferences must pass
through these two points ­ i.e., it must be that 43.1% of households have a WTP between $0 and $2,660 ­ in order to match
the behavior observed in the CMTO experiment under a frictionless model of neighborhood choice. The red curve shows one
such distribution.
           FIGURE 13: Effects of Voucher Payment Standards on Moving to Opportunity:
                                  Quasi-Experimental Estimates



                                                                                A. KCHA 5-Tier Payment Standard Reform
                                                                                                               5 Tier Reform




                                                           70
                                                                                                               in KCHA

                          Percent of Households Who Moved

                                                        60
                                                                         If voucher holders from
                              to High Opportunity Areas                  KCHA had received CMTO
                                                   50
                                                                         treatment in March 2016
                                            40

                                                                                                                                                        38 pp
                                       30




                                                                                                                                              KCHA
                                 20




                                                                                                                                              SHA
                           10                   0




                                                                  Aug/Sep    Oct/Nov    Dec/Jan    Feb/Mar     Apr/May   Jun/Jul   Aug/Sep    Oct/Nov
                                                                   2015       2015      2015/16     2016        2016      2016      2016       2016

                                                                                               Date of Voucher Issuance
                                                                Effect of 5-Tier Reform: -3.59 ranks
                                                                                        (5.75)

                                                                  B. SHA Family Access Supplement for High-Opportunity Areas
                          10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
                          Percent of Households Who Moved




                                                                                       Supplement
                              to High Opportunity Areas




                                                                                       Introduced




                                                                                                        CMTO Pilot


                                                                                                                                              HHs w/ Kids

                                                                                                                                              HHs w/out Kids
                                                0




                                                                   Aug/Sep       Oct/Nov      Dec/Jan   Feb/Mar/Apr      May/Jun    Jul/Aug      Sep/Oct
                                                                    2017          2017        2017/18      2018           2018       2018         2018

                                                                                               Date of Voucher Issuance
                                                                Effect of Family Access Supplement: 13.79 pp
                                                                                                    (5.11)


Notes: This figure plots the share of households who move to high-opportunity areas around the introduction of two payment
standard reforms, in two-month units. In Panel A, we analyze the introduction of a 5-Tier Voucher Payment Standard system
in March 2016 by the King County Housing Authority, which increased payment standards in more expensive neighborhoods.
We plot the fraction of voucher recipients with children who choose to lease up in high-opportunity areas (as defined in the
CMTO experiment in Figure 2) in both KCHA and SHA around this reform. We also report a difference-in-difference estimate
of the treatment effect, estimated using the specification in Section VII.A. As a benchmark, we show the effect of the CMTO
intervention on the same scale using the dashed line in the figure. This line is constructed by adding the treatment effect of
CMTO on moving to high-opportunity areas shown in Figure 4a to the grey series after March 2016. In Panel B, we analyze
the introduction of the Family Access Supplement (FAS) in SHA in February 2018, which increased payment standards in
high-opportunity areas as defined exactly in the CMTO experiment. The FAS was implemented at the same time as the start
of the CMTO pilot, which was conducted from Februrary-April 2018, shown by the shaded region in the figure, and continued
after the pilot ended. The FAS was only available to families with children; we therefore use families without children within
SHA as a comparison group to evaluate the impacts of this reform. We again plot the fraction of voucher recipients in each
group who choose to lease up in high-opportunity areas around this reform and report a difference-in-difference estimate of
the reform's impact (excluding the CMTO pilot period) using the specification in Section VII.A.
    APPENDIX FIGURE 1: Causal Effects of Moving to a Better Neighborhood by Age at Move:
                             Evidence from Prior Research

                       A. United States                                                 B. Australia                        C. Montreal, Canada




  Source: Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones, Porter (2018)   Source: Deutscher (2018)                      Source: Laliberté (2018)



                                                                    E. MTO: Baltimore, Boston,                    F. Chicago Public Housing
                           D. Denmark
                                                                        Chicago, LA, NYC                                 Demolitions




Source: Faurschou (2018)                                    Source: Chetty, Hendren, Katz (AER 2016)   Source: Chyn (AER 2018)




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from a recent set of papers estimating the the causal effects of the neighborhood
in which a child grows up on his or her outcomes in adulthood. Each panel depicts the causal effect of moving to an area
with better observed outcomes, by the age at which children make that move. Panels A-D all use variants of the movers
research design developed in Chetty and Hendren (2018) to estimate childhood exposure effects. Panel A presents tract-level
estimates of exposure effects on income in the U.S. from Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones and Porter (2018). Panel B
presents estimates of exposure effects on income in Australia from Deutscher (2018). Panel C presents estimates of exposure
effects on university enrollment in Montreal, Canada from Lalibert´ e (2018). Panel D presents exposure effect estimates on
income in Denmark from Faurschou (2018). Panel E shows treatment effects on income in adulthood by age at move from
the Moving to Opportunity experiment studied in Chetty, Hendren and Katz (2016). Panel F shows Chyn's (2018) estimates
of the effect of moving to a better neighborhood on income in adulthood by age at move, exploiting the demolition of public
housing projects as a quasi-experiment.
 APPENDIX FIGURE 2: Preliminary vs. Final Versions of Opportunity Atlas Upward Mobility
                                     Measures


                    Final Version of Opportunity Atlas             Preliminary Forecasts Used to Define High-Opportunity Areas




           < 36                 48                 > 57                     < 40                  48          > 53
           ($27k)              ($40k)             ($51k)                    ($31k)            ($40k)          (46k)

                                          Population-Weighted Correlation Across Tracts: 0.74
                                        These maps must be printed in color to be interpretable



Notes: This figure compares the final version of the upward mobility measures from the Opportunity Atlas (shown in Figure
2b) ­ which are the statistics we use to measure the impacts of the CMTO intervention ­ to the preliminary forecasts that we
used to define the "high opportunity" neighborhoods shown in Figure 2a. See notes to Figure 2 for details on the definition of
upward mobility, Chetty et al. (2018) for details on the construction of the final Opportunity Atlas measure, and Appendix
A for details on how the preliminary forecasts of upward mobility were constructed.
                 APPENDIX FIGURE 3: Map of Origin Tracts for Voucher Recipients



                                             Lake City
                                                     Inglewood
                                                                                                            High-Opportunity
                          Ballard     Northeast Seattle                                                     Area
                        Magnolia
                                             Capitol
                                              Hill
                                                                                                            Control
                                                              Bellevue

                                                                                                            CMTO
                                                                                                            Treatment
                       West                                              Cougar     Issaquah
                      Seattle                               Newport      Mountain



                                Burien
                                                  Tukwila


                                                                 East Hill
                                   Des           Kent
                                  Moines

                                                               Lea Hill,
                                                               Auburn
                            Federal
                             Way




Notes: This figure presents a map of the tracts where participants in the CMTO study lived at baseline, by treatment or
control group assignment. High-opportunity areas are highlighted in blue cross-hatch. Voucher recipients whose origin location
was outside the area of Seattle and King County (86 recipients), who where homeless at baseline and didn't report an origin
location (6 recipients), or whose voucher was transferred to a PHA not in the study (3 recipients) are excluded from the map.
To protect confidentiality, we add a small amount of random noise to the destination tract centroids shown in the maps.
                                                APPENDIX FIGURE 4: Predicted Treatment Effects on Other Long-Term Outcomes

                                                A. Teenage Birth Rates of Children from Low-Income Families                                                  B. Incarceration Rates of Children from Low-Income Families
                                                30




                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                              Mean Incarceration Rate When Parents at p=25
    Mean Teen Birth Rate When Parents at p=25




                                                                 21.1%
                                                                                                                                                                              2.0%
                                                20




                                                                                                                                                             2
                   in Tract (%)




                                                                                                                               in Tract (%)
                                                                                                16.5%                                                                                                         1.6%
                                                10




                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                0




                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                Control                       Treatment                                                                     Control                        Treatment
                                                     Difference: -4.6 pp                                                                                         Difference: -0.4 pp
                                                            SE: (0.8)                                                                                                   SE: (0.1)




Notes: These figures replicate Panel D of Figure 4, plotting the predicted effects of CMTO on other long-term outcomes based
on the destination tract to which families moved. Importantly, as in Figure 4d, these are not outcomes of CMTO participants
themselves. Rather, they are outcomes of children in the 1978-83 birth cohorts who grew up in households with family income
at the 25th percentile of the national income distribution in the destination neighborhoods to which CMTO participants
moved. Panel A presents the predicted effect on the tract-level teenage birth rates for women, drawing on data from the
Opportunity Atlas. Panel B presents the predicted effect on incarceration rates (on April 1, 2010) for children who grew up
in the tract. We construct these in exactly the same way as Panel D of Figure 4, simply changing the outcome variable; see
notes to that figure for details.
       APPENDIX FIGURE 5: Unconditional Short-Run Persistence of Treatment Effects on
                                Neighborhood Choice


                                                                           Control
                                                                           Treatment




                                                          60
                                                                                                                     56.9%



                           Percentage of Households who Live
                                                                                                                                  55.8%




                               in a High Opportunity Area
                                 20           40




                                                                         16.9%              16.9%
                                                 0




                                                                     Feb 6, 2019        Feb 6, 2020              Feb 6, 2019   Feb 6, 2020
                                                               Change in Treatment Effect from Feb 6, 2019 to 2020: -1.1 pp
                                                                                                               SE: (11.9)




Notes: This figure replicates Panel A of Figure 9, but does not condition on families leasing up a unit. See notes to that figure
for details.
        APPENDIX FIGURE 6: Treatment Effects on Post-Move Neighborhood Satisfaction

                                                                                       A. Satisfaction with New Neighborhood

                                                                                                                                                               62.9%
                                                                                 Control                                                                       n = 61




                                                60
                                                                                 Treatment

                          Neighborhood Satisfaction
                                                                                                                                                      45.5%
                                                                                                                                                      n = 15
                                         40



                                                                                                                                     27.3%
                                                                                                                                      n=9
                                                                                                                    21.2%
                             20




                                                                                                                     n=7

                                                                                                                            13.4%            12.4%
                                                                                                                            n = 13
                                                                                                                                             n = 12
                                                                                                           7.2%
                                                                                                           n=7
                                                                              2.1%    3.0% 2.1%     3.0%
                                                                       0.0%   n=2     n=1    n=2     n=1
                                                0




                                                                        n=0

                                                                          No            Very      Somewhat       Neither     Somewhat                  Very
                                                                        Answer       Dissatisfied Dissatisfied Satisfied nor Satisfied                Satisfied
                                                                                                               Unsatisfied
                                                                      Difference in % Very Satisfied: 17.3pp
                                                                                                SE: (10.1)




                                                                              B. Certainty about Wanting to Stay in New Neighborhood
                                                                 60




                                                                                 Control
                          Certainty About Wanting to Stay or Leave




                                                                                 Treatment
                                                                                                                                                               46.4%
                                                                                                                                                               n = 45
                                                    40




                                                                                                                                                      30.3%
                                                                                                                                                      n = 10
                                                                                     24.2%
                                                                                      n=8                                            21.2%
                                      20




                                                                                                                                      n=7
                                                                                                                            16.5%            16.5%
                                                                                                                            n = 16           n = 16
                                                                                                    12.1% 12.4%     12.1%
                                                                                                     n=4   n = 12    n=4
                                                                                             6.2%
                                                                                             n=6
                                                                              2.1%
                                                                       0.0%   n=2
                          0




                                                                        n=0

                                                                          No         Very Sure      Somewhat In the Middle Somewhat                   Very Sure
                                                                        Answer       Wants to         Sure                   Sure                     Wants to
                                                                                       Move          Wants to               Wants to                    Stay
                                                                                                      Move                   Stay
                                                                      Difference in % Very Sure Want to Stay: 16.3pp
                                                                                                        SE: (9.7)




Notes: This figure uses data from a follow-up qualitative survey administered to a random sample of CMTO participants.
Panel A shows the distribution of neighborhood satisfaction in the treatment and control groups. Participants were asked,
"Which of the following statements best describes how satisfied you are with your current neighborhood? 1. Very Satisfied -
2. Somewhat satisfied - 3. In the middle - 4. Somewhat dissatisfied - 5. Very dissatisfied - 6. (No Answer)." Panel B presents
measures of the certainty with which participants want to stay in their new neighborhood. Participants were asked, "Which
of the following statements best describes how you feel about staying in your current neighborhood? - 1. Very sure I want to
stay - 2. Somewhat sure I want to stay - 3. In the middle - 4. Somewhat sure I want to move to a different neighborhood - 5.
Very sure I want to move to a different neighborhood - 6. (No Answer)." The sample consists of all households who leased-up
and were surveyed after lease-up.
   APPENDIX FIGURE 7: Changes to King County Housing Authority Payment Standards in
                                   March 2016




                                                                                                       Increase in Max
                                                                                                             Rent
                                                                                                         for 2BR Apt.

                                                                                                              > $400



                                                                                                                 $250



                                                                                                              < $150




Notes: This figure maps the changes in payment standards implemented in March 2016 by KCHA. The map plots the changes
in the maximum monthly rent for a two-bedroom apartment that could be paid for using a housing voucher from KCHA,
comparing maximum rents in the pre-period (January 2015 to February 2016) to the post-period (March 2016 to December
2017). Darker areas experienced larger increases in maximum rent allowances.
