                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                               SCREENING AND SELECTION:
                               THE CASE OF MAMMOGRAMS


                                          Liran Einav
                                        Amy Finkelstein
                                         Tamar Oostrom
                                        Abigail J. Ostriker
                                        Heidi L. Williams

                                       Working Paper 26162
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26162


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019


We are grateful to Leila Agha, Emily Oster and participants in the Dartmouth/NIA P01 Reserach
Meeting and the NBER Health Care Summer Institute for helpful comments, and to the Laura and
John Arnold Foundation for financial support. This material is based upon work supported by the
National Institute on Aging through Grant Number T32-AG000186 and the National Science
Foundation Graduate Fellowship Program under Grant Number 1122374 (Oostrom). The authors
acknowledge the assistance of the Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI) and its data contributors,
Aetna, Humana, and UnitedHealthcare, in providing the claims data analyzed in this study. This
study also used the linked SEER-Medicare database. The interpretation and reporting of these
data are the sole responsibility of the authors. The authors acknowledge the efforts of the
National Cancer Institute; the Office of Research, Development and Information, CMS;
Information Management Services (IMS), Inc.; and the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results (SEER) Program tumor registries in the creation of the SEER-Medicare database The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26162.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Tamar Oostrom, Abigail J. Ostriker, and Heidi L.
Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Screening and Selection: The Case of Mammograms
Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Tamar Oostrom, Abigail J. Ostriker, and Heidi L. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 26162
August 2019
JEL No. I11,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

Debates over whether and when to recommend screening for a potential disease focus on the
causal impact of screening for a typical individual covered by the recommendation, who may
differ from the typical individual who responds to the recommendation. We explore this
distinction in the context of recommendations that breast cancer screening start at age 40. The
raw data suggest that responders to the age 40 recommendation have less cancer than do women
who self-select into screening at earlier ages. Combining these patterns with a clinical oncology
model allows us to infer that responders to the age 40 recommendation also have less cancer than
women who never screen, suggesting that the benefits of recommending early screening are
smaller than if responders were representative of covered individuals. For example, we estimate
that shifting the recommendation from age 40 to age 45 results in over three times as many deaths
if responders were randomly drawn from the population than under the estimated patterns of
selection. These results highlight the importance of considering the characteristics of responders
when making and designing recommendations.

Liran Einav                                     Abigail J. Ostriker
Stanford University                             Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Economics                         abigail.ostriker@gmail.com
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                         Heidi L. Williams
and NBER                                        Department of Economics
leinav@stanford.edu                             Stanford University
                                                579 Serra Mall
Amy Finkelstein                                 Office 323
Department of Economics, E52-442                Stanford, CA 94305
Massachusetts Institute of Technology           and NBER
50 Memorial Drive                               hlwill@stanford.edu
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu

Tamar Oostrom
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
oostrom@mit.edu
1    Introduction
Whether and when to recommend screening for potential diseases is a highly controversial and evolving
policy area, with active academic research.1 Much of the debate ­ both in public policy and in academia ­
centers on the causal impact of screening for a typical individual covered by the recommendation. Estimat-
ing this causal impact is challenging for several well-known reasons. First, there are the usual challenges
to causal inference. Second, many of the potential costs and benefits of screening are difficult to measure
and to monetize.2 In this paper, we highlight another important ­ and, we believe, overlooked ­ challenge
in analyzing and designing screening policies: the typical individual covered by a recommendation may be
very different from the typical individual who responds to the recommendation. As a result, the estimated
impact of the screening for a randomly selected individual may be quite different from the impact for an
affected individual.
    We explore this distinction in the context of the current controversy over whether to recommend annual
mammograms for women starting at age 40. Results from randomized trials have consistently failed to show
statistically significant mortality benefits of mammograms for women in their 40s, and in 2009 this prompted
the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPTF) to change its recommendation for routine mammograms to
begin at age 50 rather than at age 40. This change generated substantial public controversy (Kolata, 2009;
Saad, 2009; Berry, 2013).
    This debate has focused on the costs and benefits of mammograms for typical ("average-risk") 40 year
old women, with little attention paid to what types of women respond to a screening recommendation and
whether the costs and benefits for them may differ from the average woman. To investigate the type of
women who respond, we draw on two primary data sources. The first is insurance claims data on mammo-
gram choices and their results (negative, false positive, or true positive) for privately insured women aged
35-50 from the Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI). The second is cancer registry data, from the National
Cancer Institute's Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) database, on the size and stage of
detected tumors for women aged 35-50 who were diagnosed with breast cancer.
    The visual evidence shows sharp and pronounced changes in behavior and outcomes at age 40. There is
an over 25 percentage point jump in the annual mammogram rate at age 40, from 10 percent to 35 percent of
women. Women who respond to the recommendation have a lower incidence of cancer than do women who
choose screening in the absence of the recommendation: there is a roughly 30 percent decline (from 0.84%
to 0.56%) in the share of screened women diagnosed with cancer (i.e. true positives) at age 40. Given the
high rate of false positives (about 90 percent of initial positive mammograms turn out to be false positives),
the sharp increase in the mammogram rate at age 40 translates into a substantial increase in the number of
women experiencing false positives (from about 10 per thousand women to about 40). This is consistent
    1 For example, Welch, Schwartz,, and Woloshin (2011) argue that although many medical conditions ­ such as high blood

pressure, elevated blood glucose levels, low bone density, and high cholesterol ­ benefit from treatment, there has been a trend
over time towards widespread use of medical screening tests and increasingly low diagnostic thresholds that recommend treating
patients for whom the benefits from treatments are quite small. By contrast, Maciosek et al. (2010) review these same screening
efforts and conclude that they save a large number of lives at relatively low cost .
    2 The costs and benefits of screening include monetary costs, clinical outcomes, discomfort from unnecessary procedures, and

psychological effects induced by the screening process, including pre-screening apprehension and anxiety due to false positives
(e.g Ong and Mandl, 2015; Welch, 2015; Welch and Passow, 2014; Nelson et al., 2009; Brett et al., 2005).


                                                               1
with a key concern regarding false positives that motivated moving the recommended age of mammogram
from 40 to 50 (Nelson et al., 2009). Moreover, among those diagnosed with cancer, the registry data show
a sharp decline in the average tumor's stage and size starting at age 40. For example, the share of detected
tumors that are invasive (i.e. later stage) as opposed to in situ falls by about 6 percentage points (or 7 percent)
at age 40.
    These descriptive results indicate that women who respond to the recommendation for a mammogram
have lower risk of cancer than those who seek mammograms in the absence of the recommendation. Inter-
estingly, we find that women who respond to the recommendation also appear to be more likely to comply
with other types of recommended preventive care, such as cervical cancer screening tests and flu shots. This
is consistent with Oster (2018)'s finding that when a health behavior is recommended, those who comply
with the recommendation tend to exhibit other positive health behaviors.
    To assess the implications of these findings and to quantify costs and health outcomes under various
counterfactual selection scenarios, we specify a model of mammogram demand that is a function of a
woman's age, her (undiagnosed) cancer type (no cancer, in situ, or invasive), and whether or not a mam-
mogram is recommended at her age. We estimate the model by method of moments, using two key inputs.
First, we leverage our data on the observed patterns of mammogram decisions and mammogram outcomes
(specifically, cancer type) for women by age. Second, we bring in a clinical oncology model of the underly-
ing rate of onset of breast cancer by age, as well as cancers' clinical progression in the absence of detection
and treatment. In the absence of a clinical model, these objects are inherently difficult (or impossible) to
observe: cancer incidence is not observed in the non-screened population, and almost all detected cancer
is treated immediately upon detection. The clinical model of breast cancer incidence and progression is
drawn from a large scale, coordinated project funded by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) involving seven
different research groups (Clarke et al., 2006); we show robustness of our findings to a range of alternative
assumptions about the onset and distribution of cancer type by age.
    The estimates from our model indicate that women who would select into mammograms in the absence
of the recommendation have much higher rates of both in situ and invasive cancer than the general popula-
tion. We refer to this as "positive selection" into mammograms (positive with respect to cancer incidence).
However, our estimates indicate that the women who select into mammograms due to the recommendation
are much less likely to have invasive cancer ­ and are no more likely to have in-situ cancer ­ than women
who do not select into mammograms. The relative degree of selection pre- and post- the age 40 recommen-
dation is identified directly from our data; the clinical model of underlying cancer incidence is needed to
assess whether the observed selection either pre- or post-age 40 is positive with respect to the underlying
population, whose cancer incidence is not directly observed.
    We apply our model and its estimates to illustrate how the nature of selection in response to the recom-
mendation affects the impact of the recommendation. Specifically, we estimate that shifting the recommen-
dation from age 40 to age 45 results in more than three times as many deaths ­ at similar cost savings ­ if we
assume that those who respond to the recommendation are randomly drawn from the population rather than
drawn based on the estimated selection patterns. We view this as a particularly instructive counterfactual
since assuming the individuals who respond are randomly drawn from the population is conceptually simi-


                                                        2
lar to using estimates of the impact of mammography from randomized experiments (with full compliance).
Because in practice those who respond to the recommendation have a much lower rate of invasive cancer
than the underlying population, the mortality cost of moving the recommendation to age 45 is lower than
under random selection. Conversely, our model also illustrates that if it were feasible to target the recom-
mendations to those with higher rates of cancer, the mortality cost of moving the recommendation from
age 40 to 45 could be substantially larger than even the random selection assumption would imply. This is
consistent with recent interest in reducing over-diagnosis by developing targeting, precision screening for
individuals at higher risk (Elmore, 2016; Esserman et al., 2009).
    Our paper relates to several distinct literatures. Most narrowly, it speaks to the large body of work
on mammograms. A sizable number of randomized trials has explored the impact of mammograms on
subsequent health outcomes (Alexander et al., 1999; Bjurstam et al., 2003; Habbema et al., 1986; Miller
et al., 2000, 2002; Moss et al., 2006; Nyström et al., 2002). In addition, several studies have examined so-
called "over-diagnosis" ­ i.e. screening of a cancer that never would become clinically relevant (Jørgensen
and Gøtzsche, 2009); these studies have analyzed the extent to which increased mammogram screening
rates are associated with increased incidence of small or early stage tumors with no corresponding increase
in large or late-stage tumors, suggesting that increased screening may be identifying tumors that would
never have developed into life-threatening cancers (Bleyer and Welch, 2012; Harding et al., 2015; Jørgensen
and Gøtzsche, 2009; Jørgensen et al., 2017; Welch et al., 2016; Zackrisson et al., 2006). Several studies
have combined these existing estimates to quantify the costs and benefits of mammograms (e.g. Welch
and Passow, 2014; Ong and Mandl, 2015). All of these studies have focused on the average effect of
mammograms on the female population, and did not consider the potential selection that is our focus.
    A related strand of literature investigates how mammogram rates are influenced by factors such as dis-
tance to women's health clinics (Lu and Slusky, 2016), health insurance coverage (Bitler and Carpenter,
2016; Cooper et al., 2017; Fedewa et al., 2015; Finkelstein et al., 2012; Habermann et al., 2007; Kelaher
and Stellman, 2000; Mehta et al., 2015), and recommendations (Kadiyala and Strumpf, 2011, 2016; Jacob-
son and Kadiyala, 2017). Most of these studies break out effects by income, education, race, and other
individual-level characteristics, but are not able to link these demographic characteristics to cancer out-
comes. Of these, Kadiyala and Strumpf (2016) is most closely related to our work; they document a sharp
increase in self-reported mammograms at age 40 and estimate that most of the "newly detected" cancers are
early stage cancers.
    Beyond the specific application of mammograms, there is a broader health policy debate about whether
and when to recommend medical screening tests (e.g. Welch, Schwartz,, and Woloshin, 2011). A central
challenge that has limited empirical research on this topic is that ­ in the datasets typically available to
researchers ­ the testing decision is observed but the outcome of the test is not. An attractive feature of
our setting is that the outcome of the test (i.e. cancer incidence and type of cancer) is measurable both in
claims data and in registry data. In this sense our analysis is similar in spirit to Abaluck et al. (2016), who
are able to measure the outcome of imaging tests for pulmonary embolism in claims data, which they use
to investigate whether and when that imaging test is being "overused." Both our paper and Abaluck et al.
(2016) share a common feature with the racial profiling literature on stop and frisks (e.g. Anwar and Fang


                                                      3
2006; Persico 2009): the object of interest is only observed conditional on an action. This raises an empirical
challenge for analyzing how the action (in our case, screening) relates to the underlying object of interest (in
our case, the underlying incidence of cancer and cancer types). In our setting, we overcome this empirical
challenge by combining two insights. First, the recommendation at age 40 serves as an exogenous source of
variation in the screening rate, allowing us to estimate the cancer type of the marginal person affected by the
recommendation. Second, the clinical oncology model of cancer incidence and growth allows us to use the
observed moments (namely, outcomes conditional on screening under different regimes) to model outcomes
under counterfactual regimes.
      More broadly, our paper speaks to the value of complementing reduced form estimates of causal effects
with economic models of behavior, and particularly of selection. Reduced form methods ­ both quasi-
experimental and randomized experiments ­ aim to estimate causal effects by shutting down any endogenous
choices. In practice, however, most policies involve an element of choice, so that the ultimate impact of the
policy depends not only on the distribution of causal treatment effects but also on which individuals select
into treatment. In this sense our paper relates broadly to the literature on Roy selection, or selection on gains.
In the healthcare context specifically, Einav et al. (2013) emphasize that the impact on healthcare spending
of offering a high deductible health insurance plan may be very different than what would be estimated from
random assignment of high deductible plans across individuals, because the types of people who choose
high deductible plans can have very different health care utilization responses to cost sharing than a typical
individual. Our analysis speaks to a similar issue, in the context of evaluating recommendations for disease
screening.
      The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 briefly summarizes the relevant institutional details
of our empirical context (breast cancer and mammography). Section 3 describes our data and presents
descriptive results. Section 4 presents our model of mammogram choice and describes how we estimate
it using the observed descriptive patterns together with a clinical oncology model. Section 5 presents the
model estimates and discusses their implications for the impact of changing the age of recommendation for
mammogram under both observed and counterfactual selection patterns. The last section concludes.


2      Empirical context
2.1     Breast cancer
The earliest stages of breast cancer typically produce no symptoms and are not detectable in the absence of
screening technologies.3 As breast cancer progresses, it can spread within the breast, to adjacent tissues,
to adjacent lymph nodes, and to distant organs (known as metastases). In clinical settings, tumors are
classified according to the size of the tumor, the extent to which it has spread to lymph nodes, and whether it
has metastasized. Public health research typically relies on a standardized classification ­ namely, the SEER
classification system, which includes four stages: in situ, local, regional, and distant; the last three stages
are collectively referred to as "invasive" tumors.
    3 Unless   otherwise noted, the discussion in this section draws from American Cancer Society (2017a).




                                                                  4
      Our analysis focuses on the distinction between in situ and invasive tumors, because this distinction has
been a key focus of the policy debate around mammography recommendations. In situ refers to abnormal
cells that have not invaded nearby tissues, instead remaining confined to the ducts or glands in which they
originated. Some but not all in situ tumors will become invasive. Expected survival time varies greatly by
stage at diagnosis: patients who are diagnosed with localized breast cancer are 99% as likely as cancer-
free women to survive to 5 years after diagnosis, compared to 85% for regional breast cancer, and 27%
for distant-stage breast cancer.4 Within a stage, survival also varies with tumor size. For example, among
women with regional disease, 5-year survival (again, relative to comparable cancer-free women) is 95%
for tumors smaller than 2 centimeters in diameter, 85% for tumors of 2-5 centimeters, and 72% for tumors
greater than 5 centimeters.5


2.2     Mammography
Asymptomatic breast cancer can be detected by a mammogram, which is a low-dose x-ray procedure that
allows visualization of the internal structure of the breast. If an abnormality is detected on a routine screening
mammogram, the woman is typically called back in for a diagnostic mammogram and ­ if needed ­ a
confirmatory biopsy (Cutler, 2008; Hubbard et al., 2011). Once a diagnosis has been confirmed, the patient
may undergo surgery to remove the tumor, as well as other treatments which aim to reduce the risk of
recurrence, such as radiation therapy, chemotherapy, hormone therapy, and/or targeted therapy.
      Mammography is based on the theory of early detection of invasive cancer, rather than detection and
removal of precancerous lesions (Humphrey et al., 2002). The efficacy of mammography is the subject
of considerable debate. Mechanically, mammography is most beneficial if machines can detect tumors
in their earliest stages, and if tumors (on average) rapidly become more difficult to treat the longer they
go undetected. The benefits from mammography will be lower if a tumor is slow to advance from stage
to stage, if mortality when treatment begins at a later stage is similar to when tumors are treated earlier,
or if mammogram machines are unlikely to correctly identify tumors. In practice, because most patients
diagnosed with breast cancer are treated immediately upon detection, there is little information about the
natural history of breast cancer tumors, making it difficult to know how an individual tumor would have
progressed had it not been treated (Zahl et al., 2008). This complicates attempts to quantify the benefits of
mammography.
      In principle, the major potential health benefit of mammography is reduced mortality. However, in
practice randomized trials of the impact of mammogram on mortality have documented mixed results. There
have been nine trials in total, with the first one dating back to the 1960s (Welch and Black, 2010). Their
estimates of relative risk reduction in breast cancer mortality due to invitation to mammography range
from 0% to 31% (Welch and Passow, 2014), but many of these studies have lacked the statistical power
to separately determine effects in different age groups (Humphrey et al., 2002). In particular, while most
studies indicate that mammography reduces mortality among average-risk women over age 50, recent trials
specifically designed to study mammography in younger women (aged 40-49) have estimated statistically
  4 These   tabulations are drawn from US SEER cancer registry data from 2007-2013, as in American Cancer Society (2017a).
  5 These   tabulations are drawn from US SEER cancer registry data from 2000-2014, as in American Cancer Society (2017a).



                                                              5
insignificant reductions in breast cancer mortality in this age group (Bjurstam et al., 2003; Moss et al., 2006).
    The potential costs of mammography include financial, physical, and psychological costs. These costs
arise from the initial screening, the finding of false positives, and the treatment of cancers that would not
have become clinically relevant in a woman's lifetime (often referred to as "over-diagnosis"). Some of these
costs, such as the financial cost of a screening, are easy to quantify, while others are much more difficult
to estimate. Estimates of the rate of over-diagnosis of breast cancer (from both observational work and
inferences from randomized control trials) range from less than 5% to more than 50% of diagnosed breast
cancers (Oeffinger et al., 2015). Aggregating observational data and randomized studies, Welch and Passow
(2014) estimate that for every 1,000 women aged 40-49 who undergo annual mammography for 10 years,
0.1-1.6 women will avoid dying from breast cancer, while 510-690 will have at least one false positive result
and up to 11 women will be over-diagnosed and (unnecessarily) treated.
    In the 1980s, following the first randomized trials of routine mammography, the National Institutes of
Health (NIH), the National Cancer Institute (NCI), and eleven other health care organizations issued recom-
mendations for routine screenings of women over age 40 (Kolata, 2009). These recommendations became
the subject of controversy over time as more trials were published, and the US federal government subse-
quently reconsidered its position. In 1997, an NIH panel concluded that there was insufficient evidence to
recommend routine screening for women in their 40s, a finding that one radiologist described as a "death
sentence" for women (Taubes, 1997). After public pressure, the Senate encouraged an advisory board to
reject that conclusion (Kolata, 2009). In 2009, following the publication of experimental data that failed to
show statistically significant mortality benefits of mammograms for women in their 40s, the US Preventive
Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommended that women begin screening at age 50. Again, this conclu-
sion generated backlash from patient advocacy groups like the American Cancer Society, which at the time
recommended annual screening for women aged 40 and above (American Cancer Society, 2018).6 This neg-
ative reaction was exacerbated by fears that the Affordable Care Act (ACA, then being drafted) would allow
insurers to refuse to cover mammograms for younger women. The USPSTF stood by its recommendation,
but a poll found that 84% of women aged 35-49 did not plan to follow the new recommendations, and the
ACA was modified to mandate that insurers reimburse mammograms for women aged 40 and over (Saad,
2009). Although in the last few years most patient advocacy organizations have begun to moderate their
stances, the question of whether mammography should be recommended in the 40-49 age group remains
controversial.
    Importantly, both the academic literature and the policy debate over the costs and benefits of mam-
mograms has focused on the average impacts of mammograms for specific ages. In contrast, our focus is
on the characteristics of women whose decision to get a mammogram is influenced by the mammogram
recommendation, and how their underlying cancer incidence and characteristics may differ from that of a
randomly selected woman in the population.
   6 The American Cancer Society currently recommends annual screening for women between ages 45-54 and screening every 2
years for women 55 years and older (American Cancer Society, 2018).




                                                           6
3      Data and descriptive patterns
3.1     Data and variable construction
Our analysis of mammogram choices and outcomes focuses on women aged 35-50 and draws on two primary
data sources. The first is claim-level data provided by the Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI) consisting of all
claims paid by three large commercial insurers (Aetna, Humana, and UnitedHealthcare) from January 2008
through December 2012. Together, these three insurers represented about one-quarter of individuals under
age 65 with commercial insurance (HCCI, 2012). The data capture the billing-related information contained
in the claims that these insurers pay out to medical providers; this includes the exact date and purpose of
each claim, as well as the amount paid by the insurer and the amount owed out of pocket. The data also
include a (masked) person identifier as well as the individual's birth year and gender.
      The claim-level information in the HCCI data allow us to construct variables measuring whether an indi-
vidual had a screening mammogram,7 whether the result was positive or negative, and whether the positive
result was true positive or false positive. Our coding of screening mammograms (hereafter "mammograms")
­ as well as their outcomes ­ broadly follows the approach of Segel, Balkrishnan,, and Hirth (2017), which
we cross-validated using Medicare claims data linked to cancer registry data (see Appendix A for more
details).
      The original HCCI data contain about 28.7 million privately insured women aged 25-64, and over 70
million woman-years. We limit the data to woman-years aged 35-50 who are covered continuously for
at least three years between January 2008 and December 2012; we keep all the years of coverage except
the first and last (since for every woman-year we need to observe the previous year to define screening
mammograms and the subsequent year to measure outcomes). This results in about 7.4 million woman-
years, and 3.7 million distinct women.
      The primary drawback of the HCCI data is that we are not able to observe information on a breast cancer
diagnosis beyond its detection. To overcome this limitation of the HCCI data, we therefore also analyze the
National Cancer Institute's (NCI) Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database. This is
an administrative, patient-level cancer registry of all cancer diagnoses in 13 US states, covering about one
quarter of the US population (SEER, 2019). We analyze all the breast cancer diagnoses in the data between
2000 and 2014 for women aged 35-50 at the time of diagnosis; this covers about 230,000 diagnoses. All
cancer diagnoses are required to be reported, with data collected directly from the cancer patients' medical
records at the time of diagnosis (rather than self reports).8 For each diagnosed cancer, the SEER data contain
information about the size and stage of each tumor at diagnosis. They also contain basic demographics for
the patient including age at time of diagnosis, race, and insurance coverage, as well as subsequent mortality
information through December 2013.
      In our HCCI sample, the average woman's age is 43 and 27% of woman-years are under 40. In the
    7 A "screening mammogram" is a routine test that is conceptually different -- and coded differently in the data -- from a "diagnos-

tic mammogram," which would typically follow the emergence of a possible breast cancer symptom (such as a positive screening
mammogram).
    8 See https://seer.cancer.gov/manuals/2018/SPCSM_2018_maindoc.pdf for more information. SEER registries are

required to collect data on persons who are diagnosed with cancer and who, at the time of diagnosis, are residents of the geographic
area covered by the SEER registry.


                                                                  7
SEER data, because cancer risk increases with age, the average age at diagnosis is a bit higher (44.7) and
only 13% of the SEER diagnoses occur in women under 40. In SEER, where we can observe race, slightly
over three-quarters of the sample is white. And unlike the HCCI data where, by construction, everyone is
privately insured, in the SEER data only 84% are privately insured, while 13% are on Medicaid.
      Table 1 documents mammogram rates and test results in the HCCI data. About 30% of woman-years are
associated with a mammogram. The vast majority (89.6%) of mammograms are negative, and another 9.7%
are false positives. Only 0.7% are true positives. Among all woman-years with a mammogram, total (insurer
plus out-of-pocket) health care spending in the 12 months starting from (and including) the mammogram
averages $4,900; while it is slightly higher (by ~$1,500) for those with a false positive, it is dramatically
higher for those with true positives, averaging about $47,000. Out-of-pocket spending in the 12 months post
mammogram is about $2,800 for women with a positive mammogram, compared to $710 for women with a
negative mammogram and $915 for women with a false positive.
      The SEER data provide more information on tumor stage and tumor size for the 230,000 true positives
(i.e. diagnoses) we observe. Just over 15% are are in situ; the rest are invasive. Of the invasive, about 57%
are localized, 38% are regional, and the remaining 5% are distant.


3.2     Mammograms and outcomes, by age
Figure 1 shows the age profile of annual mammogram rates in the HCCI data. Because we observe birth
year, the mammogram rate at age, say, 40 is the share of women who got a mammogram in the year they
turned 40. Between ages 39 and 41, the mammogram rate jumps by over 25 percentage points, from 8.9%
to 35.2%. This pronounced jump in mammogram rates at age 40 has been previously documented in self-
reported mammograms in survey data (Kadiyala and Strumpf, 2011, 2016).9 One might be concerned that
the existence of a recommendation for mammograms at age 40 could bias upward survey self reports at that
age. However, our analysis using claims data confirms a real change in mammogram behavior at 40. Indeed,
as we show in Appendix Figure A.1, the increase in mammogram rates that we estimate at age 40 in the
HCCI data is very similar to what we estimate using survey self reports (from the Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System Survey, or BRFSS), although ­ consistent with prior work (Blustein, 1995; Cronin
et al., 2009) ­ we estimate lower mammogram rates at every age in claims data compared to self-reported
data.
      Figure 2 documents the outcomes of these mammograms ­ negative, false positive, and true positive ­
in the HCCI data. Figure 2a documents that the vast majority (on the order of 85-90%) of mammograms are
negative, and that almost all the remainder are false positive. Figure 2b narrows in on the rates of false pos-
itives and true positives by age. Between ages 39 and 41, the share of true positives falls by one-third (from
0.84% to 0.56%). This indicates that the marginal women who choose to have a mammogram because of
the screening recommendation at age 40 have lower underlying rates of cancer (i.e. true positive diagnoses).
The share of mammograms that are false positives is generally declining smoothly in age, because the prob-
   9 Our data span the time period when the 2009 US Preventive Services Task Force changed its recommendation for routine
mammograms to begin at age 50 rather than at age 40. Past analyses such as Block et al. (2013) have documented that this appears
to have had little affect on women's mammography behavior, which is not surprising given the substantial public controversy over
this recommendation change.


                                                               8
ability of a false positive is higher for women with denser breast tissue, and density generally decreases
with age (Susan G. Komen Foundation, 2018). The exception is a small "spike" in false positives around
age 40; this likely is attributable to the fact that the probability of a false positive mammogram is highest
for a woman's first mammogram (American Cancer Society, 2017b). Note, however, that while the share of
false positives is trending fairly smoothly in age, the number of women experiencing a false positive rises
considerably at age 40, given the 25 percentage point increase in the share of women having mammograms.
Given an approximately 12 percent false positive rate around age 40, the increase in the share of women
having mammograms due to the recommendations implies that the number of women experiencing a false
positive quadruples, from about 10 to 40 per thousand women.
    Figure 3 documents the age profile of tumor type among all diagnoses in the SEER data. Between ages
39 and 41, the share of detected tumors that are in situ (as opposed to invasive) rises by 6 percentage points,
from 11.6 percent to 17.7 percent; this is consistent with prior findings from Kadiyala and Strumpf (2016).
The average size of a detected tumor falls by over 9 percent, from 27mm at age 39 to 24.4mm at age 41,
although the pattern is less dramatic since detected tumor size is also falling (albeit less rapidly) at earlier
ages.
    Taken together, these descriptive results from both the HCCI and SEER data suggest that the women
brought into screening by the recommendation at age 40 have a lower cancer disease burden than those
who sought screening prior to the age 40 recommendation. This manifests itself in lower rates of cancer,
detection of cancer at earlier stages, and smaller tumors conditional on cancer detection.
    In Figure 4 we return to the HCCI data to examine the implications of these findings for the age profile
of spending in the 12 months post mammogram. Figure 4a shows, unsurprisingly, that healthcare spending
increases with age, and is higher for individuals with mammograms than without. More interestingly, it also
shows that the difference in spending between those with and without mammograms exhibits a pronounced
decline at age 40. Figure 4b shows that spending is much higher for true positives than false positives and
negatives, and that spending for true positives is increasing with age, but there is no obvious break at age 40.
    Presumably therefore, the several hundred dollar decrease at age 40 in the average spending of those
who get mammograms in Figure 4a reflects selection: those who select into mammograms due to the rec-
ommendation at age 40 have lower healthcare spending than those who choose to have mammograms prior
to age 40. Indeed, we show in Appendix Figure A.2a that prior year spending among those who get mammo-
grams drops precipitously at age 40, consistent with these individuals being healthier overall (in addition to
having lower underlying incidence of cancer). Similarly, Appendix Figure A.2b shows a precipitous decline
in the number of emergency room visits in the prior year for women who get mammograms starting at age
40, which may indicate better health and possibly better health behaviors. Women who select into mammo-
grams following the age 40 recommendation also appear more prone to complying with other recommended
preventive care: they have higher rates of pap tests (that is, cervical cancer screening tests) and flu shots in
the year before the mammogram for those who select into mammograms at age 40 rather than at earlier ages
(see Appendix Figures A.3a and A.3b). These results are consistent with Oster (2018)'s finding that when a
health behavior is recommended, those who take up also tend to exhibit other positive health behaviors.
    Finally, Figure 5 documents 5-year mortality post-diagnosis in the SEER data by age of diagnosis,


                                                       9
separately for tumors initially diagnosed as in situ and invasive tumors. Mortality is almost three times
higher for invasive tumors compared to in-situ tumors. For example, at age 40, the five-year mortality rate
is 17.2% for invasive tumors compared to 5.6% for in-situ tumors. However, the mortality rate is roughly
flat by age within tumor type.


4     Model and estimation
The empirical patterns documented in the preceding section indicate that the women who respond to the
mammogram recommendation have a lower incidence of cancer than those who seek mammograms in the
absence of a recommendation. To evaluate the implications of this selection for alternative, counterfactual
timings of the screening recommendation (such as at age 45 instead of age 40), we write down a stylized
model of mammogram decision making. We then estimate this model using the observed patterns shown
in Section 3 combined with a clinical oncology model of the underlying cancer incidence in the population
and tumor evolution in the absence of detection. The clinical oncology model provides the (hitherto absent)
crucial information on the cancer disease burden of women who respond to the mammogram recommenda-
tion compared to women who not get mammograms; naturally we explore sensitivity to alternative clinical
assumptions.


4.1     A descriptive model of mammogram choice
We model the annual decision of whether or not to have a mammogram; annual decision frequency seems
natural given that mammogram screening tends not to be done more frequently than once a year. Absent
any recommendation to do so, we assume the "organic" decision to have a mammogram follows a simple
probit, so that



(1)                       Pr (mo             o  o      o               o
                               it = 1) = Pr ( +  ait + c I (cit = c) + it > 0) ,


where mo
       it is an indicator for whether woman i had a mammogram in year t , ait is woman i's age in year t ,
                                                                  o is a (standard) normally distributed error
cit describes woman i's undiagnosed cancer status in year t , and it
term. Following our discussion in Section 3, our baseline specification summarizes cancer status cit with
two indicator variables, one that indicates an in-situ tumor and another that indicates an invasive tumor; the
omitted category is no cancer.
      If it is recommended that woman i obtain a mammogram, we model her response to the recommendation
as a second, subsequent decision that is taken within the same year. That is, if a woman has already decided
to have a mammogram "organically" based on equation (1), a recommendation has no additional impact.
But for women who decided not to have a mammogram organically (that is, mo
                                                                         it = 0), a second decision point
arises due to the recommendation, and we model this second decision point in a similar fashion, except that




                                                     10
the parameters are allowed to be different:

(2)                        Pr (mr       o             r  r      r               r
                                it = 1|mit = 0) = Pr ( +  ait + c I (cit = c) + it > 0) ,

      r is a (standard) normally distributed error term, drawn independently from  o .10 This model as-
where it                                                                          it
sumes that the impact of the recommendation is (weakly) monotone for all women. For each woman, it only
increases the probability that she has a mammogram, a feature that seems (to us) natural.
      Since we do not directly observe whether a mammogram was taken for organic reasons or in response
to a recommendation, the probability that woman i obtains a mammogram in year t is given by
                           
                                                     Pr (mo
                                                          it = 1)                           if not recommended
         Pr (mit = 1) =                                                                                                  .
                            Pr (mo = 1) + Pr (mr = 1|mo = 0) Pr (mo = 0)                      if recommended
                                 it            it     it          it


      We use the model's results to quantify the degree of selection into mammograms in the presence and
absence of a recommendation, and to examine how the nature of this selection affects the impact of recom-
mendations. To do so, we use the model estimates to predict mammogram rates and mammogram outcomes
under the current recommendation to begin mammograms at age 40 as well as under a counterfactual rec-
ommendation to begin at age 45. Consistent with our focus on selection, we also examine how alternative,
counterfactual selection into mammograms in response to the recommendation would change the impact of
changing the recommended age at which to begin mammograms from 40 to 45.

Discussion

Importantly, this is a descriptive, or statistical model of mammogram choice, rather than a behavioral one.
This is most apparent from the fact that we use the cancer status cit as an explanatory variable, when nat-
urally this cancer status is unknown by undiagnosed women. Cancer status cit is also unobserved by the
econometrician; we describe below the clinical model of tumor evolution which we use to "fill in" these
missing data, thus essentially integrating over the population distribution of this cancer status component.
      We take this modeling approach for several reasons. First, many of the outcomes in this setting are
difficult to assess or monetize, e.g. the stress and anxiety associated with false positive test results or the
non-monetary costs associated with the breast cancer treatment (even if successful). This makes it difficult
to translate the rich set of outcomes into a single metric of utility. Second, our key focus is on the impact
of the recommendation policy. With a perfectly informed population of patients, recommendations should
have no impact, yet the data in Section 3 show a clear increase in the mammogram rate in response to the
age 40 recommendation. We could try to attribute this recommendation-induced increase in mammogram
rate to improved information, but this would require us to make assumptions about what type of information
is being revealed and how, or why patients did not have such information to begin with. We prefer instead to
remain agnostic about the behavioral channel by which the recommendation affects screening rates. Finally,
  10 While  this independence assumption may appear restrictive, note that equation (2) only applies to those women who elected
not to obtain an "organic" mammogram. It is therefore effectively restricted to women with "low enough" it o 's, so that much of the

potential correlation is already conditioned out.



                                                                11
a descriptive model of decision making does not require us to try to reconcile observed patterns of decisions
with optimal behavior, or model deviations from optimality. The drawback is, of course, that we will not be
able to engage in other policy changes or in the impact of changes in the recommendation policy on patient
welfare directly, but rather will only evaluate changes in recommendation policies through their effect on
observed outcomes.
      Another key feature of our setup is that we model the mammogram decision to be a static ­ and perhaps
naive ­ one. The decision is static in the sense that we assume individuals do not take into account, for
example, the time elapsed since their most recent mammogram (if any).11 The decision is naive in the
sense that we assume that women, when deciding to get a mammogram or not, do not explicitly take into
account their propensity to get a mammogram in future years. This assumption seems not unrealistic, and
simplifies the model. This assumption is particularly important in the context of our counterfactual exercise,
which holds the estimated model as given while we change the age at which it is recommended to begin
mammograms. Specifically, in considering the changes that occur when the mammogram recommendation
begins at age 45 instead of 40, our static model assumes this would have no impact on women aged 39
or younger; in a dynamic model with forward looking agents, however, it could increase the propensity of
women below age 40 to get a mammogram. Our current model could in principle capture such dynamics
                                             o and in  r . However, because we have a relatively short
implicitly by allowing serial correlation in it       it
panel, and because we only use age to match the two main data sets, it would be hard to identify such a
serial correlation structure. Consistent with this being a fairly inconsequential assumption, Figure 2 shows
very low rates of pre-recommendation mammograms, and no evidence that mammograms decline in the
year or two years that are right before age 40 (when forward looking women might anticipate their future
mammogram).

4.2     Implementation
A clinical model of tumor appearance and evolution

To complete the empirical specification, we specify a clinical oncology model of tumor appearance and
tumor evolution, which allows us to "fill in" cancer status for women who do not get diagnosed. This
clinical model delivers two key elements. First, it produces the underlying incidence of cancer (and cancer
type) by age; this cannot be directly observed in data since cancer incidence is only observed conditional
on screening. Second, it provides (counterfactual) predictions of the rate at which tumors would progress
in the absence of detection and treatment (the so-called "natural history" of the tumor); since breast cancer
is usually treated once diagnosed, rather than being monitored without treatment, it is difficult (perhaps
impossible) to directly estimate the natural history of tumors from existing data.
      For the clinical model, we draw on an active literature creating clinical/biological models of cancer
arrival and growth. Specifically, we draw on the work of the Cancer Intervention and Surveillance Modeling
  11 While restrictive, there is no strong evidence of such dynamic patterns in the data. We only have a short panel of at most three

years for each woman, so it is difficult to apply any formal statistical testing. However, conditional on having two mammograms
during the three years we observe (2009-2011), the frequency of getting a mammogram "every other year" (that is, getting mam-
mograms in 2009 and 2011 but not in 2010) is not more likely than getting a mammogram in consecutive years (34%, relative to
39% for 2009 and 2010, and 27% for 2010 and 2011).


                                                                12
Network (CISNET) project funded by the National Cancer Institute to analyze the role of mammography in
contributing to breast cancer mortality reductions over the last quarter of the 20th century. As part of this
effort, seven different groups12 developed models of breast cancer incidence and progression (Clarke et al.,
2006). For convenience, we focus on one of these models, the Erasmus model (Tan et al., 2006). We also
show robustness of our results below to alternative specifications designed to produce markedly different
estimates for the key objects: namely, the underlying incidence of cancer and cancer types.
    We briefly summarize the Erasmus model here; Appendix B describes the model in much more detail.
Starting with a cancer-free population of 20-year-old women, the Erasmus model assumes that breast tumors
appear at a given age-specific rate (that is increasing in age). When they appear, tumors are endowed with
a given invasive potential and initial rate of growth, and then evolve accordingly over time with respect to
those two characteristics. Tumors can either be invasive, leading to death of the patient if not detected early
enough, or be in situ. In-situ tumors are not themselves harmful but may either transform into a harmful
invasive tumor or remain benign. In some sense, a key issue in the debate over mammograms is the extent
to which tumors that are detected early (e.g. in-situ tumors) would have become harmful if not detected or
would have remained benign; Marmot et al. (2013) discusses how, depending on the method of analysis, a
wide variety of estimates can be obtained when trying to answer this question. The Erasmus model further
classifies tumors by whether or not they are detectable by screening, which in the case of invasive tumors
depends on their size and in the case of in-situ tumors depends on their sub type. Finally, the model assumes
that beyond a certain size, invasive tumors are fatal.
    The original Erasmus model was calibrated using a combination of Swedish trial data and US (SEER)
population data. To better match the cancer incidence rates from the SEER (birth cohorts 1950-1975), we
introduce a proportional shifter of overall cancer incidence and calibrate this parameter on the SEER data.
Appendix Figure A.4 shows the calibrated model's predictions ­ under the assumption of no screening ­ of
the share of women with cancer at each age, and the share of existing cancers that are in situ (rather than
invasive) by age.

Estimation and Identification

We estimate the model using method of moments. The observed moments we try to match are the mammo-
gram screening rate at each age (Figure 1), the true positive rate at each age (Figure 2b), and the share of
tumors at each age that are in situ conditional on true positive (as in Figure 3).13 Because identification is
primarily driven by the discontinuous change in screening rates at age 40, we weight more heavily moments
that are closer to age 40 than moments that are associated with younger and older ages.14
   12 The composition of the CISNET consortium has changed over time, but the seven groups who produced models for the original

publication in 2006 were affiliated with the Dana-Farber Cancer Center, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Georgetown University
Medical Center, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Stanford University, University of Rochester, and University
of Wisconsin-Madison.
   13 Figure 3 shows the share of all diagnosed cancers (in the SEER data) that are in situ, but the model produces a different metric:

the share of screening mammogram-diagnosed cancers that are in situ. Cancers that are clinically diagnosed are highly unlikely to
be in situ, so the SEER value likely underestimates the true value of share in situ for screening mammogram-diagnosed cancers.
Appendix C describes how we adjust the SEER moments to account for this.
   14 Specifically, the weight on moments associated with ages 39 and 41 is 10/11 of the weight on the age 40 moment, the weight

on moments associated with ages 38 and 42 is 9/11 of the weight on the age 40 moment, and so on.


                                                                 13
    To generate the corresponding model-generated moments, we simulate a panel of women starting at
age 20, and use the clinical model described above to generate cancer incidence and tumor growth for
each woman. We then apply our mammogram decision model, by age and recommendation status, to each
simulated woman who is alive and has yet to be diagnosed with cancer. The simulated cohort allows us
to see the fraction of women with a detectable (by mammogram) tumor at each age, and thus generate the
mammogram rate, and the true positive rate (by cancer type) conditional on screening. As mentioned above,
for cancer type, we distinguish only between in-situ and invasive tumors.
    With this simulated population of women, an assumed value of parameters associated with the mammo-
gram decisions with and without recommendation (equations 1 and 2) and the observed policy recommen-
dation (40 and above), the model generates an age-specific share of women who are screened, and the tumor
characteristics (in-situ and invasive rates), conditional on getting screened. We then search for the param-
eters that minimize the (weighted) distance between these generated moments and the observed moments
described above.
    Although the model is static, it does have a dynamic element because we calculate the model-generated
moments only for women who were not diagnosed with cancer in previous years, and for those who did
not die (from breast cancer or other causes) prior to the given age. Specifically, because the mammogram
decision applies to women who have yet to be diagnosed with cancer, fitting the model requires calculating
the rate of cancer among the population who is eligible to be screened, which includes those who have
currently undiagnosed cancer or no cancer, but does not include those who are dead or already diagnosed.
Appendix C provides more detail on this and other aspects of the estimation.
    For our counterfactual exercises, the estimates from the mammogram choice model ­ and the assumption
that choices would be smooth in age through age 40 in the absence of the recommendation ­ allow us to
predict mammogram decisions and outcomes under counterfactual scenarios. Crucially, the model estimates
allow us to forecast the cancer characteristics of women who (counterfactually) do not get screened and
whose cancer may therefore progress in the absence of diagnosis. The key parameters are  o and  r , which
capture the nature of selection into mammogram screening. Positive selection (i.e. positive  ) implies that
women with cancer (or with invasive vs. in-situ cancer) are more likely to get a mammogram than are woman
without cancer. A negative  implies the opposite. Both types of selection are plausible. Positive selection
could arise, for example, if women with a greater risk of breast cancer (e.g. due to family history) are more
likely to get a mammogram; negative selection could arise, for example, if women with certain underlying
characteristics (e.g. risk aversion) are both more likely to get a mammogram and also more likely to avoid
risk factors linked to breast cancer. Importantly, by allowing  o and  r to be different, the model allows for
the nature of selection to be different for organic and recommendation-driven mammograms. Identification
of these selection effects is driven by comparing the share of cancer in the population (which is "data"
provided by the clinical oncology model) to the true positive mammogram rates. The extent to which this
relationship changes discretely at age 40, when the recommendation kicks in, allows us to separately identify
 o and  r .




                                                     14
5      The impact of alternative screening policies
5.1     Model fit and parameter estimates
Figure 6 presents the model fit to the key moments, which we view as quite reasonable. The parameter
estimates are shown in Table 2. It may be easiest to see the implications of these parameters in the context of
our counterfactual results, but one can already infer the general pattern by focusing on the four  parameters,
which indicate the extent of selection into mammogram. The two  o parameters are positive and relatively
large, indicating strong positive selection into the "organic" decision to have a mammogram. For example,
for the average woman-year in the sample (that is, using the distribution of ages in the sample), the estimated
coefficients imply that the "organic" mammogram rates for women with either an in-situ or invasive tumor
are much higher (0.30 and 0.57, respectively) relative to the "organic" mammogram rates for cancer-free
women (0.20).
      In contrast, the two  r parameters tell a different story. The estimates suggest that there is no differential
selection into the "recommended" decision for women with in-situ tumors (relative to cancer-free women),
and that essentially no woman with an invasive tumor selects into mammogram due to the recommendation.
This result is driven by precisely the patterns in the data that identify these parameters, and which were
presented in Figure 3. Namely, conditional on diagnosis, the share of in-situ tumors rises sharply at age 40,
so that virtually all the increase in detected cancers reflects in-situ tumors. As we show below, this pattern
has a critical effect on our results, because women without cancer or with in-situ tumors ­ who constitute the
primary incremental positive mammogram results ­ may not face drastic health implications if those tumors
would instead be discovered several years later.
                                                 o
      We note that the large standard errors on invasive      r
                                                         and invasive reflect the fact that the estimates imply that
virtually all women with invasive tumors who get screened do so organically, with essentially no women
with invasive tumors getting screened in response to the recommendation; as a result, the likelihood function
                                   o
is fairly flat for high values of invasive                    r
                                           and low values of invasive . But for exactly the same reason, these
imprecise estimates of the parameter have little impact on the counterfactual results, as reflected by the
much tighter standard errors associated with the counterfactuals of interest reported in the next section.


5.2     Implications
We apply the estimated parameters from Table 2 to analyze outcomes under various counterfactual recom-
mendations. For concreteness, we focus on outcomes under the current recommendation to begin mammo-
grams at age 40 as well as under a counterfactual recommendation to begin at age 45. Our model is well
suited for such a counterfactual exercise: we simply assume that mammogram decisions are based on the
"organic" decision until age 45, and only at age 45 is there a second, recommendation-induced decision.
Given the static nature of the model, mammogram rates will remain the same until age 40, and would be the
same (conditional on cancer status) from age 45 and on, but will decrease for women aged 40-44 without a
recommendation. We choose a counterfactual recommendation that begins at age 45 because this is not too
far out of sample, and also in the range of realistic policy alternatives; Canada, for instance, recommends
routine screening beginning at age 50 (Kadiyala and Strumpf, 2011).

                                                         15
   For both the age 40 and age 45 recommendations, we examine how alternative, counterfactual selection
into mammograms in response to the recommendation would change the recommendation's impact. The
main outcomes we generate under the various counterfactuals are age-specific mammogram rates, mammo-
gram outcomes (specifically, negative, false positive, and true positive, as well as tumor type), total health
care spending, and mortality. We do not attempt to quantify other potential consequences of a change in rec-
ommendation (such as the opportunity to use less invasive treatments for early-stage diagnoses, or increased
anxiety from false positive results, which are more uncertain (Welch and Passow, 2014)).
   Throughout the counterfactual exercises, mammogram rates are generated directly from the parameter
estimates in Table 2, and mammogram outcomes are generated based on the the parameter estimates in
Table 2 and the underlying incidence and natural history of breast cancer tumors from the Erasmus model.
We also use the Erasmus model's parameters in order to map detection of tumors to subsequent mortality,
allowing us to translate the estimated changes in detection into implied changes in mortality. Finally, we use
the auxiliary data from Figure 4 on how healthcare spending varies with age and mammogram outcomes
to translate the estimated change in mammogram rates and mammogram outcomes into implied spending
changes. Appendix D provides more details behind these counterfactual calculations.

5.2.1   Shifting the age of recommendation from 40 to 45

Table 3 shows the implications of shifting the recommendation from age 40 to age 45, given the estimated
response to recommendations from Table 2. We focus on the implications for women ages 35-50.
   Panel A summarizes the implications for screening and spending; Figure 7 shows how the age profile of
screening and screening outcomes change with this counterfactual. Changing the recommended age from
40 to 45 reduces the average number of mammograms a woman receives between ages 35 and 50 from 4.7
to 3.8, an almost 20 percent decline. By design, all of the "lost" mammograms occur between ages 40 and
44. Naturally, the vast majority of these "lost" mammograms would have been negative (89.5%) or false
positive (10.4%). Moving the recommendation to age 45 decreases the average number of false positives
a woman experiences over age 30-45 by 0.09. The fraction of true positive mammograms that are "lost"
due to the later recommendation, while small in absolute number (0.0004 per woman), is not negligible,
and it constitutes an approximately 6% reduction in the cancer detection rate. Of the "lost" true positives,
however, all are in situ since our estimates imply that the recommendation effectively induces no additional
women with invasive cancer to get screened. Thus, any changes in mortality are due to in-situ tumors that
go unscreened and later become invasive.
   The last row of Panel A shows that changing the recommendation age to 45 reduces total healthcare
spending over ages 35-50 per woman by about $320, or about half a percent. This reduction in spending
arises from a combination of a level and composition effect. The dominant factor is naturally the decline in
the overall number of mammograms. We estimate that women who have a mammogram in a given year are
expected to spend approximately $490 more (on average, averaging over ages 40-44) over the subsequent
12 months relative to women with no mammograms, and that moving the recommendation age to 45 re-
sults in 0.9 fewer mammograms per woman. This would mechanically result in approximately $440 lower
spending. The estimated spending reduction is lower ($320) because of selection. The "lost" mammograms


                                                     16
are disproportionally negative or false positive, and the true positive mammogram results are associated
with, by far, the highest expected subsequent spending (see Figure 4b). true positive mammograms account
for a larger share of mammograms in the counterfactual scenario (0.53%, relative to 0.44% under age-40
recommendation).
    Panel B documents the implications of this counterfactual for health outcomes. The lower detection rate
of cancers is associated with 5 more women per 100,000 who are dead by the age of 50; all of this increase
in deaths comes from increased breast cancer mortality. The results thus suggest that, relative to an age-45
recommendation, an age-40 recommendation increases spending by about $32 million per 100,000 women
(during their 35-50 age span), and prevents about 5 additional deaths by age 50 per 100,000 women; the
cost per life saved is thus about $6 million.
    Naturally, these mortality implications are driven by the assumptions in the clinical oncology model,
about which there is a range of views (Clarke et al., 2006; Welch and Passow, 2014). In addition, our
analysis considers only the costs in terms of health care spending, and does not consider the disutility of
stress and anxiety created by false positives or additional medical care. For both reasons, our goal here is
not to emphasize a specific estimate of the cost per life saved per se, but rather to examine whether and how
this type of counterfactual policy exercise can be affected by the nature of selection into mammograms in
response to the recommendation, a question we turn to in the next section.

5.2.2    Consequences of selection patterns in response to mammogram

Table 4 illustrates the importance of selection in response to the recommendation. To do so, Panel A repli-
cates the results from Table 3, while Panels B and C contrast them with what the results would be under
alternative selection responses to the recommendation. Under both alternative selection models, we maintain
our estimated selection associated with the "organic" mammogram decision, but vary the nature of selection
into mammograms in response to the recommendation. One case (Panel B) assumes no selection, which is
conceptually consistent with the idea of using estimated mammogram treatment effects from randomized
experiments to inform the recommendation policy (as in, for example, Welch and Passow (2014)); in prac-
tice we do this by assuming that  r = 0.15 The other case (Panel C) assumes that selection in response to the
recommendation is positive, and is the same as in the "organic" decision; we implement this counterfactual
by assuming that  r is equal to our estimated  o .
    In both counterfactual selection cases we consider, we adjust the model to maintain the same age-specific
mammogram rates under a given recommendation regardless of the assumed selection, so that only the
nature of selection changes; Appendix D provides more detail. By design, therefore, the mammogram
rates (first row of each panel) remain almost the same across all three selection models,16 and therefore
   15 Note that we here have in mind a conceptual randomized experiment with full compliance. Of course, in practice, full compli-

ance is rare, and the complier population to the experiment is itself not random, although it may be differentially selected from the
complier population to the recommendation. In a recent paper, Kowalski (2018) argues that in practice the women most likely to
receive mammograms when encouraged to do so in a randomized clinical trial are healthier, and hence benefit less from mammo-
grams.
   16 Although not seen in the table due to rounding, the mammogram rates are not exactly the same across the panels because the

nature of selection leads to differential mortality (discussed below), which in turn (slightly) affects the set of women "eligible" for
a screening mammogram.



                                                                 17
the spending effect associated with each of these cases also remains almost identical (second row of each
panel). In contrast, the importance of selection is shown in the third row of each panel: different patterns of
selection affect the reduction in deaths from moving the recommendation to age 40 compared to age 45. For
example, while our estimates that are based on observed selection imply that moving the recommendation
from 45 to 40 saves 5 additional lives (by age 50) per 100,000 women, which corresponds to a cost of
about $6.3 million per life saved, random selection would imply over three times as many lives saved (18
per 100,000), corresponding to a cost of about $1.9 million per life saved. At a more extreme case of
selection, assuming that the strong positive selection associated with "organic" selection would also apply
to the selection in response to the recommendation, would imply almost nine times as many lives saved (45
per 100,000 women), corresponding to a cost per life saved of about $0.86 million.
    The qualitative results are intuitive. As selection associated with the recommendation is more negative
(i.e. women who respond are less likely to have cancer), the recommendation for earlier mammograms is
less effective in finding tumors that would have not been found otherwise or tumors that would otherwise
be found only later. However, if the selection associated with the recommendation were very positive (i.e.
women who respond are more likely to have cancer), an earlier recommendation would be more effective.
Thus, out of the three selection scenarios considered, earlier recommendation is most beneficial if the se-
lection response to the recommendation is the same as under "organic" selection, which was highly positive
(Panel C). While it is not immediately clear how in practice to achieve such strong positive selection in
response to the recommendation, this result suggests that better targeting of the recommended mammogram
to women with higher a-priori risk of cancer could ­ if feasible ­ have dramatic effects on the mortality
benefits from the recommendation.17 The comparison between our estimated selection (panel A) and the
"no selection" case (panel B) is an intermediate case. Because we estimate negative selection for invasive
tumors, an earlier recommendation is more effective (i.e. more women with cancer would be screened)
under random selection, and the cost per life saved is therefore be lower.

5.2.3    Sensitivity

We observe in the data (see Figures 2b and 3) that those who select into screening via the recommendation
are healthier than those get screened organically prior to the recommendation. However, a key question
underlying our results is how women who are screened compare to those who do not get mammograms.
In particular, we need to make assumptions about how the health of these women would have developed
if they were screened at a later age instead. These assumptions depend on the underlying natural history
("clinical") model of breast cancer. We therefore examine the sensitivity of our conclusions to changing key
features of this model.
    This sensitivity analysis serves to highlight a point we have tried to emphasize throughout: the reader
should not place much (or any) weight on our particular, quantitative estimates of the cost per life saved
   17 The potential benefits of personalizing breast cancer screening recommendations have been made in the medical literature

(e.g. Schousboe et al. (2011)), and current breast cancer screening recommendations often differ across average risk and high risk
women (where the latter is, e.g., women with a family history of breast cancer). But to the best of our knowledge our point about
selection responses to recommendations has not been made previously. Our consistent selection model is one way of illustrating
the potential gains from recommendation designs that affect take-up of mammograms based on unobservables.



                                                               18
of having the recommended age to start screening at 40 instead of at 45; these are quite sensitive to the
assumptions underlying the clinical model. By contrast, the question we focus on ­ how the nature of the
selection response to the recommendation affects any estimate of the impact of an earlier recommendation
­ is less affected by the specific clinical model.
    We focus on three different adjustments to the Erasmus clinical model that we use; the details can be
found in Appendix E. First, as discussed in Section 4.2, in our baseline analysis we adjusted upward the
original Erasmus estimates of the underlying incidence rate of cancer to match the US population, rather
than the combination of Swedish and US data on which it was originally calibrated (see Appendix B); in
our first sensitivity analysis, we undo this adjustment and use the original Erasmus incidence assumptions.
Second, the Erasmus model implies that almost two-thirds of in-situ tumors will become invasive if not
treated; a review of the literature suggests that this is on the high end of model estimates, which range from
14% to 60% (Burstein et al., 2004). We therefore examine sensitivity to adjusting the model so that only
14% or 28% of in-situ tumors will become invasive, rather than the 62.5% in our baseline model. Finally,
the Erasmus model implies that about 6% of all tumors for women aged 35-50 are non-malignant, i.e. have
no potential to be invasive and therefore would never result in a breast cancer mortality. In contrast, another
clinical model ­ the Wisconsin model (Fryback et al., 2006) ­ implies a much higher share (42%) of non-
malignant tumors, while an estimate from a randomized control trial (in which women in the control group
were not invited to be screened at the end of the active trial period) suggests that 19% of tumors would not
have become malignant (Marmot et al., 2013). We therefore increase the share of in-situ tumors with no
malignant potential at all ages in a proportional shift so that the share of non-malignant tumors at age 40 is
either 19% or 42%.
    For each sensitivity analysis, we first reproduce the Erasmus model natural history with the appropriate
adjustments. We then re-estimate the mammogram decision model using the same data moments (see Figure
6) and the women simulated using the revised natural history model. To construct counterfactuals, we apply
the new parameter estimates to the revised natural history model. Qualitatively, we can anticipate the impact
of these changes: reducing the overall incidence of cancer, reducing the share in situ that will transition to
invasive, and increasing the share non-malignant all serve to make screening less effective, and therefore
delaying screening becomes less consequential.
    The results are summarized in Table 5. As we emphasized earlier, the details of the model are critical for
the quantitative results, and indeed the mortality levels vary considerably compared to the baseline model in
all specifications. In addition, the mortality cost of delaying the recommendation falls. This occurs for two
reasons. First, conditional on the same mammogram decision model estimates, screening is less effective
with fewer malignant tumors. Therefore, delaying screening is less costly. In addition, changing the share of
                                                         r
tumors that are non-malignant affects the estimation of in -situ as shown in Appendix Table A.10. In these
                     r
sensitivity checks, in -situ is lower than in the baseline estimates. This occurs because the natural history
model now has more in-situ tumors. One of the moments we match is the share of in-situ tumors among
diagnoses. In order to observe the same amount of in-situ diagnoses with more underlying in-situ tumors,
we must be screening fewer in-situ women and more invasive women. The magnitude of this selection
change depends on the magnitude of the change in the sensitivity specification; the last specification is the


                                                      19
most aggressive in increasing the in-situ tumor share. Since the women who chose to get screened due to
the recommendation now have fewer in-situ tumors (which could potentially become invasive), screening is
less effective as well.
    More importantly, we also examine how these sensitivity analyses affect our selection results, and here
we find that the qualitative conclusions are quite robust. In all cases except one (the incidence shift, reported
in row (1) of Table 5), moving from the estimated selection to no selection (or consistent selection) has
a large (relative) effect on the number of women who die by age 50. The intuition is as in the baseline
model. Under the estimated selection, the women who select into the recommendation are healthier and less
likely to have invasive or in-situ cancer. Therefore, the cost of delaying the recommendation (in terms of
lives lost) is low. If there were no selection, the women who responded to the recommendation would be
more likely to have cancer than in the estimated selection specification. Thus delaying the recommendation
would have a higher cost in terms of an increase in deaths. Finally, if there were consistent selection, the
women who chose to get screened due the recommendation would be more likely to have cancer. In this
case, the recommendation would be highly effective and delaying screening would be very costly in terms
of mortality. The one exercise for which this result does not hold is the incidence shift, since in this case the
re-estimated mammogram decision model has one different parameter sign. As shown in Appendix Table
                    r
A.10, in this case in -situ is positive, implying recommendation-induced positive selection.



6    Conclusions
The debate over whether and when to recommend screening for a particular disease involves a host of em-
pirical and conceptual challenges with which the existing literature has grappled, including how to estimate
the "health" return to early screening, how to measure non-health benefits or costs, and how to monetize all
of these factors (Humphrey et al., 2002; Nelson et al., 2009; Marmot et al., 2013; Welch and Passow, 2014;
Ong and Mandl, 2015). We make no pretense of "resolving" these issues. Instead, we suggest an additional
important and largely overlooked factor that can ­ and should ­ be considered: the nature of selection in
response to the recommendation.
    We illustrate this point in the specific context of the (controversial) recommendation that women should
begin regular mammogram screenings at age 40. We document that this recommendation is associated with
a sharp (25 percentage point) increase in mammogram rates, and that those who respond to the recommen-
dation have substantially lower rates of cancer incidence than those who choose to get mammograms in the
absence of the recommendation (i.e. before age 40); conditional on having cancer, women who respond to
the recommendation also have lower rates of the more lethal invasive cancer, relative to the less lethal in
situ cancer. These data speak directly to the relative cancer risks of women who select mammograms in the
absence and presence of a recommendation. To further assess how the cancer risk of those who select mam-
mograms either pre or post recommendation compare to those who do not select mammograms, we draw on
a clinical oncology model to provide the underlying cancer incidence in the non-screened population (since
this is not directly observed). These results suggest that those who choose mammograms in the absence of a
recommendation have substantially higher rates of both invasive and in situ cancer than women who do not


                                                       20
get screened; women who choose mammograms in response to the recommendation have similar rates of in
situ cancer to unscreened women but much lower rates of invasive cancer than unscreened women.
    To illustrate the potential consequences of these selection responses to recommendations, we write down
a stylized model of the mammogram decision ­ which depends on age, cancer status, and recommendation.
We estimate this model using the observed empirical patterns combined with the clinical oncology model,
the latter of which provides both the underlying incidence of cancer and the (counterfactual) tumor evolution
in the absence of detection. We then apply the model to assess the implications for spending and mortality
of changing the recommended age for beginning mammograms from 40 to 45. The specific numbers that
we estimate will be naturally sensitive to the modeling assumptions, and ­ moreover ­ our estimates do not
attempt to measure the potential impacts of mammograms on outcomes such as stress.
    Our focus instead is on the consequences of the selection response to the recommendation, which our
estimates suggest are non-trivial. Specifically, we consider the impact of moving the recommended age of
mammograms from 45 to 40, and how this varies under alternative selection responses to the recommen-
dation; we hold the change in mammogram rates (and consequently the cost increase) from changing the
recommendation constant, and show that the mortality implications from earlier recommended mammo-
grams vary markedly with selection patterns. For example, under the observed selection pattern, the number
of lives saved by moving the recommendation from age 45 to 40 is less than a third what it would be if those
who responded to the recommendation were instead drawn at random from the population. This difference
arises because we estimate that those who respond to the recommendation have much lower rates of invasive
cancer than the general population. Conversely, our results also suggest that if it were feasible to target the
recommendations to those with higher rates of cancer, shifting the recommendation from age 45 to 40 would
save substantially more lives than either the observed selection patterns or random selection.
    Our findings suggest that future work exploring how recommendations can be designed to affect the
behavior of higher risk individuals could have important welfare implications. More broadly, our findings
suggest that the ongoing debates over whether and when to recommend screening for a disease should
consider not only average costs and benefits from screening, but also the nature of selection associated with
those who respond to the recommendation.




                                                      21
References
Abaluck, J., L. Agha, C. Kabrhel, A. Raja, and A. Venkatesh, 2016: The Determinants of Productivity in
  Medical Testing: Intensity and Allocation of Care. American Economic Review, 106 (12), 3730­3764,
  doi:10.1257/aer.20140260, URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20140260.

Alexander, F., and Coauthors, 1999: 14 years of follow-up from the Edinburgh randomised trial of breast-
  cancer screening. The Lancet, 353 (9168), 1903­1908, doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(98)07413-3, URL http:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673698074133.

American Cancer Society, 2017a:             Breast Cancer Facts & Figures 2017-2018. American Cancer
  Society, Inc., URL https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/cancer-org/research/cancer-facts-and-statistics/
  breast-cancer-facts-and-figures/breast-cancer-facts-and-figures-2017-2018.pdf.

American Cancer Society, 2017b: Limitations of Mammograms. URL https://www.cancer.org/cancer/
  breast-cancer/screening-tests-and-early-detection/mammograms/limitations-of-mammograms.html.

American      Cancer    Society,        2018:       History    of   ACS   Recommendations   for   the   Early
  Detection     of     Cancer      in      People     Without       Symptoms.   URL   https://www.cancer.org/
  health-care-professionals/american-cancer-society-prevention-early-detection-guidelines/overview/
  chronological-history-of-acs-recommendations.html.

Anwar, S., and H. Fang, 2006: An Alternative Test of Racial Prejudice in Motor Vehicle Searches: Theory
  and Evidence. American Economic Review, 96 (1), 127­151, doi:10.1257/000282806776157579, URL
  https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/000282806776157579.

Berry, D., 2013: Breast cancer screening: Controversy of impact. Breast (Edinburgh, Scotland),
  22 (0 2), S73­S76, doi:10.1016/j.breast.2013.07.013, URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
  PMC4192714/.

Bitler, M. P., and C. S. Carpenter, 2016: Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Di-
  agnoses. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8 (3), 39­68, doi:10.1257/pol.20120298, URL
  https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pol.20120298.

Bjurstam, N., and Coauthors, 2003: The Gothenburg Breast Screening Trial. Cancer, 97 (10), 2387­2396,
  doi:10.1002/cncr.11361, URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cncr.11361.

Bleyer, A., and H. G. Welch, 2012: Effect of three decades of screening mammography on breast-cancer
  incidence. The New England Journal of Medicine, 367 (21), 1998­2005, doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1206809.

Block, L., M. Jarlenski, A. Wu, and W. Bennett, 2013: Mammography use among women ages 40-49 after
  the 2009 u.s. preventive services task force recommendation. J Gen Intern Med, 28 (11), 1447­1453.

Blustein, J., 1995: Medicare Coverage, Supplemental Insurance, and the Use of Mammography by Older
  Women. New England Journal of Medicine, 332 (17), 1138­1143, doi:10.1056/NEJM199504273321706,
  URL https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199504273321706.

                                                          22
Brett, J., C. Bankhead, B. Henderson, E. Watson, and J. Austoker, 2005:                      The psycho-
  logical impact of mammographic screening. A systematic review. Psycho-Oncology, 14 (11),
  917­938, URL http://libproxy.mit.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&
  db=mdc&AN=15786514&site=ehost-live&scope=site.

Burstein, H. J., K. Polyak, J. S. Wong, S. C. Lester, and C. M. Kaelin, 2004: Ductal Carcinoma in Situ of
  the Breast. New England Journal of Medicine, 350 (14), 1430­1441, doi:10.1056/NEJMra031301, URL
  https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra031301.

Clarke, L. D., S. K. Plevritis, R. Boer, K. A. Cronin, and E. J. Feuer, 2006: Chapter 13: A Comparative
  Review of CISNET Breast Models Used To Analyze U.S. Breast Cancer Incidence and Mortality Trends.
  JNCI Monographs, 2006 (36), 96­105, doi:10.1093/jncimonographs/lgj013, URL https://academic.oup.
  com/jncimono/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/jncimonographs/lgj013.

Cooper, G. S., T. D. Kou, A. Dor, S. M. Koroukian, and M. D. Schluchter, 2017: Cancer preventive services,
  socioeconomic status, and the Affordable Care Act. Cancer, 123 (9), 1585­1589, doi:10.1002/cncr.30476.

Cronin, K. A., and Coauthors, 2009: CEBP Focus on Cancer Surveillance: Bias Associated With Self-
  Report of Prior Screening Mammography. Cancer epidemiology, biomarkers & prevention : a publication
  of the American Association for Cancer Research, cosponsored by the American Society of Preventive
  Oncology, 18 (6), 1699­1705, doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0020, URL https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
  pmc/articles/PMC2771779/.

Cutler, D. M., 2008: Are We Finally Winning the War on Cancer? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22 (4),
  3­26, doi:10.1257/jep.22.4.3, URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jep.22.4.3.

Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, S. P. Ryan, P. Schrimpf, and M. R. Cullen, 2013: Selection on Moral Hazard
  in Health Insurance. American Economic Review, 103 (1), 178­219, doi:10.1257/aer.103.1.178, URL
  https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.103.1.178.

Elmore, J. G., 2016: Solving the problem of overdiagnosis. New England Journal of Medicine,
  375 (15), 1483­1486, doi:10.1056/NEJMe1608683, URL https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMe1608683,
  pMID: 27732826, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMe1608683.

Ernster, V. L., and Coauthors, 2002: Detection of ductal carcinoma in situ in women undergoing screening
  mammography. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 94 (20), 1546­1554.

Esserman, L., Y. Shieh, and I. Thompson, 2009: Rethinking screening for breast cancer and prostate cancer.
  JAMA, 203 (15), 1685­1692.

Eusebi, V., E. Feudale, M. Foschini, A. Micheli, A. Conti, C. Riva, S. DiPalma, and F. Rilke, 1994: Long-
  term follow-up of in situ carcinoma of the breast. Seminars in Diagnostic Pathology, 11 (3), 223­235.

Fedewa, S. A., and Coauthors, 2015: Elimination of cost-sharing and receipt of screening for colorectal and
  breast cancer. Cancer, 121 (18), 3272­3280, doi:10.1002/cncr.29494.

                                                    23
Finkelstein, A., and Coauthors, 2012: The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First
  Year. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (3), 1057­1106, doi:10.3386/w17190, URL http://www.
  nber.org/papers/w17190.

Freeman, J., C. Klabunde, N. Schussler, J. Warren, B. Virnig, and G. Cooper, 2002:                Measur-
  ing Breast, Colorectal, and Prostate Cancer Screening with Medicare Claims Data. Medical Care,
  40 (8), (Supplement):IV­36­IV­42, URL https://journals.lww.com/lww-medicalcare/Abstract/2002/
  08001/Measuring_Breast,_Colorectal,_and_Prostate_Cancer.5.aspx.

Fryback, D. G., N. K. Stout, M. A. Rosenberg, A. Trentham-Dietz, V. Kuruchittham, and P. L. Remington,
  2006: The Wisconsin Breast Cancer Epidemiology Simulation Model. Journal of the National Cancer
  Institute. Monographs, (36), 37­47, doi:10.1093/jncimonographs/lgj007.

Habbema, J. D. F., G. J. v. Oortmarssen, D. J. van Putten, J. T. Lubbe, and P. J. v. d. Maas, 1986: Age-
  Specific Reduction in Breast Cancer Mortality by Screening: An Analysis of the Results of the Health
  Insurance Plan of Greater New York Study. JNCI: Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 77 (2), 317­
  320, doi:10.1093/jnci/77.2.317, URL https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/77/2/317/945422.

Habermann, E. B., B. A. Virnig, G. F. Riley, and N. N. Baxter, 2007: The impact of a change in
  Medicare reimbursement policy and HEDIS measures on stage at diagnosis among Medicare HMO
  and fee-for-service female breast cancer patients. Medical Care, 45 (8), 761­766, doi:10.1097/MLR.
  0b013e3180616c51.

Harding, C., F. Pompei, D. Burmistrov, H. G. Welch, R. Abebe, and R. Wilson, 2015: Breast Cancer
  Screening, Incidence, and Mortality Across US Counties. JAMA internal medicine, 175 (9), 1483­1489,
  doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.3043.

HCCI, 2012: Health Care Cost and Utilization Report: 2011, URL https://www.nahdo.org/sites/nahdo.org/
  files/publications/HCCI_HCCUR2011.pdf.

Hubbard, R. A., K. Kerlikowske, C. I. Flowers, B. C. Yankaskas, W. Zhu, and D. L. Miglioretti, 2011:
  Cumulative probability of false-positive recall or biopsy recommendation after 10 years of screen-
  ing mammography: a cohort study. Annals of Internal Medicine, 155 (8), 481­492, doi:10.7326/
  0003-4819-155-8-201110180-00004.

Hubbard, R. A., W. Zhu, S. Balch, T. Onega, and J. J. Fenton, 2015: Identification of abnormal screening
  mammogram interpretation using Medicare claims data. Health Services Research, 50 (1), 290­304, doi:
  10.1111/1475-6773.12194.

Humphrey, L. L., M. Helfand, B. K. S. Chan, and S. H. Woolf, 2002: Breast cancer screening: A summary
  of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Annals of Internal Medicine, 137 (5 Part 1),
  347­360.

Jacobson, M., and S. Kadiyala, 2017: When guidelines conflict: A case study of mammography screening
  initiation in the 1990s. Womens Health Issues, 27 (6), 692­699.

                                                    24
Jørgensen, K. J., and P. C. Gøtzsche, 2009: Overdiagnosis in publicly organised mammography screening
  programmes: Systematic review of incidence trends. BMJ, 339, b2587, doi:10.1136/bmj.b2587, URL
  https://www.bmj.com/content/339/bmj.b2587.

Jørgensen, K. J., P. C. Gøtzsche, M. Kalager, and P.-H. Zahl, 2017: Breast Cancer Screening in Denmark.
  Annals of Internal Medicine, 167 (7), 524, doi:10.7326/L17-0270, URL http://annals.org/article.aspx?
  doi=10.7326/L17-0270.

Kadiyala, S., and E. Strumpf, 2011: Are United States and Canadian cancer screening rates consistent
  with guideline information regarding the age of screening initiation? International Journal for Quality
  in Health Care: Journal of the International Society for Quality in Health Care, 23 (6), 611­620, doi:
  10.1093/intqhc/mzr050.

Kadiyala, S., and E. Strumpf, 2016: How Effective is Population-Based Cancer Screening? Regression
  Discontinuity Estimates from the US Guideline Screening Initiation Ages. Forum for Health Economics
  & Policy, 19 (1), 87­139, URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/bpj/fhecpo/v19y2016i1p87-139n2.html.

Kelaher, M., and J. M. Stellman, 2000: The impact of medicare funding on the use of mammography among
  older women: Implications for improving access to screening. Preventive Medicine, 31 (6), 658­664, doi:
  10.1006/pmed.2000.0759.

Kolata, G., 2009: Get a Mammogram. No Don't. Repeat. New York Times.

Kowalski, A. E., 2018: Behavior within a Clinical Trial and Implications for Mammography Guidelines.
  Working Paper 25049, National Bureau of Economic Research. doi:10.3386/w25049, URL http://www.
  nber.org/papers/w25049.

Lu, Y., and D. J. G. Slusky, 2016: The Impact of Women's Health Clinic Closures on Preventive Care.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8 (3), 100­124, doi:10.1257/app.20140405, URL
  https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20140405.

Maciosek, M. V., A. B. Coffield, T. J. Flottemesch, N. M. Edwards, and L. I. Solberg, 2010: Greater use of
  preventive services in u.s. health care could save lives at little or no cost. Health Affairs, 29 (9).

Marmot, M. G., D. G. Altman, D. A. Cameron, J. A. Dewar, S. G. Thompson, and M. Wilcox, 2013:
  The benefits and harms of breast cancer screening: An independent review. British Journal of Cancer,
  108 (11), 2205­2240, doi:10.1038/bjc.2013.177, URL https://www.nature.com/articles/bjc2013177.

Mehta, S. J., D. Polsky, J. Zhu, J. D. Lewis, J. T. Kolstad, G. Loewenstein, and K. G. Volpp, 2015: ACA-
  mandated elimination of cost sharing for preventive screening has had limited early iimpact. The American
  Journal of Managed Care, 21 (7), 511­517.

Miller, A. B., T. To, C. J. Baines, and C. Wall, 2000: The Canadian National Breast Screening Study-2: 13-
  Year Results of a Randomized Trial in Women Aged 50­59 Years. JNCI: Journal of the National Cancer


                                                       25
  Institute, 92 (18), 1490­1499, doi:10.1093/jnci/92.18.1490, URL https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/
  92/18/1490/2909588.

Miller, A. B., T. To, C. J. Baines, and C. Wall, 2002: The Canadian National Breast Screening Study-1:
  Breast Cancer Mortality after 11 to 16 Years of Follow-up: A Randomized Screening Trial of Mam-
  mography in Women Age 40 to 49 Years. Annals of Internal Medicine, 137 (5_Part_1), 305, doi:
  10.7326/0003-4819-137-5_Part_1-200209030-00005, URL http://annals.org/article.aspx?doi=10.7326/
  0003-4819-137-5_Part_1-200209030-00005.

Moss, S. M., H. Cuckle, A. Evans, L. Johns, M. Waller, and L. Bobrow, 2006: Effect of mammo-
  graphic screening from age 40 years on breast cancer mortality at 10 years' follow-up: A randomised
  controlled trial. The Lancet, 368 (9552), 2053­2060, doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69834-6, URL http:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673606698346.

Nelson, H. D., K. Tyne, A. Naik, C. Bougatsos, B. K. Chan, and L. Humphrey, 2009: Screening for Breast
  Cancer: Systematic Evidence Review Update for the U. S. Preventive Services Task Force. Annals of
  internal medicine, 151 (10), 727­W242, doi:10.1059/0003-4819-151-10-200911170-00009, URL https:
  //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2972726/.

Nyström, L., I. Andersson, N. Bjurstam, J. Frisell, B. Nordenskjöld, and L. E. Rutqvist, 2002: Long-term
  effects of mammography screening: updated overview of the Swedish randomised trials. The Lancet,
  359 (9310), 909­919, doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(02)08020-0, URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
  article/pii/S0140673602080200.

Oeffinger, K. C., and Coauthors, 2015: Breast Cancer Screening for Women at Average Risk: 2015 Guide-
  line Update From the American Cancer Society. JAMA, 314 (15), 1599­1614, doi:10.1001/jama.2015.
  12783, URL https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2463262.

Ong, M.-S., and K. D. Mandl, 2015: National expenditure for false-positive mammograms and breast cancer
  overdiagnoses estimated at $4 billion a year. Health Affairs (Project Hope), 34 (4), 576­583, doi:10.1377/
  hlthaff.2014.1087.

Oster, E., 2018: Behavioral Feedback: Do Individual Choices Influence Scientific Results? Working Paper
  25225, National Bureau of Economic Research. doi:10.3386/w25225, URL http://www.nber.org/papers/
  w25225.

Page, D., W. Dupont, L. Rogers, R. Jensen, and P. Schuyler, 1995: Contined local recurrence of carcinoma
  15-25 years after a diagnosis of low grade ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast treated only by biopsy.
  Cancer, 76 (7), 1197­1200.

Persico, N., 2009: Racial profiling? detecting bias using statistical evidence. Annual Review of Economics,
  1 (1), 229­254, doi:10.1146/annurev.economics.050708.143307, URL https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
  economics.050708.143307, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.economics.050708.143307.



                                                    26
Rosenberg, M. A., 2006: Competing risks to breast cancer mortality. Journal of the National Cancer Insti-
  tute. Monographs, (36), 15­19, doi:10.1093/jncimonographs/lgj004.

Roth, M. Y., J. G. Elmore, J. P. Yi-Frazier, L. M. Reisch, N. V. Oster, and D. L. Miglioretti, 2011: Self-
  detection remains a key method of breast cancer detection for U.S. women. Journal of Women's Health
  (2002), 20 (8), 1135­1139, doi:10.1089/jwh.2010.2493.

Saad, L., 2009: Women Disagree with New Mammogram Advice. Gallup, URL http://news.gallup.com/
  poll/124463/women-disagree-new-mammogram-advice.aspx.

Schousboe, J., K. Kerlikowske, A. Loh, and S. Cummings, 2011: Personalizing mammography by breast
  density and other risk factors for breast cancer: Analysis of health benefits and cost-effectiveness. Annals
  of Internal Medicine, 155 (1), 10­20.

SEER, 2019: SEER Incidence Data, 1973-2015. URL https://seer.cancer.gov/data/index.html.

Segel, J., R. Balkrishnan, and R. Hirth, 2017: The Effect of False-positive Mammograms on Antide-
  pressant and Anxiolytic Initiation. Medical Care, 55 (8), 752­758, URL https://journals.lww.com/
  lww-medicalcare/Abstract/2017/08000/The_Effect_of_False_positive_Mammograms_on.3.aspx.

Susan G. Komen Foundation, 2018:             Accuracy of Mammograms. URL https://ww5.komen.org/
  BreastCancer/AccuracyofMammograms.html.

Tan, S. Y. G. L., G. J. van Oortmarssen, H. J. de Koning, R. Boer, and J. D. F. Habbema, 2006: The
  MISCAN-Fadia Continuous Tumor Growth Model for Breast Cancer. JNCI Monographs, 2006 (36),
  56­65, doi:10.1093/jncimonographs/lgj009, URL https://academic.oup.com/jncimono/article/2006/36/
  56/917299.

Taubes, G., 1997: The Breast-Screening Brawl. Science, 275 (5303), 1056­1059, doi:10.1126/science.275.
  5303.1056, URL http://science.sciencemag.org/content/275/5303/1056.

Welch, H. G., 2015: Less Medicine, More Health: 7 Assumptions That Drive Too Much Medical Care.
  Beacon Press.

Welch, H. G., and W. C. Black, 2010: Overdiagnosis in Cancer. JNCI: Journal of the National Cancer
  Institute, 102 (9), 605­613, doi:10.1093/jnci/djq099, URL https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/102/9/
  605/894608.

Welch, H. G., and H. J. Passow, 2014: Quantifying the benefits and harms of screening mammography.
  JAMA Internal Medicine, 174 (3), 448­454, doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.13635.

Welch, H. G., P. C. Prorok, A. J. O'Malley, and B. S. Kramer, 2016: Breast-Cancer Tumor Size, Over-
  diagnosis, and Mammography Screening Effectiveness. New England Journal of Medicine, 375 (15),
  1438­1447, doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1600249, URL https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1600249.



                                                     27
Welch, H. G., L. M. Schwartz, and S. Woloshin, 2011: Overdiagnosed: Making People Sick in the Pursuit
  of Health. Beacon Press.

Zackrisson, S., I. Andersson, L. Janzon, J. Manjer, and J. P. Garne, 2006: Rate of over-diagnosis of breast
  cancer 15 years after end of Malmö mammographic screening trial: Follow-up study. BMJ, 332 (7543),
  689­692, doi:10.1136/bmj.38764.572569.7C, URL https://www.bmj.com/content/332/7543/689.

Zahl, P.-H., J. Mæhlen, and H. G. Welch, 2008: The Natural History of Invasive Breast Cancers Detected
  by Screening Mammography. Archives of Internal Medicine, 168 (21), 2311­2316, doi:10.1001/archinte.
  168.21.2311, URL https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/773446.




                                                    28
                                                         Figure 1: Mammogram rates by age

                              0.45

                               0.4

                              0.35
  Share who had a mammogram




                               0.3

                              0.25

                               0.2

                              0.15

                               0.1

                              0.05

                                0
                                     35   36   37   38     39   40   41     42 43    44     45   46   47   48   49   50
                                                                              Age

Notes: Figure shows share of women who had a mammogram by age, from insurance claims data on a set of privately insured
woman-years from 2009- 2011. Because we observe birth year, age is measured as of the start of the calendar year. Thus the
mammogram rate at age 40 is the share of women who got a mammogram in the year they turned 40. Error bars (small, and
therefore not visible in the figure) reflect 95% confidence intervals. N = 7,373,302 woman-years.




                                                                       29
                                                                                         Figure 2: Mammogram outcomes by age

                                                                       1




                          Mammogram result conditional on mammogram   0.8




                                                                      0.6




                                                                      0.4                                                                           Negative
                                                                                                                                                    False positive
                                                                                                                                                    True positive
                                                                      0.2




                                                                       0
                                                                             35    36    37   38    39    40    41    42 43       44      45   46    47     48    49    50
                                                                                                                        Age

                                                                                        (a) Mammogram Results Conditional on Mammogram

                                                                      0.01                                                                                             0.2

                                                                                                                     True positive        False positive




                                                                                                                                                                              Share of mammograms that are false positive
                    Share of mammograms that are true positive




                                                                  0.009                                                                                                0.18



                                                                  0.008                                                                                                0.16



                                                                  0.007                                                                                                0.14



                                                                  0.006                                                                                                0.12



                                                                  0.005                                                                                                0.1



                                                                  0.004                                                                                                0.08
                                                                              35   36    37   38   39    40    41    42 43   44      45   46   47   48     49    50
                                                                                                                       Age

                                                                                              (b) Share True Positive and False Positive

Notes: Sample is limited to the set of privately insured woman-years from the private insurance claims data who had a mammogram.
N = 7,373,302 woman-years. For each age (measured by the age at the beginning of the calendar year), panel A shows the share
with each mammogram outcome. Panel B presents no new information but, for expositional ease, reports on a different scale the
share of mammograms at each age that are true positive (left hand axis) and false positive (right hand axis). Error bars reflect 95%
confidence intervals.




                                                                                                                     30
                                                                           Figure 3: Tumor stage and size by age

                                                 0.2                                                                                         32
                                                                                                   Share in situ (primary yaxis)

                                                                                                   Average tumor size (secondary yaxis)
                                                                                                                                             30
    Share of detected tumors that are in situ




                                                                                                                                                  Average detected tumor size (mm)
                                                0.17

                                                                                                                                             28



                                                0.14                                                                                         26



                                                                                                                                             24

                                                0.11

                                                                                                                                             22



                                                0.08                                                                                         20
                                                       35   36   37   38    39   40   41   42 43     44   45    46    47    48     49   50
                                                                                             Age

Notes: Figure shows diagnosed breast cancer tumors in the SEER (2000-2014) data by age. Primary y-axis shows share of breast
cancer tumors that are in situ. Secondary y-axis shows average size of diagnosed tumors. Error bars reflect 95% confidence
intervals. N =197,956 breast cancer diagnoses.




                                                                                            31
                                                                                  Figure 4: Spending by age

                                                     6,000

                                                     5,800

                                                     5,600             No mammogram
                                                                       Mammogram
                          Average 12month spending

                                                     5,400

                                                     5,200

                                                     5,000

                                                     4,800

                                                     4,600

                                                     4,400

                                                     4,200

                                                     4,000
                                                             35   36   37    38    39   40   41    42 43   44   45      46   47       48   49   50
                                                                                                     Age

                                                                            (a) Mammogram versus no mammogram

                                             64,000



                                             54,000
                  Average 12month spending




                                             44,000


                                                                                                                     Negative
                                             34,000                                                                  False positive
                                                                                                                     True positive

                                             24,000



                                             14,000



                                                     4,000
                                                             35   36   37    38    39   40   41    42 43   44   45      46   47       48   49   50
                                                                                                     Age

                                                                                   (b) By mammogram outcome

Notes: Sample is insurance claims data on a set of privately insured woman-years from 2009- 2011. In Panel A, for each age
(defined based on age at the beginning of the calendar year), we report the spending in the 12 months following the mammogram.
For those without a mammogram, we draw a reference date from the distribution of actual mammograms in that year. All reference
dates are set to be the first of the given month. Spending is measured in the 12 months after this reference date. Panel B focuses
only on the woman-years with mammograms and shows subsequent 12-month spending separately based on mammogram outcome.
Error bars (not always visible) reflect 95% confidence intervals. N = 7,373,302 woman-years.




                                                                                                  32
                                                                       Figure 5: Mortality

                                       0.25


                                                                                                        In situ diagnosis

                                       0.20                                                             invasive diagnosis
   5year mortality (since diagnosis)




                                       0.15




                                       0.10




                                       0.05




                                       0.00
                                              35   36   37   38   39   40   41        42 43   44   45    46    47    48     49   50
                                                                                        Age

Notes: Figure shows 5-year mortality for diagnosed breast cancer tumors in the SEER (2000-2014) data. Mortality rates are shown
separately by age of diagnoses and by tumor stage (in situ and invasive). Error bars reflect 95% confidence intervals. N = 147,243
diagnoses with non-missing 5-year mortality.




                                                                                 33
                                                                                                                Figure 6: Model fit
                                                                              0.5




                                                                              0.4




                                 Share who had a mammogram
                                                                              0.3
                                                                                                                                                                   Observed
                                                                                                                                                                   Fitted
                                                                              0.2




                                                                              0.1




                                                                               0
                                                                                         35    36    37    38    39    40    41    42 43   44   45       46   47     48     49   50
                                                                                                                                     Age


                                                                                                           (a) Share with mammogram

                                                                               0.01
                                 Share of mammograms that are true positive




                                                                              0.008




                                                                              0.006




                                                                              0.004
                                                                                                                                                                   Observed
                                                                                                                                                                   Fitted
                                                                              0.002




                                                                                     0
                                                                                          35    36    37    38    39    40    41   42 43   44    45      46   47      48    49   50
                                                                                                                                     Age


                                                                                          (b) Share of mammograms that are true positive

                                                                               0.6
                                 Share of diagnoses that are in situ




                                                                               0.5




                                                                               0.4

                                                                                                                                                Observed
                                                                                                                                                Fitted


                                                                               0.3
                                                                                         35    36    37     38   39    40    41    42 43   44    45      46   47     48     49   50
                                                                                                                                     Age


                                                                                                           (c) Share of diagnoses in situ

Notes: Figures show model fit by comparing the observed patterns of mammogram rates, outcomes, and types of diagnoses by age
to the fitted values from the model based on the parameter estimates from Table 2. The observed data on mammograms (Panel
A) was previously shown in Figure 1; the observed data on share of mammograms that are true positives was previously shown in
Figure 2; the observed data on the share of diagnoses that are in situ is a modified version of the data shown in Figure 3. While
Figure 3 presented the share of all diagnosed cancers that are in situ, we match the share of mammogram-diagnosed cancers that
                                                                34
are in situ, as shown in Panel C. Appendix C provides more detail.
         Figure 7: Impact of changing the mammogram recommendation age from 40 to 45, by age
                                                                              0.5




                                                                              0.4




                                 Share who had a mammogram
                                                                              0.3




                                                                              0.2




                                                                              0.1
                                                                                                                                                                             Age 40 Recommendation
                                                                                                                                                                             Age 45 Recommendation
                                                                               0
                                                                                         35        36        37        38        39        40        41        42 43    44    45    46   47   48   49   50
                                                                                                                                                                 Age


                                                                                                             (a) Share with mammogram by age

                                                                              0.012



                                                                               0.01
                                 Share of mammograms that are true positive




                                                                              0.008



                                                                              0.006



                                                                              0.004
                                                                                                                                                                 Age 40 Recommendation
                                                                                                                                                                 Age 45 Recommendation
                                                                              0.002



                                                                                     0
                                                                                              35        36        38        39        40        41        42     43    44    45    46    47   48   49   50
                                                                                                                                                                 Age


                                                                                (b) Share of mammograms that are true positive by age

                                                                               0.6
                                 Share of true positives that are in situ




                                                                               0.5




                                                                               0.4



                                                                                                                                  Age 40 Recommendation
                                                                                                                                  Age 45 Recommendation

                                                                               0.3
                                                                                          35        36        38        39            40        41        42    43     44    45    46    47   48   49   50
                                                                                                                                                                Age


                                                                                                         (c) Share of diagnoses in situ by age

Figure reports the model predictions - by age - for mammogram rates, mammogram outcomes, and the share of diagnoses that are
in situ, based on the parameter estimates from Table 2. As in Table 3, we report the model predictions both under the status quo
recommendation that mammograms begin at age 40 and the counterfactual recommendation that mammograms begin at age 45.


                                                                                                                                                      35
                                                  Table 1: Summary statistics


                                                   No. of Observations                  Health Care Spending
                                                  N (000s)        Share                 Total      Out-of-pocket

    No mammogram                                   5,166.2            0.701                 $4,300               $625
    Mammogram                                      2,206.9            0.299                 $4,985               $751

    Conditional on mammogram:
       Negative                                    1,977.8            0.896                 $4,552              $715
       False positive                               214.6             0.097                 $6,106              $952
       True Positive                                 14.4             0.007                $47,639             $2,821

Notes: Table shows summary statistics from insurance claims data on a set of 35-50 year old privately insured women in 2009-
2011. Each observation is a woman-year. 12-month spending measures healthcare spending in the 12 months after the mammogram
(including the mammogram itself) for those with a mammogram. For those without a mammogram, we draw a reference date from
the distribution of actual mammograms in that year. All reference dates are set to be the first of the given month. Spending is
measured in the 12 months after this reference date.


                                                 Table 2: Parameter estimates


                                     Parameter               Estimate          Std. Err.

                                        o
                                                              -5.21              0.30
                                      o
                                                              0.10               0.01
                                     oin-situ                 0.36               0.18
                                      o
                                       invasive               1.13              14.96
                                        r
                                                              0.29               0.50
                                      r
                                                              -0.03              0.01
                                     rin-situ                 -0.01              0.24
                                      r
                                      invasive                -4.67             33.38

Notes: Table shows the parameter estimates from the mammogram decision model. Standard errors are calculated using 100
repetitions of the bootstrap.




                                                              36
              Table 3: Impact of changing the mammogram recommendation age from 40 to 45

                                                         Rec at Age 40         Rec at Age 45             Change

       A. Screening and spending (per woman)
             Mammograms                                        4.70                  3.80                 -0.90
                                                              (0.06)                (0.14)                (0.08)

               Negative                                        4.22                  3.42                 -0.81
                                                              (0.05)                (0.12)                (0.07)
               False positives                                 0.46                  0.36                 -0.09
                                                              (0.01)                (0.02)                (0.01)
               True positives                                0.0208                0.0204                -0.0004
                                                             (0.0024)              (0.0024)              (0.0001)

                  In-situ diagnoses                          0.0063                0.0060                -0.0004
                                                             (0.0005)              (0.0005)              (0.0001)
                  Invasive diagnoses                         0.0145                0.0145                0.0000
                                                             (0.0019)              (0.0019)              (0.0001)

             Total healthcare spending ($)                   71,326                71,007                 -319
                                                               (128)                 (155)                 (29)

       B. Mortality (per 1,000 women by age 50)
             Dead                                             15.98                 16.03                 0.05
                                                              (0.53)                (0.53)                (0.03)
               Dead from breast cancer                         8.23                  8.28                 0.05
                                                              (0.53)                (0.53)                (0.03)
               Dead from other reason                          7.75                  7.75                 0.00
                                                              (0.00)                (0.00)                (0.00)

             Years alive, per woman                           15.87                 15.87                -0.0002
                                                              (0.00)                (0.00)               (0.0001)

Notes: Table reports model predictions for various outcomes under the status quo recommendation that mammograms begin at
age 40 (column 1) and the counterfactual recommendation that mammograms begin at age 45 (column 2). The predictions are
generated using the parameter estimates from Table 2, and simulated women's life histories under a non-screening regime based
on the clinical oncology model. Panel A reports the average number of mammograms and different mammogram outcomes per
woman over ages 35-50. Panel B shows the share of women dead (and from different causes) by age 50, as well as the number of
years alive on average between 35 and 50. Standard errors are calculated using 100 repetitions of the bootstrap.




                                                             37
Table 4: Impact of changing mammogram recommendation age from 40 to 45, under alternative assump-
tions about selection

                                                                          Recommendation at
                                                                                                                   Difference
                                                                       Age 40          Age 45

    A. Estimated Selection
        Mammograms (per woman)                                           4.70                   3.80                  -0.90
                                                                        (0.06)                 (0.14)                 (0.08)
         Total healthcare spending ($ per woman)                       71,326                 71,007                  -319
                                                                         (128)                  (155)                  (29)
         Dead by age 50 (per 1,000 women)                               15.98                  16.03                   0.05
                                                                        (0.53)                 (0.53)                 (0.03)

    B. No Selection
        Mammograms (per woman)                                           4.70                   3.80                  -0.90
                                                                        (0.06)                 (0.14)                 (0.08)
         Total healthcare spending ($ per woman)                       71,364                 71,024                  -340
                                                                         (111)                  (147)                  (37)
         Dead by age 50 (per 1,000 women)                               15.84                  16.02                   0.18
                                                                        (0.47)                 (0.53)                 (0.06)

    C. Consistent Selection
        Mammograms (per woman)                                           4.70                   3.80                  -0.90
                                                                        (0.06)                 (0.14)                 (0.08)
         Total healthcare spending ($ per woman)                       71,450                 71,068                  -382
                                                                         (87)                   (134)                  (48)
         Dead by age 50 (per 1,000 women)                               15.54                  15.99                   0.45
                                                                        (0.39)                 (0.52)                 (0.13)

Notes: Table reports model predictions under the status quo recommendation that mammograms begin at age 40 (column 1) and
the counterfactual recommendation that mammograms begin at age 45 (column 2). Each panel reports results under different
assumptions about the nature of selection both in the absence and presence of a recommendation. Panel A reports results based on
the estimated selection patterns; these results repeat findings shown previously in Table 3. Panel B repeats the same exercises as in
Panel A, but instead of using the estimated selection (i.e.  r and  o vectors shown in Table 2), we instead assume "no selection" -
i.e. we set  r =  o = 0. Panel C also repeats the exercises in Panel A but now assumes "consistent selection" - i.e. we set  r equal
to our estimates of  o in Table 2. In both Panel B and C, we hold the overall mammogram rate fixed at Panel A's predicted age-
specific mammogram rates (which of course varies in column 1 and column 2), so that the counterfactuals across panels consider
differences in selection, not in levels. To do this we adjust the intercept r for each age and counterfactual to match the age-specific
mammogram rates in Panel A, assuming the simulated life histories and cancer status remains constant. The small differences in
mammograms in Panel A and Panel C are due to changes in the denominator of simulated life histories. Specifically, since fewer
women die in Panel C, there are more years where they could potentially obtain a mammogram. Standard errors are calculated
using 100 repetitions of the bootstrap.




                                                                 38
   Table 5: Sensitivity checks for impact of changing mammogram recommendation age from 40 to 45

                                            A. Estimated Selection                B. No Selection             C. Consistent Selection

                                               Dead by age 50                    Dead by age 50                   Dead by age 50
                                             (per 1,000 women)                 (per 1,000 women)                (per 1,000 women)
                                        Recommendation at                 Recommendation at                Recommendation at
                                                               Diff                              Diff                             Diff
                                        Age 40     Age 45                 Age 40     Age 45                Age 40     Age 45

     Baseline Estimate                   15.98       16.03      0.05      15.84       16.02         0.18   15.54      15.99       0.45

  Decrease cancer incidence to:
  (1) Erasmus original level             10.66       10.68      0.02      10.67       10.68         0.01   10.65      10.68       0.03

  Decrease share of in-situ tumors that become invasive:
  (2) from 62.5% to 28%                    15.20      15.22     0.02      15.06       15.21         0.15   14.78      15.18       0.41
  (3) from 62.5% to 14%                    14.89      14.90     0.01      14.75       14.89         0.14   14.48      14.86       0.39

  Increase share of non-malignant tumors:
  (4) from 6% to 19%                      15.08      15.12      0.03      14.90       15.10         0.20   14.63      15.07       0.44
  (5) from 6% to 42%                      12.69      12.70      0.02      12.53       12.68         0.15   12.36      12.66       0.30

Notes: Table reports model predictions under alternate sensitivity assumptions. The first three columns in the first row replicate the
results from Table 4 Panel A on the impact of changing the mammogram recommendation age from 40 to 45 based on the estimated
selection patterns. We report only the impact on the death rate by age 50. The second three columns replicate the results from Table
4 Panel B where we instead assume "no selection" - i.e. we set  r =  o = 0. The last set of columns reflect Table 4 Panel C where
we assume "consistent selection" - i.e. we set  r equal to our estimates of  o in Table A.10. Each row tests the sensitivity of these
estimates under alternate natural history assumptions, as discussed in Section 5.2.3.




                                                                     39
Appendix

A     Coding Mammograms and Outcomes in Claims Data
We follow Segel, Balkrishnan,, and Hirth (2017) in coding the incidence of screening mammograms (here-
after "mammograms") and the results of those mammograms in the HCCI claims data.
    We code a woman as having a screening mammogram on a given date if she has a claim with ICD-9
procedure code V76.12 or CPT codes 77057 or G0202 on that date, but no claims for any other mammo-
gram within the previous 12 months and no prior claims for breast cancer treatment.18 Previous work has
documented that claims-based measures of mammogram rates tend to be lower than mammogram rates in
self-reported survey data. For example, Freeman et al. (2002) document this pattern in Medicare data, and
Cronin et al. (2009) document similar evidence in a study of Vermont women. Consistent with these studies,
Appendix Figure A.1 documents the age profile of the annual screening mammogram rate, as measured by
both the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) survey and the algorithm described above
using the HCCI claims data. Between ages 39 and 41, the mammogram rate jumps by approximately the
same amount - 25 percentage points - by both measures, but the survey data describe mammogram rates as
being approximately 10 to 20 percentage points higher than the claims data rate at all ages. Of course the
samples are not perfectly comparable, as the BRFSS sample is of all women with health insurance (public
or private) from 2002-2012, while the HCCI sample is of women privately insured by Aetna, Humana or
United between 2008 and 2012.
    We code the outcome of a screening mammogram as negative if there are no subsequent claims for
either follow-up testing or breast cancer treatment within the next twelve months. We code the outcome
as a false positive if there is at least one claim for follow-up testing in the following three months (i.e.
a subsequent mammogram, a breast biopsy, a breast ultrasound, or other radiologic breast testing) in the
following three months, but no claims for breast cancer treatment in the next 12 months. We code the
outcome of a mammogram as true positive if, within twelve months following the mammogram, there is
at least one claim for breast cancer. We consider a women to have a subsequent mammogram if she has a
claim with ICD-9 procedure code V76.12 or CPT codes 77057 or G0202. A women has a breast biopsy
if she has a claim with ICD-9 procedure code 85.11, 85.12, 85.20, or 85.21 or CPT codes 19100, 19101,
or 19120. A breast ultrasound is coded with ICD-9 procedure code 88.73 or CPT code 76645. Radiologic
breast testing is coded with ICD-9 procedure code 87.35, 87.36, 87.73, or 88.85 or CPT codes 76003, 77002,
76095, 77031, 76086, 76087, 76088, 77053, 77054, 76355, 76360, 76362, 77011, 77012, 77013, 76098,
76100, 76101, 76102, 76120, 76125, 76140, 76150, 76350, or 76365. Breast cancer is coded with ICD-9
procedure code 233.0, V103.0, or 174.0 through 174.9 or CPT code 19160, 19162, 19180, 19200, 19220,
19240, 19301, 19303, 19305, 19307, 38740, or 38745.The codes used to identify these claims are provided
in Appendix Table A.1, along with their references.
    The linked SEER-Medicare data allows us to cross validate this claims-based coding process against
  18 Segel,Balkrishnan,, and Hirth (2017) focused on data from 2003-2004, so used the CPT code 76092. In 2007 this code was
replaced by 77057. In addition, Hubbard et al. (2015) identify CPT code G0202 as indicating a screening mammogram claim.
Segel, Balkrishnan,, and Hirth (2017) provide codes for "other" (non-screening) mammograms, which we omit.



                                                            40
cancer diagnoses in the cancer registry. The results are very encouraging. Appendix Tables A.2 and A.3
describe the concordance of true positive mammograms as coded using this algorithm with actual diagnoses
as recorded in the SEER-Medicare data. For those who were diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mam-
mogram in the year of diagnosis, 99.8% of mammograms were coded as true positive using our algorithm.
Meanwhile, 93% of mammograms for patients who were never diagnosed with breast cancer were nega-
tive, while 6.5% were false positives. Most patients with true positive mammograms were diagnosed with
breast cancer in the year of or the year following the mammogram, while 83% of those without true positive
mammograms were never diagnosed and a further 13% were not diagnosed until more than 1 year after
the mammogram (4% were diagnosed in the year following the mammogram, but none in the year of the
mammogram).


B     Clinical model: the Erasmus model
We use the Erasmus model to generate estimates of the underlying onset rate by age of cancer and cancer
type, as well as the evolution of (untreated) cancers. We adjust the model to better match certain key
moments of the SEER data. This (modified) Erasmus data, together with assumed parameters from the
mammogram decision model (specifically, equations 1 and 2) and the observed policy recommendation (40
and above), generates an age-specific share of women who are screened, as well as the tumor characteristics
(in situ and invasive rates) conditional on getting screened, which we then attempt to match by method
of moments to the observed data on the age-specific share of women who are screened and the tumor
characteristics conditional on getting screened.
    As described in the main text, the Erasmus model is one of seven models developed for the Cancer
Intervention and Surveillance Modeling Network (CISNET) as part of a project decomposing breast cancer
mortality reductions from 1975-2000 into effects from the dissemination of mammography versus the de-
velopment of advanced treatment techniques (Clarke et al. 2006). Each of the groups participating in the
project wrote a model of breast cancer incidence and mortality in the US over this time period and then
compared the mortality rates under scenarios with and without mammography and advanced treatment. For
convenience, we focus on one of these models, the Erasmus model (Tan et al., 2006).
    In what follows we describe our implementation of the Erasmus model. This implementation directly
follows Tan et al. (2006), with all the assumptions we describe being theirs. We then describe the calibration
changes we make to the model based on some of our own external data and assumptions.


B.1   Model details
Tumor incidence

The model allows us to simulate a cohort of women i, each with a year of birth bi and a year of death from
other causes di which is randomly determined and dependent on the year of birth. Specifically, it assumes
that in each year y the probability that a person born in year b (such that y  b) dies of causes other than
breast cancer is Qb
                  y . A woman's year of death is defined as the lesser of 110 and the first year in which a




                                                     41
random draw from a uniform distribution on [0,1] falls below Qb
                                                              y . It assumes that no woman dies from other
causes before age 30.
    The model further assumes that there exists a probability Cb that any woman from cohort b will get
cancer before age 85. It defines age ab
                                      y = y - b as the age in year y of an individual born in year b and
assumes that for every cohort b and year y such that 20  ab
                                                          y  85 there exists Sa , the probability that a
woman experiences tumor onset at age a conditional on eventually getting cancer. For each woman i with
any cancer, we can therefore construct the year of tumor onset ti as the lesser of the year in which she turns
85 and the first year in which a random draw from a uniform distribution on [0, 1] falls below Sy-bi .

Tumor type and in situ characteristics

At onset, cancer type is defined to be either an invasive tumor or one of three types of non-invasive tumors.
Non-invasive tumors are also known as as ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), which we refer to in the text as in
situ. Invasive tumors are assigned a minimum size and other tumor characteristics (as described in Appendix
Table A.4) at onset and immediately begin growing. DCIS-regressive tumors eventually disappear without
causing any harm; DCIS-invasive tumors eventually transform into a harmful invasive tumor but do no harm
in the meantime, and DCIS-clinical tumors do no harm but are eventually clinically detected. The model
assumes that the outcome of each DCIS tumor (regression, invasion, or detection) occurs wi years after
onset, where wi is generated by random draws from an exponential distribution with mean W . None of the
three types of DCIS tumors can be clinically detected during the duration of this "dwell time", but they can
be screen-detected with a screening-year-specific probability Ey if screening occurs. The type of tumor is
defined at onset subject to age-specific probabilities Ia (invasive), Va (DCIS-invasive), Ra (DCIS-regressive),
and Ca (DCIS-clinical) such that Ia + Va + Ra + Ca = 1. Values for these and other Erasmus parameters are
given in Appendix Table A.5.
    For DCIS tumors that become invasive, onset of invasive disease is defined as the moment when the
tumor size reaches the minimum value of the screening threshold diameter; this threshold varies with the
woman's age as well as over time (to reflect improvements in screening technology). The dwell time for
DCIS tumors was calibrated in the MISCAN breast cancer model based on the duration from onset of DCIS
to the 1975 screening threshold diameter.

Invasive tumor characteristics

The model assumes that the fundamental characteristic of invasive tumors is their year-dependent size sy
                                                                                                       i.
For all invasive tumors, it defines s0
                                     i (the size in the year of onset) to be equal to 0.01 cm. It assume that all
                                                                                           y
invasive tumors grow exponentially. Tumor size in year y is therefore given by s0
                                                                                i (1 + gi ) where gi is the
individual-specific growth rate (drawn from a lognormal distribution at tumor onset). It further assumes that
diagnosis depends on tumor size and the individual's "screen detection diameter" riay (drawn at the time of
screening from an age- and detection-year-specific Weibull distribution) and "clinical diagnosis diameter"
ci (log normally distributed and set at tumor onset). If the patient undergoes screening, the tumor can be
detected if sy                                                         y
             i > ri . Alternatively, if the tumor grows so large that si > ci , the patient will certainly detect it
due to the appearance of clinical symptoms. Tumor size also determines mortality: if a patient diagnoses

                                                        42
her tumor before it reaches its "fatal diameter" fi (drawn at onset from a year-specific Weibull distribution),
she will receive treatment and survive, but if not, she will die regardless of treatment.
    The model defines for each invasive tumor the length of time the patient will survive after the tumor
reaches its fatal diameter, called the "survival duration since fatal diameter" and denoted ui (log normally
distributed). It assumes that if the tumor has not been clinically detected by the time 0.9*ui years have
passed since the fatal diameter was reached, it will be clinically detected due to distant metastases at that
time.
    Finally, it assumes that the growth rate gi , clinical diagnosis diameter ci , and survival duration ui are
correlated with coefficients gc , gu , and cu . The variables described in this section (sy    ay
                                                                                          i , ri , f i gi ,ci ,ui ) ,
combined with the woman's age and the year of initiation, fully specify the course of the disease for an
invasive tumor, subject to potential screening regimens.


B.2     Parameterizing the Erasmus model
We begin by choosing certain population-specific parameters required as inputs for the Erasmus model: the
other-cause death probability, the overall tumor incidence, and the tumor incidence by age. As in Tan et al.
(2006), the other-cause death probability follows the approach of Rosenberg (2006). However, we adjusted
the tumor incidence parameters (overall cohort incidence and quadratic incidence by age) that are given in
Tan et al. (2006) in order to match the SEER data's share of diagnoses that are in situ and invasive for those
under 40 and over 40. After establishing these population-specific parameters, we simulate individual life
histories under a no-screening assumption, and use the tumor sizes and types to determine the population
cancer rate by age.

Other-cause death probability

Following Rosenberg (2006), we computed probability of death due to other causes as the difference be-
tween the all-cause mortality and breast cancer specific mortality. We obtained all-cause mortality for ages
0-110 and years 1933-2010 from the Human Mortality Database. Using breast cancer death totals from
the National Center for Health Statistics and female population totals from the Human Mortality Database,
we calculated breast-cancer-specific mortality for ages 0-110 and years 1959-2010. To impute values for
previous years, we assumed that the age-specific breast cancer mortality rate in any year before 1958 was
equal to the rate in 1958. We combined these data to calculate non-breast-cancer mortality rates for all years
between 1933 and 2010.

Age profile of cancer incidence

The Erasmus model provided a CDF of tumor incidence in 5-year increments, implying a step function of
yearly incidence that produces spikes in tumor onset within a cohort every 5 years (see Appendix Table A.6,
first column reproduced from Tan et al. (2006), based on estimates of US population in 1975). We con-
structed a smoothed CDF of tumor incidence by fitting to the Erasmus CDF using a constrained polynomial



                                                         43
(quadratic) fit: y = ax2 + bx + c. We fitted a, b, c, the start age xstart (at which the CDF should be zero), and
the end age xend (at which the CDF should be one). Restrictions included:

                                              2
                                            axstart + bxstart + c = 0


                                               2
                                             axend + bxend + c = 1


                                                2axstart + b  0

                                        ^ - y)2 across each of the fourteen ages in Appendix Table A.6 are
    The values that minimize the error (y
xstart = 24, xend = 85, a = 0.000268, b = -0.01282, c = 0.15327. We assume that the incidence before age
24 is 0. The fit is shown in Appendix Figure A.5.

Adjusting cancer incidence rates

Tan et al. (2006) calculate cumulative tumor incidence by birth cohort based on observed (i.e. diagnosed)
incidence in the US from 1975-1979. Implicitly, this assumes that all tumors are diagnosed. It will therefore
miss any undiagnosed tumors. Not surprisingly, therefore, when we use the original Erasmus parameters and
our calibrated screening policy described below, the model substantially under-predicts observed diagnoses.
To rectify this, we allowed the cohort tumor incidence to vary with a multiplicative shift  which uniformly
affects each cohort's tumor incidence.
    We calibrate  as follows. We define the parameters  = ( , pscrninv , pscrndcis ) where pscrninv is the
probability of a mammogram conditional on having an invasive tumor and pscrninsitu is the probability
of a mammogram conditional on having an in situ tumor. We then estimate  by maximum likelihood.
Specifically, we maximize the log likelihood of observing SEER tumor types (1973-2013, for women 25-
34). The model's original incidence and the incidence multiplicatively shifted by  are plotted against the
SEER diagnosis rates in Appendix Figure A.6. We also plot the model's diagnosis rates with no screening;
with the multiplicative shift this roughly matches with the SEER diagnosis levels.


B.3   Visual representation and results from Erasmus model: Underlying cancer rate
The first panel of Appendix Figure A.7 visualizes the Erasmus model using a flow chart. The second panel
shows example sequences of progression for each of the four types of tumors, in the absence of screening.
The first two rows show the progress of DCIS-regressive and DCIS-clinical tumors, which are harmless
and differ only in their behaviors at the end of their dwell time: DCIS-regressive tumors disappear, while
DCIS-clinical tumors are detected clinically, for example at a routine physical exam. If these tumors are
screened, they will be diagnosed with a probability equal to the "sensitivity" as described in Appendix Table
A.5. Likewise, before it switches to its invasive phase, the DCIS-invasive tumor can also be detected by a
screening mammogram in the same way. After it becomes invasive, the DCIS-invasive tumor (row 3) and the
invasive tumor (row 4) can only be detected if the size exceeds the year- and age-specific screening diameter


                                                       44
of the year in which it is screened. If a woman's tumor is screened (or clinically diagnosed) before it reaches
the fatal diameter, her life is saved, but if not, she will eventually die, regardless of detection or treatment in
later years. In most cases, when a woman's tumor reaches the fatal diameter without being diagnosed, she
will be clinically diagnosed before death. The flow chart omits deaths due to other causes.
    Appendix Figure A.8 plots the share of women in each of five categories when the Erasmus model
is calculated with no screening. The calculation is based on birth cohorts from 1950-1975, and focuses
on women aged 30-50 in 2000-2005. At any given age, the share of women with detectable invasive or
DCIS cancer is substantially smaller than the share of women who have already been diagnosed clinically,
indicating that there is a small window of time during which a cancer can be screened before it is clinically
detected.
    Using the calibrated other-cause death probabilities and incidence rates, we solve the Erasmus model
assuming that there is no screening for birth years 1950-1975. We restrict to years 2000-2005 and ages
30-50, producing a set of individual life-histories that can be categorized in every year as dead due to breast
cancer, dead due to other causes, clinically diagnosed, currently undiagnosed invasive cancer, currently
undiagnosed DCIS, or no cancer. (We consider invasive cancer that is too small to be detectable, and
regressed DCIS tumors, to be the same as "no cancer.")
    We take the "population cancer rate" at each age, or the share of women who have a tumor by a certain
age, from the Erasmus model. The Erasmus model assumes that cancers can only be detected by mammo-
gram once they have reached a certain size, so we assume the screening diameter is 1.09 cm ­ the average
screen-detectable size in the Erasmus model ­ and count the share of women with detectable invasive cancer
as the share of women with tumors above that size in the Erasmus model. We also count 80% of the women
with DCIS tumors, under the assumption in the Erasmus model that about 80% of technically "detectable"
in situ tumors will be detected in any given year. We do not count DCIS-regressive tumors after they have re-
gressed, and after a DCIS-invasive tumor has transitioned to an invasive tumor we determine its detectability
based on the rules for invasive cancers.19


C     Estimation of mammogram model
We estimate our model of mammogram demand by method of moments. The moments are generated from
the Erasmus model combined with our model of screening decisions. We first use the Erasmus model to
generate cancer incidence and tumor growth under a no-screening assumption, as described above. Specifi-
cally, we simulate a panel of ten million women born between 1910 and 1974. We start at age 20 and model
cancer incidence and tumor growth using the Erasmus model, assuming no screening. We use the tumor
sizes and types to determine the population cancer rate by age.
    Then, for a given set of parameters  o ,  o ,  o ,  r ,  r ,  r , we apply the mammogram decision model (by
  19 Note that this leads to an unintuitive model behavior in which DCIS tumors are detectable at smaller sizes than invasive tumors.

In the Erasmus model, invasive tumors are initialized at 0.01 mm and are not considered screen-detectable (by us) until they reach
1.09 cm. DCIS-invasive tumors are initialized at the screening threshold of the year and age in which they become invasive. Since
this is sometimes smaller than 1.09 (1.09 is just the average of the distribution of screening thresholds in 2010), the model could
simulate a DCIS-invasive tumor which is detectable for several years, then becomes undetectable, then becomes detectable again.



                                                                45
age and recommendation status) to the cancer rate age profile from the Erasmus model to generate the main
moments by age.
    Although the model is static, it does have a dynamic element in it, as we calculate the model-generated
moments only for the women who were not diagnosed with cancer in previous years, or those who did not
die (from breast cancer or other causes) prior to the given age. To do this, we must make an assumption about
what fraction of clinically-diagnosed women under the no-screening assumption overlap with the screen-
diagnosed population when the mammogram decision model is applied. One extreme would be to assume
that there is no overlap (perfect negative correlation between clinical and screen diagnosis), so that if 0.01
of the population were clinically-diagnosed under the no-screening assumption, and 0.02 of the population
were screen-diagnosed for a given set of parameters, a total of 0.03 of the women would be diagnosed with
cancer. We chose to make the other assumption, that there was perfect positive correlation between clinical
and screen diagnosis. In this case, if 0.01 of the population were clinically-diagnosed and 0.02 were screen-
diagnosed, only 0.02 of the women would be diagnosed with cancer. This likely produces an underestimate
of the effects of screening, because it minimizes the number of women who are diagnosed each year.
    With this simulated population of women, an assumed value of parameters associated with the mammo-
gram decisions with and without recommendation (equations 1 and 2) and the observed policy recommen-
dation (40 and above), the model generates an age-specific share of women who are screened, and the tumor
characteristics (in situ and invasive rates), conditional on getting screened.
    As mentioned in the main text (footnote 13), the in situ rate moment differs from Figure 3 in the main
text. Figure 3 shows the in situ rate of all diagnosed cancers that appear in the SEER database, but the
moment we match with the model is the in situ rate of screen-detected cancers. Cancers that are clinically
diagnosed are highly unlikely to be in situ, so the SEER value likely underestimates the true value of share in
situ for screening mammogram-diagnosed cancers. We adjust the SEER moment at each age using Bayes'
rule:


                      P(M )  P(insitu|M ) + (1 - P(M ))  P(insitu|  M ) = P(insitu),

where M is the event that a diagnosed tumor was screen-detected. We assume that P(M ), the share of
diagnoses detected by screening mammogram, is 0.2 for ages 35-39 and 0.34 for ages 40-49 (following
Roth et al. (2011)). We assume that P(insitu|  M ) = 0.08, following Ernster et al. (2002). P(insitu) is
given by the SEER moments in Figure 3, allowing us to back out P(insitu|M ), our object of interest, which
is the moment we actually match. The results for P(insitu|M ) for ages 40-49 range from 52% to 55%, which
is in line with the 56% reported in this age group by Ernster et al. (2002).
    With our 48 moments in hand (16 moments for each of 3 types), we then search for the parameters that
minimize the (weighted) distance between these generated moments and the observed moments. We apply
a linear weight that decreases on each side of age 40, so that the weight on moments associated with ages
39 and 41 is 10/11 of the weight on the age 40 moment, the weight on moments associated with ages 38 and
42 is 9/11 of the weight on the age 40 moment, and so on. To achieve a reasonable fit, we also weight the
moments by the inverse of their standard deviation. We chose 2,000 random starting values in the parameter



                                                       46
space defined as follows:

                      o  [-10, 10],  o  [-0.2, 0.2], insitu
                                                      o                o
                                                             [-2, 2], invasive  [-2, 2]
                         r  [-2, 2],  r  [-0.2, 0.2], insitu
                                                       r                r
                                                              [-2, 2], invasive  [-2, 2]

and applied the Nelder-Mead algorithm to each of these starting vectors. We then iteratively applied the
Nelder-Mead algorithm to the best starting value to further minimize the objective function.


D    Counterfactual simulations of mammogram model
Our counterfactuals analyze the impact of changing the recommendation age as well as the selection re-
sponse. In both cases, we first model the underlying onset rate of cancer and the evolution of cancers using
the Erasmus model described in Section 4.2 and Appendix B. Since we are interested in analyzing the im-
pact of potential future recommendation changes, we apply the most recent year's value of any time-varying
parameters of the Erasmus model. In practice, this means we use the breast-cancer-specific and non-breast-
                                                                  y
cancer mortality for 2010, the scale parameter for fatal diameter F from 1975 (see Appendix Table A.5),
the screening sensitivity Ey from 2000, the screening diameter scale parameters from 2000 (see Appendix
Table A.7), and the tumor incidence for the 1970 cohort (see Appendix Table A.8). We simulate this model
for 10 million women's life histories, and in particular from ages 35-50.
    We then apply the screening decision as described in Section 4.2 for each women and year. The baseline
model uses the parameter values given in Table 2, with the recommendation applied starting at age 40. We
change the age of the recommendation in Table 3 and the selection parameters  r in Table 4.
    In all counterfactuals that retain the age-40 recommendation (i.e. the ones that aim to isolate a counter-
factual selection responses), we specify that the age-specific mammogram rates must be the same as in the
baseline specification, while the type of women who respond to the recommendation is allowed to change.
This allows the counterfactuals to consider only differences in selection, not levels. After imposing the
counterfactual selection coefficients, we add an age-specific constant so that the age-specific mammogram
rates are unchanged relative to the baseline. In all counterfactuals that both use the age-45 recommendation
(i.e. the ones that consider a counterfactual policy recommendation) and impose alternative selection pat-
terns, we make a similar adjustment so that the age-specific mammogram rates match those produced by the
age-45 counterfactual with the baseline estimated selection parameters. The screening decisions along with
underlying natural history in the Erasmus model determine whether a given mammogram screen results in
a negative test, a false positive, or true positive based on the cancer type of the screened woman.
    The Erasmus model parameters also reveal whether a mammogram detects a cancer early enough to
prevent breast-cancer-related morality. If an invasive tumor is detected before it reaches the fatal diameter
(see Appendix Table A.5 on Erasmus parameters), the person survives to die of natural causes. If the invasive
tumor is detected after the tumor is larger than the fatal diameter, the person dies of breast cancer after
some stochastic period determined by survival duration parameters (see Appendix Table A.5 on Erasmus
parameters). Breast cancer related mortality is driven by invasive tumors; in situ tumors are only fatal if



                                                     47
they progress to an invasive tumor.
    To estimate total spending under different counterfactuals, we first calculated in the HCCI data, the
total age-specific spending in the twelve months following no mammogram, a negative mammogram, a
false positive mammogram, and a true positive mammogram. At each age, each simulated woman falls into
one of these categories. We add up the spending for a given woman across ages 35-50 based on her relevant
mammogram outcomes in each year. For example, suppose a woman had a true positive mammogram at age
42, and no mammograms at any other age. We would add the average spending in the HCCI data for women
with no mammograms for ages 35-41, the average spending for a woman in the twelve months following
a true positive mammogram at age 42, and the average spending for women with no mammograms at ages
43-50. Note that the screening decision only applies to women who are alive and have never been diagnosed
with breast cancer; once a women receives a true positive diagnosis she is not longer screened.


E     Sensitivity Analysis
We explore the robustness of our estimates to changing features of our clinical model. In particular, we
focus on statistics that can be compared with other sources, such as the share of in-situ tumors that become
invasive, and the share of tumors that are non-malignant.
    Two specifications test sensitivity to decreasing the share of in-situ tumors that become invasive. The
Erasmus model assumes that 62.5% of in-situ tumors will become invasive, while estimates for the fraction
of DCIS tumors that would become invasive over 10 years if left untreated ranges from 14-60% (Burstein
et al., 2004), putting the Erasmus model at the most conservative end of the spectrum. Alternate estimates
suggest that the share of DCIS-tumors that become invasive is 14% (Eusebi et al., 1994) or 28% (Page et al.,
1995). In these checks, we also shift the tumor type distribution to match these estimates at age 40. This
sensitivity proportionally reduces the share of DCIS-invasive tumors at all ages, and proportionally increases
the share of tumors that are DCIS-regressive and DCIS-clinical at all ages. The share of invasive tumors
remains the same.
    Similarly, two specifications test sensitivity to increasing the share of non-malignant tumors. Non-
malignant refers to tumors that have no potential to be invasive and therefore would never result in a breast
cancer mortality. Specifically, in our natural history model, recall that there are invasive tumors as well as
three types of non-invasive tumors (also known as DCIS or in situ): DCIS-regressive, DCIS-clinical and
DCIS-invasive. The invasive and DCIS-invasive tumors are referred to as "malignant" due to their potential
to cause harm, while the DCIS-regressive and DCIS-clinical tumors will never become invasive and are
therefore referred to as "non-malignant". The Erasmus model's parameters (see Appendix Table A.9) imply
that 3-9% of all tumors are non-malignant.20 In contrast, estimates of over-diagnosis, or the diagnosis of a
cancer that would not harm a woman in her lifetime, vary from <5% to >30% (American Cancer Society,
2017a). Compared to other models, the Erasmus model seems to have a low estimate of non-malignancy,
or equivalently a high estimate of the share of cancer that is invasive or could become invasive. Therefore,
  20 The share of cancer that is in situ of any kind (DCIS-clinical, DCIS-regressive, or DCIS-invasive) with no screening is ap-

proximately 15% at age 35 and 9% at age 50 (see Appendix Figure A.4). The age gradient is because some of the DCIS invasive
becomes invasive and some of the DCIS regressive regresses.


                                                              48
each of our sensitivity analysis decreases the amount of invasive or potentially invasive tumors.
   In an alternate natural history model (Fryback et al., 2006), the share of tumors with "non-malignant
potential" was 42%. Alternate estimates of over-diagnosis are provided by three trials in which women in
the control group were not invited to be screened at the end of the active trial period. In a meta-analysis,
estimates of the excess incidence was 19% when expressed as a proportion of the cancers diagnosed during
the active screening period (Marmot et al., 2013). We therefore increase the share of non-malignant tumors
from approximately 8% at age 40 to (separately) 19% and 42% at age 40. In each of these sensitivity
analyses, we increase the share of DCIS-regressive and DCIS-clinical at all ages in a proportional shift so
that the share of non-malignant tumors at age 40 is either 19% or 42%. We separately decrease the share of
tumors that are invasive or DCIS-invasive by a proportional shift so that the total tumor types sum to 100%.




                                                     49
                                             Figure A.1: Mammogram rate in survey and claims data, by age



                                  0.7


                                  0.6
      Share who had a mammogram




                                  0.5


                                  0.4


                                  0.3


                                  0.2                                                                 BRFSS Survey

                                                                                                      HCCI Claims
                                  0.1


                                   0
                                        35   36   37   38   39   40   41    42 43    44   45    46   47     48   49     50
                                                                              Age
Notes: This figure shows the share of women who received a screening mammogram each year, by age. Source for survey data:
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System Survey (BRFSS), even years 2000-2012, restricted to women with health insurance
(public or private). Source for claims data: HCCI data from 2008-2012, for mammograms between 2009-2011. Mammograms are
coded in the HCCI claims data using the algorithm described in Segel, Balkrishnan,, and Hirth (2017). Mammograms are coded in
the BRFSS data based on self-reports. The approximately 15-ppt discrepancy between surveyed and observed mammogram rates
is consistent with the finding of Cronin et al. (2009), who document that self-reported screening rates overstated actual screening
rates by 15 to 27 percentage points in a study of Vermont women.




                                                                           50
          Figure A.2: Health care spending and emergency room use prior to mammogram, by age

                                                                       4,500



                                                                                                     No Mammogram
                   Average 12month spending in Prior Year              4,300
                                                                                                     Mammogram



                                                                       4,100




                                                                       3,900




                                                                       3,700




                                                                       3,500
                                                                                                35    36   37   38   39   40   41    42 43   44   45   46   47   48   49   50
                                                                                                                                       Age

                                                                                                           (a) Annual spending in year prior to mammogram

                                                                                         0.21
                                                                                                                                                        No Mammogram
                                                                                                                                                        Mammogram
                                      Average # of Emergency Room Visits in Prior Year




                                                                                         0.20



                                                                                         0.19



                                                                                         0.18



                                                                                         0.17



                                                                                         0.16



                                                                                         0.15
                                                                                                35    36   37   38   39   40   41    42 43   44   45   46   47   48   49   50
                                                                                                                                       Age

                                                                                                     (b) # of emergency room visits in year prior to mammogram

Notes: Sample is insurance claims data on a set of privately insured woman-years from 2009- 2011. The x-axis plots the women's
age at the time of the mammogram. Panel A presents average total spending in the 12 months prior to the mammogram, not includ-
ing the mammogram date. Panel B presents average number of emergency room visits in the 12 months prior to a mammogram.
For those without a mammogram, we draw a reference date from the distribution of actual mammograms in that year. All reference
dates are set to be the first of the given month. N = 5,140,371 woman-years.




                                                                                                                                    51
                                                                    Figure A.3: Preventive care prior to mammogram by age

                                                              0.9
                                                                                                                               No Mammogram
                                                                                                                               Mammogram
                                                              0.8

                                 Any Pap Test in Prior Year

                                                              0.7



                                                              0.6



                                                              0.5



                                                              0.4



                                                              0.3
                                                                    35   36   37   38   39   40   41    42 43   44   45   46   47   48   49   50
                                                                                                          Age

                                                                               (a) Any pap test in year prior to mammogram

                                                   0.15
                                                                         No Mammogram
                                                                         Mammogram
                                                   0.14


                                                   0.13
                    Any Flu Shot in Prior Year




                                                   0.12


                                                   0.11


                                                   0.10


                                                   0.09


                                                   0.08
                                                                    35   36   37   38   39   40   41    42 43   44   45   46   47   48   49   50
                                                                                                          Age

                                                                               (b) Any flu shot in year prior to mammogram

Notes: Sample is insurance claims data on a set of privately insured woman-years from 2009- 2011. In panel A, for each age at the
time of the mammogram, we report the average share of women who obtained a pap test in the 12 months prior to the mammogram.
We do not include tests done on the day of the mammogram. Panel B presents the analogous results for any flu shot. For those
without a mammogram, we draw a reference date from the distribution of actual mammograms in that year. All reference dates
are set to be the first of the given month. Spending is measured in the 12 months prior to this reference date. N = 5,140,371
woman-years.




                                                                                                       52
        Figure A.4: Erasmus model predictions for share with cancer and share in situ (no screening)

     0.16


     0.14


     0.12


      0.1


     0.08
                   Share with any cancer
                   Share of insitu cancer, conditional on having cancer
     0.06


     0.04


     0.02


        0
              35     36     37      38     39     40     41     42 43         44     45     46     47     48     49     50
                                                                  Age

Notes: Figure presents the share with any cancer and the share of cancer in situ in the Erasmus model, with no screening.




                                                               53
                                              Figure A.5: Fitted tumor incidence by age




                            1.0




                                       Erasmus Incidence
                                       Restricted 2nd Degree Poly
                            0.8
          Cumm. Incidence

                            0.6
                            0.4
                            0.2
                            0.0




                                  20      30                        40   50     60       70           80

                                                                          Age

Notes: Figure presents the smoothed CDF of tumor incidence by age, fitted to the original Erasmus incidence in 5-year intervals.




                                                                         54
                                                         Figure A.6: Multiplicative incidence adjustment
                 4




                                                                                                               8
  Num per 1000 alive in cohort




                                                                                                Num per 1000 alive in cohort
                          3




                                                                                                                        6
              2




                                                                                                            4
    1




                                                                                                  2
                 0




                                                                                                               0
                                 25   30   35          40         45       50    55        60                                  25    30      35          40         45       50    55   60
                                                Age at diagnosis/incidence                                                                        Age at diagnosis/incidence

                                                   SEER Dx              Sim Dx                                                                       SEER Dx              Sim Dx
                                                   Sim Incd                                                                                          Sim Incd


                                           (a) Original incidence                                                                   (b) Incidence multiplicatively shifted by 

Notes: Figure presents the simulated incidence and diagnosis rates compared with the SEER diagnosis rates. These are presented
for both the original incidence in panel (a), and for the incidence shifted by  in panel (b). This simulation assumes no screening.




                                                                                      55
                                                           Figure A.7: Erasmus model

                                                                 Tumor Onset


                                  Draw type, dwell time                                   Draw growth rate, fatal diameter


                                    Dwell 1 year                                                            Grow 1 year

                            Yes
   Diagnosed (screen)                Screened?                                                                  Screened?
                                      No
                                                                                               Yes                            No
                                  Dwell time over?
                                                      No
                                     Yes
                                                                                                                  No
                                                        Yes                Above screening diameter?                    Above clinical detection diameter?
                                Tumor type invasive?
                                   No                                               Yes                                                              No
                          Yes
   Diagnosed (clinical)          Tumor type clinical?                                                                                                                            No

                                     No                                Above fatal diameter?                      Above fatal diameter?                  Above fatal diameter?

                                  Tumor type regressive;                  No                                           No                                      Yes
                                  Tumor disappears
                                                                                      Yes                                      Yes                          Eventual death
                                                              Diagnosed (screen) +                     Diagnosed (clinical) +
                                                              Tumor treated & disappears               Tumor treated & disappears


                                                                                      Diagnosed (screen) +                      Diagnosed (clinical) +
                                                                                      Eventual death                            Eventual death


                                                                               (a) Flow chart


                                                                                          Time                                      Death?


                                                     DCIS - Regressive                                                              Never
             Legend

             DCIS tumor
                                                     DCIS - Clinical                                                                Never
             Invasive tumor
                                                                               DCIS
                                                                                                                                    Y if not
             Fatal diameter
                                                     DCIS - Invasive                                                                screen-detected
                                                                                                                                    by year 4
             Clinical
             diagnosis                                                                               Invasive


                                                                                                                                    Y if not
                                                     Invasive                                                                       screen-detected
                                                                                                                                    by year 2
                                                                 (b) Example sequences

Notes: Panel (a) shows the flow chart of a tumor's natural history according to the Erasmus model. Panel (b) shows example
sequences of progression for each different type of tumor, in the absence of screening.




                                                                               56
                                        Figure A.8: Cancer histories in Erasmus model




                     .08     .06
             Fraction of Cohort
            .02     .04
                     0




                                   30         35                   40                     45                     50
                                                                  Age

                                           Dead Other Causes                      Dead Breast Cancer
                                           Alive Dxed                             Alive Dtctbl - Invasive
                                           Alive Dtctbl - DCIS


Notes: Figure shows the share of women in different categories when the Erasmus model is run without screening for birth cohorts
1950-1975, and focuses on years 2000-2005. The categories represented are "Dead Other Causes" (died due to other causes), "Dead
Breast Cancer" (died due to breast cancer), "Alive Dxed" (alive and with clinically diagnosed cancer), "Alive Dtctbl - Invasive"
(alive and with detectable but not yet detected invasive cancer), and "Alive Dtctbl - DCIS" (alive and with detectable but not yet
detected DCIS cancer). The remainder of the population is cancer-free or has invasive or DCIS cancer that is too small to be
detectable yet.




                                                               57
                                       Table A.1: Codes used to identify claims


             Event                   Code type                            CPT Codes                                    ICD-9 Codes
 Screening mammogram              CPT procedure                    77057*, G0202**                                      V76.12
      Breast biopsy               CPT procedure                   19100, 19101, 19120                          85.11, 85.12, 85.20, 85.21
    Breast ultrasound             CPT procedure                          76645                                          88.73**
 Radiologic breast testing        CPT procedure          76003, 77002*, 76095, 77031*, 76086,                  87.35, 87.36, 87.73, 88.85
                                                         76087, 76088, 77053*, 77054*, 76355,
                                                         76360, 76362, 77011*, 77012*, 77013*,
                                                          76098, 76100, 76101, 76102, 76120,
                                                           76125, 76140, 76150, 76350, 76365
  Breast cancer treatment         CPT procedure           19160, 19162, 19180, 19200, 19220,                  233.0, V103.0, 174.0-174.9
                                                          19240, 19301**, 19303**, 19305**,
                                                                 19307**, 38740, 38745
* indicates this code was not provided by Segel, Balkrishnan,, and Hirth (2017) but is the post-2007 analog of such a code. See
http://provider.indianamedicaid.com/ihcp/Bulletins/BT200701.pdf.
** indicates this code was provided by Hubbard et al. (2015) rather than Segel, Balkrishnan,, and Hirth (2017).
Notes: This table provides the codes used to define mammograms in the HCCI and SEER-Medicare claims data. "CPT codes" are
also known as "HCPCS codes".


                                  Table A.2: Results of mammograms by diagnosis


                                                               Diagnosed in SEER-Medicare
                                                                   Yes                   No
                                  Negative                       0.001                 0.226
                                False Positive                   0.001                 0.014
                                True Positive                    0.501                 0.002
                               No Mammogram                      0.497                 0.759

                                        N                       80,408               3,327,642
Notes: This table summarizes the outcomes of mammograms for SEER-Medicare patients who are diagnosed with breast cancer
in that year (column 1) and not diagnosed with breast cancer in that year (column 2). Breast cancer diagnoses are recorded in the
SEER linked data. Mammogram outcomes (negative, false positive, true positive, and no mammogram) are coded using the Segel
algorithm as described in Appendix A. We restrict to those who were diagnosed between 2007 and 2013. Sample includes both
65+ and disabled.




                                                              58
                                  Table A.3: Diagnosis status by true positive result


                                                                        True positive mammogram
                                                                        (Conditional on screened)
                                Time of Diagnosis                           Yes                   No
                            Prior to mammogram                             0.001                0.000
                          In year of mammogram                             0.722                0.000
                      In year following mammogram                          0.145                0.022
                     More than 1 year after mammogram                      0.016                0.142
                              Never diagnosed                              0.116                0.836

                                          N                               55,799               952,292
Notes: This table summarizes the time of diagnosis in the linked SEER data for patients who were coded as having a true positive
mammogram in the SEER-Medicare data. We restrict this analysis to patients who received a screening mammogram in the SEER-
Medicare data, as coded in the Segel algorithm as described in Appendix A. For these patients, we use the SEER-Medicare claims
and the Segel algorithm to determine whether the patient had a true positive mammogram. We then compare the timing of this
claims-related diagnosis with the SEER diagnosis, if any occurred. The rows refer to the year the patient was coded as having
breast cancer in the SEER linked data. Source: SEER-Medicare data, diagnoses between 2007-2013.



                                            Table A.4: Tumor characteristics

                                         Invasive                                    DCIS
                                       Size sy
                                             i (cm)                          Dwell time wi (years)
                                Growth rate gi (1/years) *
                           Screen detection diameter riay (cm)
                          Clinical diagnosis diameter ci (cm) *
                                  Fatal diameter fi (cm)
                         Survival duration since fatal ui (years) *
Note: This table lists the tumor characteristics for invasive and DCIS tumors. Starred variables (*) have correlated distributions
- see Table A.5. Parameter values listed in Appendix Table A.4 to A.7 are taken from Tan et al. (2006) or the extended CISNET
description of the same model.




                                                               59
                                              Table A.5: Model parameters


                 All women                      Notation                                 Values
     Probability of death from other               Qb
                                                    y                  Derived following Rosenberg (2006)
                  causes
     Probability of any breast cancer              Cb         Quadratic fit to Table A.8 plus further optimization
       Age-specific probability of                 Sa                Quadratic fit to values in Table A.6
         onset (given any onset)
      Probability of invasive tumor                 Ia                               See Table A.9
          (given tumor onset)
       Probability of DCIS tumor               Va , Ra , Ca                          See Table A.9
      sub-type (summing to 1 - Ia )
               Invasive Tumors
     Mean of log of growth rate gi                 µG                                    0.062
      SD of log of growth rate gi                  G                                      0.87
                                                    ay
      Scale parameter for screen                   R                                 see Table A.7
             detection riay
      Shape parameter for screen                   R                                       2.95
             detection riay
        Mean of log of clinical                    µC                                      0.97
         diagnosis diameter ci
     SD of log of clinical diagnosis               C                                       0.63
              diameter ci
                                                   y
       Scale parameter for fatal                   F           Linear between 1915 and 1975 (0.8 in 1915; 4.0 in
              diameter fi                                                   1975); 4.0 after 1975
       Shape parameter for fatal                   F                                0.95
              diameter fi
    Mean of log of survival duration               µU                                      2.43
                   ui
    SD of log of survival duration ui              U                                      1.13
     Correlation between gi and ci                 gc                                     +0.41
     Correlation between gi and ui                 gu                                     -0.90
     Correlation between ci and ui                 cu                                     -0.43
                DCIS Tumors
     Mean of tumor dwell time wi 21                W            5.22 - (time to grow from 1975 to current year
                                                                              screening diameter)
             Screening sensitivity                 Ey          Linear from 1975-2000 (0.4 in 1975, 0.8 in 2000)
                                                                           and 0.8 from 2001-2010
Note: This table lists the parameters of the tumor growth model, along with their values where applicable.


  21 Dwelltime wi (time from in situ onset to invasive onset) is calculated by subtracting the time it takes the invasive tumor to
grow from the 1975 screening threshold to the current screening threshold from a random draw from an exponential distribution
with mean 5.22.




                                                               60
                                           Table A.6: Tumor incidence by age


                     Age      Cumulative incidence           Age      Annual probability of incidence
                      25               0.002               20-24                     0.0004
                      30               0.005               25-29                     0.0006
                      35               0.021               30-34                     0.0032
                      40               0.046               35-39                     0.0050
                      45               0.105               40-44                     0.0118
                      50               0.169               45-49                     0.0128
                      55               0.233               50-54                     0.0128
                      60               0.328               55-59                     0.0190
                      65               0.436               60-64                     0.0216
                      70               0.563               65-69                     0.0254
                      75               0.707               70-74                     0.0288
                      80               0.852               75-79                     0.0290
                      85                1.00               80-85                     0.0247
Note: This table shows the age distribution of the incidence of the onset of pre-clinical breast cancer (including ductal carcinoma
in situ). Source: Tan et al. (2006); author's calculations.



                                    Table A.7: Screening diameter scale parameter


                                            Parameter value for age and year screened
                                            30-49 50-59         60-69         70-85
                                  1975        2.2       1.7         1.3                1.0
                                                      (linear interpolation)
                                  2000        1.5       1.1         0.9                0.6
Note: This table shows the age- and screening-year-dependent values of the scale parameter for the screening diameter Weibull
distribution. Linear interpolation is applied between years 1975 and 2000.




                                                               61
                      Table A.8: Tumor incidence by birth cohort: original Erasmus values


                                           Birth cohort      Cumulative incidence
                                              1900-04                  0.122
                                              1905-09                  0.132
                                              1910-14                  0.141
                                              1915-19                  0.154
                                              1920-24                  0.169
                                              1925-29                  0.176
                                              1930-34                  0.182
                                              1935-39                  0.200
                                              1940-44                  0.220
                                              1945-49                  0.223
                                              1950-54                  0.204
                                              1955-59                  0.198
                                              1960-64                  0.193
                                              1965-69                  0.189
                                               1970                    0.187
Note: This table shows the cumulative probability (up to age 85) of the onset of pre-clinical breast cancer by birth cohort. Source:
Tan et al. (2006)



                                           Table A.9: Tumor type distribution


                  Age at onset       Invasive      DCIS-invasive        DCIS-regressive         DCIS-clinical
                      20-34            0.76              0.15               0.03                     0.06
                      35-79                               (linear interpolation)
                      80-85            0.92              0.05               0.01                     0.02
Note: This table shows the age-dependent proportions of incident tumor types. Linear interpolation is applied between ages 35 and
79.




                                                                62
                              Table A.10: Sensitivity checks for parameter estimates

                                                              Sensitivity Checks
                                        (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)          (5)
                    Baseline                        Share In-situ to Invasive    Share Non-Malignant
   Parameter        Estimate         Incidence        28%             14%         19%          42%

     o
                      -5.21            -4.81           -5.20           -5.20           -4.67            -3.33
   o
                       0.10             0.09           0.10             0.10            0.09            0.05
  oin-situ             0.36             1.15           0.36             0.36            0.09            -0.16
    o
     invasive          1.13            10.89           1.13             1.13            1.15            1.58
     r
                      0.29             -0.06           0.26            0.26            0.03             -0.73
   r
                      -0.03            -0.02           -0.02           -0.02           -0.02            0.00
  rin-situ            -0.01            0.58            -0.01           0.00            -0.55            -1.06
    r
   invasive           -4.67            22.28           -5.10           -12.80          -6.67           -13.67

Notes: Table shows the parameter estimates from the mammogram decision model under alternate sensitivity assumptions.
Specifics for each of the columns are discussed in Section 5.2.3.




                                                         63
