                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DEPOSIT MARKET POWER, FUNDING STABILITY AND LONG-TERM CREDIT

                                             Lei Li
                                       Elena Loutskina
                                       Philip E. Strahan

                                      Working Paper 26163
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26163


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019




The authors did not receive funding for this project, other than support from their home
institutions. Strahan acts as an academic visitor to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Lei Li, Elena Loutskina, and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Deposit Market Power, Funding Stability and Long-Term Credit
Lei Li, Elena Loutskina, and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 26163
August 2019
JEL No. G2

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper shows that banks raising deposits in more concentrated markets have more funding
stability, which enhances banks' ability to extend longer-maturity loans. We show that banks
raising deposits in concentrated markets exhibit less pro-cyclical financing costs and profits,
which in turn reduces the funding risk of originating long-term illiquid loans. Consistently, banks
with deposit HHI one standard deviation above average extend loans with about 20% longer
maturity than those with deposit HHI one standard deviation below average. Deposit
concentration also allows banks to charge lower maturity premiums. Access to banks raising
funds in concentrated markets improves growth in industries traditionally reliant on long-term
credit.

Lei Li                                           Philip E. Strahan
Federal Reserve Board of Governors               Carroll School of Management
Washington, DC, DC                               324B Fulton Hall
lei.li@frb.gov                                   Boston College
                                                 Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
Elena Loutskina                                  and NBER
Darden School                                    philip.strahan@bc.edu
University of Virginia
100 Darden Blvd
Charlottesville VA 22903
Loutskinae@darden.virginia.edu
I.         Introduction

           Why would banks be willing to extent long-term credit? The traditional literature has

focused on how borrower credit risk affects loan maturity and ignored another risk associated with

long-term lending - the lender's funding risks. Because business loans are illiquid, they must be

held on the originator's balance sheet for the duration of the loan. 1 As such, declines in profits

(during cyclical downturns) or increases in funding costs (during upturns) could constrain a long-

term lender's ability to make new, profitable loans. 2

           In this paper, we show that market power in deposits increases funding stability to banks,

thereby allowing them to extend long-term credit. Banks with more deposit market power make

longer maturity loans and charge lower maturity premiums than other banks. This has a real effect:

the greater availability of long-term bank credit leads to faster industry growth, particularly for

firms in need of long-term debt. Our results imply that deposit market power, by increasing long-

term credit supply, helps alleviate credit cycles.

           Existing papers exploring bank lending through the business cycle mainly focus on lending

quantities rather than lending terms. The financial accelerator models show that variations in bank

funding costs and capital amplify business cycles, especially for small firms that are more

dependent on bank finance. Macro-economists document that changes in bank funding costs,

engineered by central banks, can limit bank credit availability (e.g., Bernanke and Blinder, 1988;

Gertler and Gilchrist, 1994). Declines in bank capital and bank failures worsen business conditions

because capital-constrained banks tighten credit, thereby exacerbating the initial downturn (e.g.,


1
    Flannery (1986) and Diamond (1991) argue theoretically and Berger et. al. (2005) confirm empirically that riskier
     borrowers with long-term projects, in anticipation of the higher refinancing risk, will demand more expensive longer
     maturity loans.
2
    Diamond and Rajan (2006) offer a liquidity version of the lending channel model that emphasizes the risk of funding
     long-term projects with unstable short-term funds.



                                                                 1
Bernanke, 1983; Peek and Rosengren, 2000). 3 These papers, however, are silent on how bank

funding affects the supply of long-term credit. Our paper bridges this gap.

           In our first set of results, we establish that deposit market power contributes to bank funding

stability. Numerous studies have shown that banks raising deposits in concentrated markets pay

lower rates and earn higher profits than other banks. 4 Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2017) (DSS

hereafter) take these findings a step further and show that deposit market power provides banks

flexibility in controlling their deposit rates in order to balance the tradeoff between rents extracted

from depositors against the value of funding profitable lending opportunities. 5 DSS show that

both the costs of deposits and loan growth are less pro-cyclical for banks raising deposits in

concentrated markets (i.e., banks with a high weighted average of county-level deposit HHIs). We

extend this idea, showing that banks raising funds in concentrated deposit markets also experience

less pro-cyclical profitability and, by extension, equity capital. During downturns (when all other

funding sources are scarce or even unavailable), banks raising deposits in concentrated markets

experience larger deposit inflows and smaller declines in profitability, which collectively stabilizes

bank funding sources and costs.

           To link deposit market power to loan maturity, we exploit the 1997-2017 Survey of the

Terms of Business Lending (STBL). These data allow us to study maturity for a large sample of

small business loans. The STBL covers a sample of randomly selected banks' new commercial

and industrial (C&I) loan originations. The data contain loan-level price and non-price terms on



3
    A large academic literature on bank "capital crunches" has extended the seminal approach pioneered by Peek and
    Rosengren. See, for example, Ashcraft (2006), Khwaja and Mian (2008), Paravisini (2008), Iyer and Peydro (2011),
    and others.
4
    See, for example, Berger and Hannan (1989 and 1991).
5
    This is a direct implication of Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl's model with profitable lending opportunities ­ see
    equation (14) from their paper.



                                                               2
all new loans originated by each surveyed bank during a one-week window; the survey occurs four

times per year. The STBL also offers some information on borrower heterogeneity, including a

measure of borrower credit risk and borrower location (for the 2012-2017 sub-sample). 6 For our

analysis, we focus on small business loans - those below $1 million - to capture lending to

businesses that rely on bank finance.

           STBL data allow us to document our core contribution: by reducing the cyclicality of both

the costs of deposits and the availability of internal funds (profits), deposit market power reduces

funding risk and provides banks with the flexibility to originate long-term loans. We start by

showing that banks raising funds in more concentrated deposit markets make longer-maturity

business loans. Magnitudes are large: banks with deposit HHI one standard deviation above

average extend loans with about 20% longer maturity than banks with HHI one standard deviation

below average. Unlike studies focusing on the quantity of lending (e.g., the bank lending channel

literature), we find that deposit concentration leads to longer loan maturity in both the boom and

bust phases of the business cycle. During booms, banks with less cyclical funding and capital can

originate long-term loans because they face less risk of future declines in deposits or capital.

Conversely, during busts, these banks have more capital today and face less risk of increased

financing costs tomorrow.

           Next, we document that banks raising funds in concentrated deposit markets charge lower

maturity premiums. Consistent with prior literature, the direct effect of maturity on the loan rate is

strongly positive, capturing the fact that longer-term loans are generally riskier and more profitable

for banks. However, the relationship between loan maturity and the interest rate flattens for banks



6
    Unfortunately, the STBL data do not capture information on the borrower's industry or other characteristics such as
     balance sheet or income statement variable, nor do they allow us to follow the same borrower over time.



                                                                3
raising funds in more concentrated deposit markets. Banks with deposit HHI one standard

deviation below average increase loan rates by about 35 basis points more for each one-standard

deviation increase in loan maturity; in contrast, for banks with Bank HHI one standard deviation

above average, maturity has approximately zero effect on interest rates. Deposit market power

mitigates banks' funding risk, thus allowing them to charge lower (maturity) risk premiums.

        While we advocate a credit-supply interpretation of our empirical evidence, the prior

literature shows that loan maturities and interest rates may reflect unobserved heterogeneity in

borrower demand for long-term credit, which itself may be correlated with credit risk rather than

funding risk (Flannery, 1986; Diamond, 1991; Berger et. al., 2005). Firms worried about their

ability to roll over short-term debt in the future (e.g., riskier firms that lack collateral) might choose

to borrow long term, despite higher loan rates (Diamond, 1991; Hertzberg et al., 2019). We rule

out this explanation by explicitly controlling for borrower credit risk ratings and incorporating

granular state-year fixed effects in our analysis. And we show that our core findings are

independent of borrower credit risk. When estimated separately, the effects persist in every credit

risk bin of STBL loans. Moreover, the alternative explanation is inconsistent with deposit market

power leading to a lower, rather than higher, maturity premium.

        We also find that concentration leads to longer maturity and lower maturity premiums only

for loans in which lenders plausibly have access to private information (that is, in our sample of

"local loans," defined as loans in which the lender owns a branch in the same state as the borrower).

For non-local loans made by out-of-state banks, we find no link from deposit market power to

maturity. This makes sense because local loans absorb a lender's balance sheet capacity both at

origination and over the course of the loan. Non-local loans, being more liquid, offer originators

the option to sell (or securitize) them after origination. This differential response is consistent with




                                                        4
existing evidence that bank credit origination responds more to their own financial conditions for

illiquid loans than liquid ones (Loutskina and Strahan, 2009).

           Since our measure of banks' deposit market power might also capture aspects of lending

conditions, we re-estimate our core models using Out-of-state Bank HHI. 7 This measures funding

conditions using the weighted average of a bank's deposit market power across all counties other

than those counties from the borrower's state. We find our core results are similar using this

approach.

           Does banks' ability to extend more long-term credit have real effects? To answer this

question, we use the County Business Patterns (CBP) data, which allow us to measure employment

growth and wage growth at the industry-county-year level. For identification, we exploit

heterogeneity across industries in their reliance on long-term debt (vs short-term debt), based on

the population of Compustat firms over the same sample period. The analysis shows that firms in

industries traditionally reliant on long-term debt grow more quickly in counties served by banks

with deposit market power (and more slowly in counties served by banks operating in competitive

deposit markets). In this analysis, we directly control for local competition, allowing us to isolate

the effect of bank deposit market power in other markets.

           Our paper lies at the intersection of three literatures. First, we extend the literature on the

determinants of debt maturity, which to date mostly focused on demand-related drivers. A wide

set of papers explore how borrower heterogeneity along risk, asymmetric information, or opacity

dimensions affects loan maturity, both theoretically (Flannery, 1986; Diamond, 1991) and

empirically (e.g., Berger et al., 2005; Barclay and Smith, 1995; Stohs and Mauer, 1996). Much of


7
    For example, consider a small bank operating in just one market. For such a bank, its concentration might be high
     for both the deposit-taking and lending sides of its business. This example bank would have market power in both
     businesses, making it hard to know if variation in Bank HHI represents variation in funding conditions or variation
     in lending conditions (or both).



                                                                 5
this work concludes that riskier firms, firms that lack collateral, and/or firms characterized by more

asymmetric information tend to pursue more expensive longer maturity loans. We augment these

studies by offering a supply-side mechanism whereby bank financial conditions affect their

willingness and ability to supply long-term debt. Black and Rosen (2016) is the closest study to

ours. While not explicitly exploring the supply side of the loan maturity equation, they document

that tighter monetary policy leads to shorter-term lending.

       Second, we contribute to a large literature on market power's effects on bank services.

Numerous studies have documented the costs of less than perfect competition. Prices of bank

services ­ deposit and loan rates ­ are higher for loans and lower for deposits in more concentrated

markets (Berger and Hannan, 1989 and 1991) or those with regulatory barriers to entry (Rice and

Strahan, 2010). Removal of restrictions on banks' ability to expand geographically, which reduces

bank market power, is associated with better lending quality, more firm creation and dynamism,

and higher overall growth (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996; Black and Strahan, 2002; Kerr and Nanda,

2009; among others). A few papers have found benefits associated with bank market power.

Keeley (1990) argues that bank charter value, enhanced by market power, helps mitigate the moral

hazard and risk-shifting problems associated with deposit insurance and expectations of bailouts

(see Strahan, 2013, for a review). DSS show that deposit market power creates a bank lending

channel of monetary policy without the need for reserve requirements. Petersen and Rajan (1995)

show that small firms in more concentrated lending markets maintain longer-lived relationships

with their banks. The authors argue that this expectation allows banks to subsidize credit early in

a firm's relationship and thus helps foster business formation. Our study adds to this line of

literature by documenting that funding stability, fostered by deposit-market power, contributes to

banks' ability to extend long-term credit.




                                                      6
       Third, our paper demonstrates a new connection from one side of bank balance sheets

(funding stability fostered by deposit-market power) to the other (loan maturity). This is important

because one of the overarching themes in the study of banking is the source of the nexus between

banks' funding role (deposits) with their credit role (lending).        Existing explanations have

emphasized information spillovers from deposits to loans (e.g., Fama, 1985), liquidity synergies

(e.g. Diamond and Dybvig, 1983; Calomiris and Kahn, 1991; Flannery, 1994; Diamond and Rajan,

2001; Kashyap et al., 2002; and Gatev and Strahan, 2006), or access to core deposits (Berlin and

Mester, 1999). We add to this literature by connecting deposit market power to the contractual

maturity of bank loans.




II.    Methods and Results

       In the first portion of this section, we describe our data and variable construction. In

Section II.2, we document how deposit concentration affects the cyclical properties of bank

outcomes. We extend DSS, who analyze volumes and costs of deposits, by also analyzing bank

profit. Sections II.3 and II.4 report our core result, relating deposit concentration to loan maturity

and to the maturity premium (that is, to interest rates). In Section II.5-II.6, we summarize our

robustness tests, most of which are reported fully in the Internet Appendix. Section II.7 compares

our results for local vs. non-local loans. Finally, in section II.8, we document the real economic

implications of the maturity effects we document.


II.1   Data

       We combine several sources to build our dataset. To capture bank characteristics, we use

the quarterly Bank Call Reports, as is standard in the literature. Panel A of Table 1 reports the




                                                      7
summary statistics of bank characteristics. Overall, the observed sample characteristics are similar

to those used in prior studies.

           For loan terms, we exploit the Federal Reserve's Survey of the Terms of Business Lending

(STBL), which contains micro-data on all commercial and industrial (C&I) loans originated by a

random sample of banks during one full business week every three months (in February, May,

August, and November). 8 The selection of banks is proportional to bank sizes, and as such, leads

to a representative sample of C&I loans.

           The STBL data provide detailed loan characteristics, including the loan amount (i.e., loan

size), interest rate, maturity, whether or not the loan comes with a prepayment penalty, collateral

status, the location of the borrower (based on state, available only since 2012), and so on. 9 In

addition to these characteristics, since 1997, the STBL has reported the lender's internal risk rating

for each loan. While banks report the risk ratings independently, the Federal Reserve provides

instructions on how to make the ratings consistent across institutions. The rating ranges from 1 to

4, with 1 representing loans with the lowest risk and 4 representing those with the highest risk. We

exclude distressed loans (risk rating = 5), because these observations in the STBL do not reflect

new originations. Capturing loan risk helps rule out alternative explanations stemming from credit

risk, so we begin our analysis in 1997 and exclude the unrated loans (risk rating = 0) from

consideration. Since we are interested in how the originator's funding conditions affect small C&I

lending terms, we drop syndicated loans and loans with commitment amounts above $1 million.

           Panel B of Table 1 reports the summary statistics for our final STBL sample of about 1.6

million small C&I loans originated between 1997 and 2017. These loans are characterized by the


8
    The loan-level data are proprietary and may only be used with the Federal Reserve, which releases aggregate statistics
     from the survey to convey the cost and availability of business lending.
9
    The credit lines in the STBL are coded as having a zero maturity. We drop these observations from our analysis.



                                                                  8
average loan size of about $119,000, and the average interest rate of 5.7%. On average, these loans

have a bit more than one year maturity. We also observe substantial variation in the loan interest

rates both in the cross-section (due, for example, to variation in credit risk) as well as in the time-

series (due to changes in the level of rates generally, which have trended down over time). Loan

maturity, however, is more stable over time, with most of the variation reflecting the cross-section.

           We further construct measures of bank deposit concentration using the branch-level

Summary of Deposits (SOD) data, which are available at the Federal Deposit Insurance

Corporation (FDIC) website over the full period of our sample, 1997-2017. 10 The FDIC collects

total deposits in the SOD each June, so we merge variables based on these data into the subsequent

August, November, February, and May versions of STBL, as well as the following four quarters

of the Call Report.

           We build three measures of deposit concentration at different aggregation levels: branch-

level, bank-level, and county-level. All three approaches begin with Branch HHI, which varies at

the level of the county-year and equals the sum of squared deposit market shares for all bank

branches operating in a given county. At this level of aggregation, the variable captures the

competitive conditions in the county, but not the aggregate funding conditions of a given bank

operating in the county, since most banks have branches in multiple counties and move funds

across local markets to accommodate differential lending conditions at the local level (Gilje,

Loutskina, and Strahan, 2016).

           To capture a given bank's deposit funding condition, we follow DSS and build Bank HHI

that equals the weighted average of Branch HHI, where the weights depend on the fraction of

deposits raised in each county in which the bank owns one or more branches. This variable captures


10
     See https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/resources/call/sod.html.



                                                                9
a given bank's average market power in raising deposits across all of the markets in which it has

branches. As such, two banks operating in the same county will have different levels of Bank HHI

(representing different funding conditions), since their branch footprints will generally not overlap

fully. In the data built at bank-county-year level, the correlation between Branch HHI and Bank

HHI is 0.62, indicating that these two measures do capture different economic forces.

        Finally, we build County HHI that varies at county-year level and captures the exposure of

a given county to funding conditions across all banks operating within it. We build this variable

by averaging Bank HHI, with weights equal to each bank's market share of deposits in a given

county. County HHI and Branch HHI are correlated, as one is a weighted average of another (the

correlation coefficient is 0.72).

        Panel C of Table 1 reports the summary statistics for Branch HHI and County HHI that

vary at county-year level, while Panel A reports similar statistics for Bank HHI that vary at bank-

year level. The average Bank HHI is 0.19, with a standard deviation of 0.075. Most of the variation

in Bank HHI reflects cross-bank heterogeneity, as variation over time in banking market

concentration in individual counties is minimal.

        Finally, we use the Federal Funds interest rate to capture business cycle variation. As in

prior studies (e.g., DSS), rate increases represent business cycle upswings, and declines represent

downswings. Figure 1 shows the path of the Fed Funds rate during our sample period. The rate

increases in the late 1990s (the end of the 1990s dot.com boom), then falls in the early 2000s (as

the economy moves into recession), increases again leading up to the Financial Crisis (boom), falls

after the crisis (bust), and stays constant until 2015, when it begins to rise again as the economy

recovers from the Great Recession.




                                                     10
II.2    Cyclical Properties of Bank Outcomes

        In this sub-section, we evaluate whether bank market power in raising deposits affects

funding cyclicality. We do so by evaluating how bank outcomes vary over the business cycle, as

measured by the Federal Funds rate. We focus on reduced form models similar to those reported

in DSS:

         =  +             0 Bank HHI-1 + 1  + 2   Bank HHI-1 +                              (1a)

         =  +  + 0 Bank HHI-1 +                          2   Bank HHI-1 +                   (1b)

where  represents bank-quarter level outcomes for bank  in quarter . Equation (1a) allows us

to learn how the cyclicality of an outcome varies with funding conditions by comparing 1 with

2 . For example, as we will show, loan growth is higher when interest rates are rising relative to

when they are falling (i.e., 1 > 0), but this effect is smaller for banks raising deposits in

concentrated markets (i.e., 2 < 0).

        We evaluate five types of bank outcomes related to the liability and asset side of a bank's

balance sheet. For liabilities, we consider the growth in total deposits, the (annualized) cost of

deposits, and the return on equity (net income/ equity). For assets, we consider the growth in total

loans and the growth in C&I loans. Growth rates are constructed using the first difference of the

natural log of each outcome. We winsorize all (non-indicator) variables at the 1st and 99th

percentiles of their distributions.

        DSS focus strictly on interaction effects between bank deposit concentration (Bank HHI)

and changes in the Federal Funds interest rate (FFt), while absorbing the direct effect of rate




                                                    11
changes with time effects and cross-bank heterogeneity with bank effects. 11 We follow this

approach in some models (to establish the consistency of our results with DSS analysis). We also

report models with the direct effect of market interest rates estimated (rather than being absorbed

by time effects) to illustrate how deposit-market concentration affects the cyclical properties of

various outcomes (Equation 1a). Similar to DSS, we aim to illustrate how equilibrium bank

outcomes move through the cycle, rather than attempting to separately identify variation from

credit supply vs. credit demand.

           Table 2 reports the results. First, we find that deposit growth is counter-cyclical, increasing

during downturns when interest rates decline, and declining during upswings (Panel A). At the

mean of Bank HHI, the effect of interest rate increases is strongly negative (=0.114-1.836 x 0.19

= -0.235). Moreover, consistent with DSS, banks with higher deposit market power (higher Bank

HHI) exhibit more countercyclical variation in deposits as compared to banks with lower Bank

HHI. A bank with Bank HHI one standard deviation above the mean (0.27) has a stronger negative

sensitivity to interest rate changes (=0.114-1.836 x 0.27 = -0.381) than a bank with Bank HHI one

standard deviation below the mean (=0.114-1.836 x 0.12 = -0.106).

           The cost of deposits (Panel B) is strongly pro-cyclical for an average bank, increasing with

the level of market interest rates, but this cyclicality is dampened by access to concentrated deposit

markets. The cost of deposits for a bank with Bank HHI one standard deviation above the mean

exhibits lower sensitivity to interest rate changes (=0.179-0.08 x 0.27 = 0.157) than a bank with

Bank HHI one standard deviation below the mean (=0.179-0.08 x 0.12 = 0.17).




11
     Like DSS, we allow two sets of bank effects, one representing the pre-crisis period and the other representing the
     post-crisis period. This approach absorbs heterogeneity related to differential effects of the Financial Crisis on
     banks, depending on many factors such as real estate exposure, exposure to wholesale funding, etc.



                                                               12
       Deposit market power provides banks with the flexibility not to fully adjust their deposit

rates as market interest rates change. Banks with relatively strong loan demand can choose to

increase their deposit rates more than banks with similar funding conditions to limit outflows of

deposits (and thus help fund lending). In essence, banks may choose to give up some of their

deposit rents (by raising rates during booms) to fund a larger balance sheet (when their lending

opportunities are unusually strong). As we see in the reduced form model, banks overall raise

deposit rates less than one-for-one with market rates, and those with more deposit market power

respond less to changes in rates. This pricing behavior contributes to the counter-cyclicality of

deposit quantities.

       Similar to the cost of deposits, (annualized) return on equity (Panel C), growth in bank total

loans (Panel D) and growth in C&I loans (Panel E), on average, behave very pro-cyclically

(increasing with interest rates). This pro-cyclicality is lower for banks with competitive advantage

in deposit markets. For example, Panel C suggests that in response to a 1% decline in Federal

Funds rate, a bank with Bank HHI one standard deviation above the mean would experience a 1.7

percentage point decline in ROE (=2.419-2.644 x 0.27); in contrast, a bank with Bank HHI one

standard deviation below the mean would experience a 2.1 percentage point decline in ROE

(=2.419-2.644 x 0.12). Notably, in all of the outcomes analyzed in Table 2, inclusion of the time

fixed effects does not significantly affect either the magnitude or the statistical significance of 2

estimates.

       Overall, the analysis presented in Table 2 is consistent with DSS and shows that banks with

access to concentrated deposit markets have better control over their funding. During economic

downturns, when other sources of funds (e.g., capital markets) are scarce, these banks experience

larger deposit inflows and smaller declines in the availability of internal funds (ROE). The latter




                                                     13
effect is critically important for regulated banks because it limits the risk of facing a binding capital

requirement during downturns. DSS show that deposit market power allows banks to extend

relatively more credit in downturns and relatively fewer loans in booms. Next, we extend these

findings further and explore how deposit market power affects the terms of bank loans, and by

extension, the real economy.


II.3    Deposit-Market Power and Loan Maturity

        How does deposit market power affect bank lending terms, including maturity and interest

rates? From one perspective, long-term lending is attractive to banks because it commands higher

returns. However, originating long-term loans exposes banks to more credit risks, as that risk

accumulates over a longer period of time. More importantly in our setting, long-terms loans expose

banks to more funding risks than shorter ones because business loans are illiquid and thus must be

held on the originator's balance sheet for the duration of the loan. Declines in profits (during

busts) or deposits (during booms) could thereby constrain a long-term lender's ability to make

future loans and thus forgo potentially profitable investments. Deposit market power (i.e.,

concentration) mitigates these funding effects by allowing banks to stabilize their funding

throughout the business cycle.

        To test these ideas, we estimate our core models, which link Bank HHI to C&I loan

maturity. In particular, we report the results from the following regressions:

() =  + 1 Bank HHI-1 +  -1 +   +                                                                     (2)


        The level of analysis is the loan (), originated by a bank () during quarter (). Our main

variable of interest (Bank HHI) varies at the level of the bank-year (bt-1) and is measured as of the

last June prior to the loan origination quarter. Since most of the variation in Bank HHI represents

the cross-section (see discussion above), we do not include bank-level fixed effects in the model.


                                                       14
We argue that banks with access to concentrated deposit markets have more stable funding

conditions (over the business cycle) and face less risk in funding longer-maturity loans.

Consequently, we expect loan maturity to increase with Bank HHI (i.e., 1 > 0).

            We eliminate a number of alternative explanations by controlling for observed

heterogeneity. On the loan side, we control for the (log of) loan size; the bank's assessment of

borrower risk, which varies from 1 to 4 (with 4 being the highest risk category); an indicator for

loans with prepayment penalties; and an indicator for secured loans. The ability to control for loan

risk is crucial in this analysis because it helps eliminate alternative explanations stemming from

bank risk preferences. 12

            On the bank side, we control for the log of bank assets (and its square to address the non-

linearity of the effect), non-performing loans/assets, the return on assets (net income/assets), C&I

loans/assets, (cash + securities)/assets, mortgage loans/assets, trading assets/assets, consumer

loans/assets, equity/assets, and deposits/assets. 13 All bank controls vary by quarter and are

measured as of the last quarter prior to the loan origination quarter. We capture the effect of macro-

economic conditions via time fixed effects ( ). Given that we have many loans per bank, we

cluster standard errors at the level of primary variation for our key explanatory variable ­ that is,

at the bank level.

            Panel A of Table 3 reports the baseline result, using the 1997-2017 sample of loans.

Consistent with our hypothesis, we find that banks with more deposit market power extend longer-

maturity loans: 1 > 0. The effects is both economically and statistically significant. The


12
     STBL also does not include a borrower-specific identifier, so we are not able to incorporate borrower-level fixed
     effects in our models. The reason is that STBL only samples loans made during a single week, and the set of banks
     in the survey changes over time.
13
     Internet Appendix Table A2 illustrates that our core findings, however, are not sensitive to whether or not we include
     bank-level control variables (other than bank size).



                                                                 15
coefficient from the simplest specification (column 1) suggests that a bank with deposit

concentration one standard deviation above average would extend loans with about 20% longer

maturity than a bank one standard deviation below average (= 2*0.075*1.35).

           STBL provides no borrower-specific information beyond the risk rating, yet for loans

originated after 2012 it offers the state of the borrower. This allows us to introduce the state-quarter

fixed effects, and hence control for variation in (state-specific) local economic conditions,

including local loan demand. It also allows us to control for a bank's proximity to the borrower

using an indicator variable (Local Lender) equal to one for loans originated by lenders with a

branch in the same state as the borrower (Cortes et al., 2019). 14

           Panels B and C of Table 3 report these results. First, we repeat the original analysis using

the 2012-2017 sample (Panel B) and then incorporate the state-year-level controls (Panel C).

Consistent with Panel A, we find a positive and statistically significant effect of Bank HHI on loan

maturity. The coefficient magnitude increases during the post-2012 period, which may reflect the

greater importance of deposits in funding to banks after the end of the Financial Crisis (although

we have no specific test for this claim). More importantly, the magnitude of the effect is not

sensitive to increasing the granularity of the fixed effects and/or adding the Local Lender indicator

(compare columns 3 and 5).

           Finally, we find that the effect of deposit market power on loan maturity does not vary with

business cycle conditions. Throughout all the Panels, the coefficient on the interaction term

( ×Bank HHI-1 ) is statistically close to zero and exhibits unstable magnitudes across

samples (see the even-numbered columns of Table 3). This is consistent with our arguments:


14
     A large literature has argued that small business lending often relies on soft information, which requires lenders to
     know and develop long-lasting relationships with their borrowers. We follow a number of papers in this literature
     in using distance (whether or not a bank owns a branch near the borrower) to proxy access for local information
     (e.g., Berger et al., 2005).



                                                                 16
during booms, banks with less cyclical funding can originate long-term loans because they face

less risk of future declines in external (deposits) and internal (ROE) funding. Conversely, during

busts, these banks face less risk of increased funding costs in the future (i.e., when the economy

moves out of recession).


II.4   Deposit Market Power and Loan Interest Rates

       As we have shown, banks facing less competition in deposit markets originate longer-

maturity loans. We argue that this is due to deposit market power mitigating banks' funding risk

associated with long-term loans. If this is the case, deposit market power should also affect loan

pricing: lower funding risks should lead to lower maturity premiums. To test this idea, we regress

the C&I loan interest rates on measures of borrower credit risk, loan maturity, and Bank HHI using

the following regression specification:

  =  + 1 Bank HHI-1 + 2 () +                                                                  (3)

         3 Bank HHI-1 × () +   +   + 


       As in Equation (2), the unit of analysis is the loan (), originated by a bank () during

quarter (). Since longer-maturity loans are riskier than shorter-maturity ones, we expect them to

command higher premiums (2 > 0). According to our argument, banks with deposit market

power (higher Bank HHI) face less funding risk and hence can charge lower maturity premium

(3 < 0).

       Table 4 reports these results, with three separate panels. Similar to Table 3, we report

results based on loans originated between 1997 and 2017 (Panel A), as well as similar models

using the 2012-2017 sample (Panel B), which allow us to capture both state-time fixed effects as

well as the Local Lender indicator (Panel C).




                                                   17
       We find a positive relationship between loan maturity and the interest rate across all of the

specifications. The results also suggest that banks facing less competition in deposit markets (those

with higher Bank HHI) charge lower maturity premiums: the coefficient 3 is negative and

economically and statistically significant across all three sets of models. For example, in the most

complete model (column 6), a bank with Bank HHI one standard-deviation below the mean (0.12)

would increase loan rates by about 35 basis points for each one-standard deviation increase in log

loan maturity (=1.16x(0.553-2.109x0.12)). In contrast, a bank with Bank HHI one standard

deviation above average (Bank HHI =0.27), maturity has approximately zero effect on interest

rates (=1.16 x (0.553 - 2.109 x 0.27)).

       Combined, the results presented in Tables 2 through 4 suggest that deposit market power

provides banks with the flexibility to mitigate funding risk. This competitive advantage enables

them to originate more long-terms loans and charge a lower maturity premium.


II.5   Alternative Explanations: Credit Risk and Demand for Long-Term Loans

       Prior literature shows that the relationship between loan maturity and the interest rate may

reflect unobserved heterogeneity in borrower demand for long-term credit, which itself may be

correlated with credit risk (rather than funding). One mechanism that could generate this effect is

sorting, whereby firms worried about their ability to roll over short-term debt in the future (e.g.,

riskier firms that lack collateral) choose to borrow long term, despite higher loan rates (Diamond,

1991; Hertzberg et al., 2019). Borrower credit risk composition also may affect banks' market

entry incentives (Branch HHI). Since Bank HHI is a weighted average of Branch HHIs, one can

argue that it is the credit risk composition and related heterogeneity in demand for long-term loans,

rather than deposit market power, that explain our results. We partially mitigate this alternative




                                                     18
explanation by explicitly controlling for borrowers' credit risk ratings and incorporating state-year

fixed effects in our analysis.

       To further rule out this demand-driven explanation, we conduct our analysis by credit-risk-

rating bin. If our core results are indeed driven by refinancing risk that is higher for firms with

higher credit risk, then we should observe our effect to be weak or non-existent among low credit

risk borrowers (who face low refinancing risk) and stronger among high credit risk borrowers. In

contrast, we have argued that long maturity lending creates potential funding risks: banks may face

constraints on future lending as a consequence of having to hold a loan originated today

irrespective of the borrower's credit risk.

       Table 5 reports the analysis of loan maturity (Panels A and B) and interest rates (Panels C

and D) within sub-samples of loans with risk ratings equal to 1 or 2 (the least risky loans, columns

1 and 2), risk ratings equal to 3 (columns 3 and 4), and risk ratings equal to 4 (the most risky loans,

columns 5 and 6). The results show that banks with higher Bank HHI originate loans with longer

maturity, irrespective of the credit risk of the borrower and irrespective of the sample period. If

anything, the effect is economically stronger (in Panel A) for borrowers in the lowest rather than

highest credit risk category.

       We also observe that banks facing less competition in deposit markets (higher Bank HHI)

charge lower maturity premiums, again irrespective of the credit risk category. The evidence

undermines the alternative hypothesis stemming from credit risk heterogeneity and is consistent

with our funding risk explanation. Maturity increases funding risk to lenders, irrespective of credit

quality. By mitigating funding risk, deposit market power allows banks to fund more, and cheaper,

long-term loans.




                                                      19
II.6   Alternative Explanations: Deposit Market Power vs Lending Market Power

       Another possible concern is that Branch HHI (and hence Bank HHI) may capture aspects

not only of funding markets but also of lending markets. For example, consider a small bank

operating in just one market. For such a bank, its concentration might be high for both the deposit-

taking and lending sides of its business. This example bank would have market power in both

businesses, making it hard to know if variation in Bank HHI represents variation in funding

conditions or variation in lending conditions (or both).

       To rule out this concern, we re-estimate our core models using Out-of-state Bank HHI.

This measure of bank funding conditions varies at bank-state-year level and is computed as a

weighted average of Branch HHI across all counties where a bank operates other than counties

located in the state where the business loan is originated. With this revised measure, lending to

borrowers of bank b located in state s, for example, would depend only on bank b's funding

conditions in all states other than state s. Effectively, this revised measure leaves out the variation

in Bank HHI from the borrower's state. We can implement this approach only for banks that raise

deposits in two or more states. The necessity to know the geographic location of the borrower also

limits the analysis to the 2012-2017 sample.

       Table 6 reports these results for the full sample, as well as for risk-rating sub-samples.

Panel A reports the maturity analysis, while Panel B reports the interest rate analysis. The results

show that even after we leave out the local heterogeneity in Branch HHI in computing Bank HHI,

we still observe that (out-of-state) deposit market power allows banks to extend longer-maturity

loans and charge lower maturity premiums.            Moreover, the economic magnitudes of the

documented effects are similar to those reported in Tables 3, 4, and 5. These results thus rule out

the concern that the results are driven by local lending market power.




                                                      20
II.7   Deposit Market Power and Soft Information Production

       A large literature has argued that small business lending relies on soft information,

requiring lenders to know and develop long-lasting relationships with their borrowers. Beyond

directly affecting loan maturity and pricing, banks' ability to process local (soft) information

matters in our setting because it mediates how funding costs interact with loan risk. Small business

loans underwritten with credit-scoring technology ­ that is, loans banks make over long distances

and without a relationship with the borrower ­ likely embody little or no soft information and thus

offer originators the option to sell or securitize them (since potential buyers would be

symmetrically informed). As such, their risk ought not to reflect the lender's financing capacity

or potential changes in that financing capacity over the life of the loan. Hence, our argument

suggests that access to concentrated deposit markets should affect maturity only for the sample of

local loans.

       To test this hypothesis, we implement the maturity and interest rate analysis separately for

the subsamples of loans originated within and outside of each bank's branch domain. That is, we

split the sample based on the indicator variable Local Lender. Table 7 reports the results for loan

maturity (Panel A) and loan interest rates (Panel B). This analysis is limited to the post-2012

sample because the location of the borrower is not available during the earlier survey years.

       The results are consistent with our argument: loan maturity increases with Bank HHI only

for the set of local loans. The effect becomes negative and weakly significant within the subset of

loans originated in markets where banks do not have brick-and-mortar locations. Furthermore,

bank deposit concentration affects loan maturity premium only within the sample of local loans.

Overall, the results support the notion that funding stability, fostered by deposit market power,




                                                    21
helps banks supply long-term loans, but only for those that require the originator's funding

capacity over the life of the loan.

          In the Internet Appendix tables, we provide several additional robustness tests on our core

result. We show that the positive link from Bank HHI to loan maturity is consistent across loans

of differing sizes. We show that the effect, both in terms of statistical as well as economic

significance, is not dependent on bank asset shares in different loan categories; nor is it dependent

on a bank's liability mix; nor is it dependent on bank size ­ both large and small banks exhibit a

strong positive link from Bank HHI to loan maturity. Finally, we show that the result is strong in

both the pre-crisis and post-crisis samples, with magnitudes somewhat larger in the post-crisis

period.


II.8      Real Effects

          Do borrowers benefit from proximity to banks that have deposit market power? To test this

idea, we evaluate how industry growth varies with local banks' access to concentrated deposit

markets. In implementing this analysis, we face a number of empirical challenges. First, bank

funding availability locally ought not to affect large companies with access to public capital (e.g.,

Compustat firms). Hence, we confine our analysis to small businesses. Second, we cannot observe

borrowers' capital structures or the maturity breakdowns of debt, given our focus on smaller firms.

          To address these concerns, we exploit the County Business Patterns (CBP) data to

construct the growth in employment and in total wages, as well as the size of local establishments

with high geographic (county) and industry (NAICS3) granularity. We then use the SOD data to

match the county-year measures of local economic growth to characteristics of local banks. Since

the vast majority of small C&I loans are originated within the lender's branch domain (recall the

sample sizes in Table 7), this approach allows us to map borrowers to lenders with reasonable



                                                      22
precision. Following DSS, we then build County HHI to capture the exposure of a given county to

funding risk conditions based on the average across all of the banks operating in the county.

           To capture the variation in borrower-level demand for long-term debt, we exploit

heterogeneity among Compustat firms in their dependence on long-term debt. Specifically, we

compute time-invariant median Long-term debt/assets (LTD) ratio within 3-digit NAICS industries

using annual Compustat data from 1994 to 2017. Following the approach pioneered by Rajan and

Zingales (1998), we argue that Compustat firms face the least supply-side constraints on their

capital structure decisions, so their LTD will provide the best measure of the demand for long

maturity debt at the industry level. Appendix Table A1 reports the LTD measure for the top 10 and

bottom 10 NAICS 3-digit industries.

           Finally, many prior studies indicate that small firms rely more on local credit conditions

than large ones, which implies that funding conditions of local banks ought to matter in driving

real outcomes most for the smallest enterprises (e.g., Cetorelli and Strahan, 2006). Thus we split

our county-industry-year sample into two subsamples, based on the average county-industry-year

establishment size relative to the median establishment size across all counties within the same

year. 15

           Armed with these data, we implement regressions with the following structure:

  =  +  +  +                                                                                                           (4)

                           1 County HHI-1 + 2 County HHI-1 ×  + 3 County HHI-1 ×  +

                           1 Branch HHI-1 + 2 Branch HHI-1 ×  + 3 Branch HHI-1 × 




15
     Our results are robust to alternative splits of the sample. For example, we split the sample into county-industry-year
     observations with above (below) global median establishment size and found qualitatively and quantitatively similar
     results. Using annual benchmarks for sample split allows for a balanced over sample period panel of observations
     in both above-median and below-median subsamples.



                                                                 23
       The level of analysis is industry  , county  , and year . The dependent variable is either

employment growth or growth in total wages. As defined above, County HHIct-1 equals the average

deposit market concentration (Bank HHI-1 ) across all banks  operating in county  in year

 - 1. This measure gets most of its variation from concentration in other counties, because most

banks draw funds from multiple localities.

       One clear advantage of this approach, relative to what was possible using the STBL data,

is our ability to control separately for the funding effects of deposit market concentration

(measured by County HHI) and for the effects of local banking competition (measured by Branch

HHI). By incorporating Branch HHI-1 and all related interaction terms, alongside

County HHI-1 , we can confirm the effect of deposit market power and related funding stability

even after we control for local banking competition characteristics.

       We further include the interaction terms between FF and both County HHI and Branch

HHI. We do so because DSS (and our earlier results) suggest that lending by banks with deposit

market power varies less cyclically. Finally, as compared to STBL-based analysis, the granularity

of the CBP data allows us to absorb many more sources of unobserved heterogeneity. We capture

common industry shocks by including industry-year fixed effects (it). These absorb the direct

effect of LTD. In some specification, we also incorporate county-year fixed effects to absorb local

economic shocks.

       Our identification relies on the heterogeneity of the effect of bank funding stability across

industries that rely more (less) on long-term debt. We argue that industries dependent on long-

term debt in their capital structure ought to benefit most from close proximity to banks with access

to concentrated deposit markets. Hence, we expect 3 > 0. Notably, this expectation follows if

the positive effect of Bank HHI on maturity, documented above, in fact reflects credit supply. We



                                                    24
have argued that the micro-evidence is hard to explain otherwise, but this last test helps bolster

that interpretation.

           We report models with just the County HHI (and interactions), just the Branch HHI (and

interactions), and both sets of variables. Finally, since our identification stems from heterogeneity

captured by  and related interaction terms, we saturate some models with county-year fixed

effects to capture unobserved heterogeneity at the county-year level, including local economic

conditions and local loan demand. The latter helps justify the credit supply interpretation of our

results.

           One problem with interpreting the effects of Branch HHI is reverse causality ­ markets

that are growing fast will experience faster growth in deposits. Growth in deposits will, in turn,

feedback to Branch HHI. This concern is much less important for County HHI, which is our focus,

because it depends mainly on deposits raised in other markets. Given this difference, we do not

attempt to interpret the effects of Branch HHI; instead, we use it to demonstrate the robustness of

our key variable. In addition, we report the models with and without the most granular set of fixed

effects, again to help establish the robustness of our main finding.

           Tables 8 and 9 report the results for the full sample of county-industry-year observations

(Panel A) as well as for subsamples of county-industry-years characterized by size (below the

median in Panel B and above the median in Panel C). Table 8 reports employment growth analysis

and Table 9 reports growth in total wages analysis.

           First, and consistent with DSS, columns (1) and (3) of Table 8 show that counties exposed

to banks with more deposit market power (higher County HHI) experience less pro-cyclical




                                                      25
economic growth. 16 Second, the positive effect of County HHI on employment growth increases

with the demand for long-term credit ( ), but only within the subsample dominated by smaller

industry establishments (Panel B). Consistent with larger firms being less dependent on local

finance, we do not find that county exposure to banks with deposit market power affects large

firms' employment growth (Panel C). These conclusions persist even after we saturate our models

with county-year fixed effects that fully absorb the effects of local economic conditions.

        To understand magnitudes, consider the effect of County HHI on small establishments

during the midpoint of the business cycle (i.e., setting FF = 0). For an industry with the mean


level of LTD (=0.22), the marginal effect of County HHI equals -0.005 + 0.086 x 0.22 = 0.014

(Table 8, Panel B, column 7). This implies that employment growth would be 0.21% faster for

industries located in counties with County HHI one standard deviation above average, compared

to those one standard deviation below. The growth effect rises to 0.34% for industries that are

one-standard deviation above average in their use of long-term debt. These growth effects are

substantial relative to the mean level of employment growth (=0.5%, see Table 1). Notably, the

robustness tests focused on wage growth and presented in Table 9 yield similar conclusions.


III.    Conclusions

        In this paper, we document a new channel linking deposits to bank credit supply. We argue

that banks facing lower competition in deposit markets can stabilize their funding over the business

cycle, which in turn reduces the risk of originating long-term illiquid business loans. Without such

funding stability, long-term lending today risks constraining future profitable lending. We further



        16
           Despite DSS implementing their analysis at county-year level and us implementing the analysis at the
county-industry-year level, the economic magnitudes of the coefficient on the interaction term County HHI-1 ×
 are comparable across. This further validates our empirical approach.


                                                          26
argue that such funding stability benefits sectors of the economy that are more dependent on long-

term credit.

       As evidence, we provide three new results: First, we show that banks raising deposits in

more concentrated markets originate longer-maturity loans. Second, we show that banks with

access to concentrated deposit markets charge lower maturity premiums, consistent with deposit

market power mitigating the funding risks associated with long-term loans. Third, we show that

non-financial firms located near banks raising deposits in concentrated markets grow faster,

especially for industries with high demand for long-term debt. Our results suggest a new benefit

of concentration in banking more generally, although this benefit comes with other costs as well,

such as less competition in lending markets.

       In the traditional framework, liquid deposits used to finance illiquid loans creates value but

also lead to run-risk for banks, a la Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Hence, deposit-taking contributes

to bank fragility. This liquidity transformation problem, we learned in 2008, now resides outside

of bank deposits. Deposits were a source of funding inflows during the Financial Crisis and helped

banks continue to lend (Cornett et al., 2011). Our paper offers another means by which deposits

help banks mitigate the risk of originating and holding long-term illiquid loans.




                                                    27
                                             REFERENCES

Ashcraft, Adam, 2006, "New Evidence on the Lending Channel," Journal of Money, Credit, and

      Banking 38, 751-776.

Barclay, Michael J. and Clifford W. Smith, Jr., 1995, "The Maturity Structure of Corporate Debt,"

      Journal of Finance 50(2), 609-631.

Berlin, Mitchell and Loretta J. Mester, 1999, "Deposits and Relationship Lending," The Review

      of Financial Studies 12(3), 579-607.

Bernanke, Ben S., 1983, "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the

      Great Depression," American Economic Review 73(3), 257-276.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Alan S. Blinder, 1988, "Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand," American

      Economic Review 78, 435-439.

Berger, Allen N. and Timothy H. Hannan, 1989, "The Price-Concentration Relationship in

      Banking," Review of Economics and Statistics 71, 291-299.

Berger, Allen N. and Timothy H. Hannan, 1991, "The Rigidity of Prices," American Economic

      Review 81, 938-945.

Berger, A. N., Marco Espinosa-Vega, W. Scott Frame and Nathan H. Miller, 2005, "Debt Maturity,

      Risk, and Asymmetric Information," Journal of Finance 60(6), 2895-2923.

Berger, A. N., Miller, N. H., Petersen, M. A., Rajan, R. G., Stein, J. C., 2005, "Does Function

      Follow Organizational For? Evidence from the Lending Practices of Large and Small

      Banks," Journal of Financial Economics 76, 237-269.

Black, Lamont and Richard Rosen, 2016, "Monetary Policy, Loan Maturity, and Credit

      Availability," Journal of Central Banking.


                                                   28
Black, Sandra E., Philip E. Strahan, 2002, "Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Availability,"

      Journal of Finance 57, 2807-2833.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Charles M. Kahn, 1991, "The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring

      Optimal Banking Arrangements," The American Economic Review 81(3), 497-513.

Cetorelli, Nicola and Philip E. Strahan, 2006, "Finance as a Barrier to Entry: Bank Competition

      and Industry Structure in Local U.S. Markets," Journal of Finance 61, 437-461.

Cornett, Marcia Millon, Jamie McNutt, Philip E. Strahan and Hassan Tehranian, 2011, "Liquidity

      Risk Management and Credit Supply in the Financial Crisis," Journal of Financial

      Economics 101(2), 297-312.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1991, "Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk," Quarterly Journal of

      Economics 106, 709­738

Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip Dybvig, 1983, "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,"

      The Journal of Political Economy 91(3), 401-419.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2001, "Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation, and

      Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking," Journal of Political Economy 109(2), 287-327.

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov and Philipp Schnabl, 2017, "The Deposit Channel of Monetary

      Policy," Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(4), 1819-1876.

Fama, Eugene, 1985, "What's Special about Banks," Journal of Monetary Economics.

Flannery, Mark J., 1986, "Asymmetric Information and Risky Debt Maturity Choice," Journal of

      Finance 41, 19­37




                                                 29
Flannery, Mark J., 1994, "Debt Maturity and the Deadweight Cost of Leverage: Optimally

      Financing Banking Firms," American Economic Review 84(1) 320-331.

Gatev, Evan and Philip E. Strahan, 2006, "Bank Advantage in Supplying Liquidity: Theory and

      Evidence from the Commercial Paper Market, Journal of Finance 61(2), 867-892.

Gilje, Erik, Elena Loutskina and Philip E. Strahan, 2016, "Exporting Liquidity: Branch Banking

      and Financial Integration," Journal of Finance 71(3) 1159-84.

Gertler, Mark, Simon Gilchrist, 1994, "Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the Behavior of

      Small Manufacturing Firms," Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 309-340.

Iyer, Raj and Peydro, J., 2011, "Interbank Contagion at Work: Evidence from a Natural

      Experiment," Review of Financial Studies 24, 1337-1377.

Jayaratne, Jith, Philp E. Strahan, 1996, "The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank Branch

      Deregulation," Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 639-670.

Kashyap, Anil K, Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy Stein, 2002, "Banks as Liquidity Providers: An

      Explanation for the Coexistence of Lending and Deposit-Taking," Journal of Finance 57,

      33-73.

Keeley, Michael, 1990, "Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in Banking," American

      Economic Review 80 (5), 1183-200.

Kerr, William R. and Ramana Nanda, 2009, "Democratizing entry: Banking Deregulations,

      Financing Constraints and Entrepreneurship," Journal of Financial Economics 94, 124-149.

Khwaja, A. I. and Atif Mian, 2008, "Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence from

      an Emerging Market," American Economic Review 98, 1413-1442.




                                                  30
Loutskina, Elena, and Philip E. Strahan, 2009, "Securitization and the Declining Impact of Bank

      Finance on Loan Supply: Evidence from Mortgage Acceptance Rates," Journal of Finance

      64, 861-889.

Paravisini, Daniel, 2008, "Local Bank Financial Constraints and Firm Access to External

      Finance," Journal of Finance 63, 2161-2193.

Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren, 2000, "Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank Crisis on

      Real Activity in the United States," American Economic Review, 90(1), 30-45.

Petersen, Mitchell A. and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1995, "The Effect of Credit Market Competition

      on Lending Relationships," The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(2), 407-443.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales, 1998, "Financial Dependence and Growth," The

      American Economic Review 88(3), 559-586.

Rice, Tara and Philip E. Strahan, 2010, "Does Credit Competition Affect Small-Firm Finance,"

      Journal of Finance 65, 861-889.

Stohs, Mark Hoven and David C Mauer, 1996, "The Determinants of Corporate Debt Maturity

      Structure," The Journal of Business 69(3), 279-312.

Strahan, Philip E., 2013, "Too Big to Fail: Causes, Consequences and Policy Responses," Annual

      Review of Financial Economics.




                                                 31
                                        Figure 1: Fed Funds Rate
This figure shows the path of the Fed Funds target rate between May 1997 and May 2017. Fed Funds
target rates are expressed in decimal format. After 2008, the Fed Funds target is defined as the midpoint
of the Fed Funds target range.

   0.07


   0.06


   0.05


   0.04


   0.03


   0.02


   0.01


      0
          1997
          1997
          1998
          1999
          1999
          2000
          2000
          2001
          2002
          2002
          2003
          2003
          2004
          2004
          2005
          2006
          2006
          2007
          2007
          2008
          2009
          2009
          2010
          2010
          2011
          2011
          2012
          2013
          2013
          2014
          2014
          2015
          2016
          2016
          2017




                                                        32
                                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for bank characteristics, small business lending loan terms, county economic characteristics,
and industry long-term-debt dependence. Data sources are Consolidated Report of Condition and Income (call reports), Survey of
Terms of Business Lending (STBL), Summary of Deposits (SOD), County Business Patterns (CBP), and Compustat.

                                                         Number of                                                     Standard
                                                        Observations            Mean               Median              Deviation

Panel A: Bank Characteristics (1997Q1-2017Q1)
Bank HHI                                                   15,292               0.192               0.183                0.075
Log of Bank Assets                                         15,292               14.37               14.18                2.24
Equity/Assets                                              15,292               0.100               0.093                0.029
Deposits / Assets                                          15,292               0.790               0.807                0.090
NPL / Assets                                               15,292               0.014               0.005                0.030
ROA                                                        15,292               0.003               0.003                0.002
C&I Loans / Assets                                         15,292               0.134               0.118                0.077
Cash + Securities / Assets                                 15,292               0.276               0.254                0.129
Consumer Loans / Assets                                    15,292               0.056               0.037                0.056
Mortgage Loans / Assets                                    15,292               0.395               0.405                0.156
Trading Assets / Assets                                    15,292               0.001               0.000                0.001
Panel B: STBL Loan Terms (1997Q2-2017Q2)
Loan Rate (percentage points)                            1,618,261               5.70                 5.25                2.51
Log of Loan Size                                         1,618,261             10.759               10.700               1.431
Loan Size ($)                                            1,618,261             118,618              44,334              177,229
Maturity (months)                                        1,618,261              14.89                9.10                17.53
Log(Days to Maturity)                                    1,618,261              5.515                5.613               1.155
Rating (1=safest; 4=riskiest)                            1,618,261              3.285                3.000               0.702
Local Bank? (available since 2012)                        467,832               0.798
Loan is Secured?                                         1,618,261              0.831
Prepayment Penalty?                                      1,618,261              0.088
Panel C: County Economic Characteristics (1997-2017)
Branch Deposit HHI                                   1,920,723                  0.231               0.196                0.128
County Deposit HHI                                   1,920,723                  0.221               0.205                0.074
 log (Employment)                                    1,920,723                  0.005               0.005                0.171
 log (Wages)                                         1,920,723                  0.033               0.034                0.199

Panel D: Industry Long-Term-Debt Dependence
Long-Term Debt/Assets                                        84                 0.215               0.216                0.109




                                                                    33
                                               Table 2: Deposit Concentration, Bank Liabilities, and Lending: Bank-Level Analysis

This table reports the results of the OLS analysis following regression equation (1). The level of analysis is bank-quarter. Bank HHI is a weighted average of Branch HHIs across all
counties where a given bank operates. Panels A through E report the results for different bank outcomes. The sample covers the period between 1997 and 2017. Standard errors are
clustered at bank level. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*' denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level.



                                         Panel A:                        Panel B:                        Panel C:                       Panel D:                      Panel E:
                                    log Total Deposits               Cost of Deposits                      ROE                       log Total Loans               log C&I Loans
FF Ratet                          0.114***                        0.179***                        2.419***                       0.796***                       0.810***
                                    (2.72)                         (98.94)                         (33.52)                        (19.07)                        (9.01)
Bank HHIt-1                         -0.002       0.001            0.001***     -0.0002**            0.006        -0.012          0.018***      0.012**          0.033***    0.026***
                                    (0.28)       (0.15)             (3.61)       (2.30)             (0.65)       (1.30)            (3.50)       (2.41)           (4.23)       (3.35)
FF Ratet x Bank HHIt-1           -1.836***     -1.862***         -0.080***     -0.083***         -2.644***     -2.744***        -0.535***     -0.594***         -0.811**    -0.934**
                                   (11.62)      (11.82)            (11.46)      (12.22)             (9.70)      (10.10)            (3.29)       (3.67)           (2.16)       (2.50)

Bank*Post-2008 Fixed Effects        Yes           Yes               Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes               Yes           Yes               Yes          Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                -            Yes                -            Yes               -            Yes                -            Yes                -           Yes

Observations                      585,374       585,374           585,374       585,374          585,374       585,374           585,374      585,374           585,374       585,374
R2                                 13.9%         16.5%             12.0%         40.5%            46.2%         48.6%             19.8%        23.0%             5.5%          6.1%




                                                                                            34
                                Table 3: Bank Deposit Concentration and Loan Maturity
This table reports the results of the OLS analysis following regression equation (2). The dependent variable is (log) of
loan maturity in days. Panel A reports the results for the 1997-2017 sample of small business loans. Panels B and C report
the result for the 2012-2017 subsample where we have information on the location (state) of the borrower. Bank HHI is a
weighted average of Branch HHIs across all counties where a given bank operates. Loan controls include the (log of)
loan size; the bank's assessment of borrower risk; an indicator for loans with pre-payment penalties; and an indicator for
secured loans. Bank controls are log of total assets and its square, return on assets (net income/assets), C&I loans/assets,
(cash + securities)/assets, mortgage loans/assets, trading assets/assets, consumer loans/assets, non-performing
loans/assets, equity/assets, and deposits/assets. Standard errors are clustered at bank level. T-statistics are reported in
parentheses. '*' denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level.


                                                       Dependent Variable = Log(Days to Maturity)
                                          Panel A:                       Panel B:                       Panel C:
                                     Sample 1997-2017,              Sample 2012-2017,              Sample 2012-2017,
                                      No State Controls              No State Controls             With State Controls
                                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
Bank HHIt-1                        1.348***       1.351***        2.170***       2.203***        2.516***       2.601***
                                     (3.22)         (3.26)          (2.77)         (2.80)          (3.71)         (3.88)
Bank HHIt-1 x FF Ratet                             7.111                          -82.04                          -186.9
                                                   (0.18)                         (0.48)                          (1.26)
log (Loan Size)                    0.0729***     0.0728***        0.0477**       0.0477**        0.0395**       0.0394**
                                     (5.79)        (5.79)           (2.34)         (2.33)          (2.07)         (2.07)
Local Bank Dummy                                                                                 -0.530***      -0.530***
                                                                                                   (5.75)         (5.77)
Other Bank Controlst-1                Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Other Loan Controls                   Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                 Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes              -              -
State x Quarter Fixed Effects          -             -                -              -              Yes            Yes

Observations                       1,618,261     1,618,261         467,832       467,832          414,726        414,726
 2                                   4.5%          4.5%             7.1%          7.1%             10.7%          10.7%
R




                                                             35
                                Table 4: Bank Deposit Concentration and Loan Interest Rates
This table reports the results of the OLS analysis following regression equation (3). The dependent variable is loan interest
rate. Panel A reports the results for the 1997-2017 sample of small business loans. Panels B and C report the result for the
2012-2017 subsample where we have information on the location (state) of the borrower. Bank HHI is a weighted average of
Branch HHIs across all counties where a given bank operates. Loan controls include the (log of) loan size; the bank's
assessment of borrower risk; an indicator for loans with pre-payment penalties; and an indicator for secured loans. Bank
controls are log of total assets and its square, return on assets (net income/assets), C&I loans/assets, (cash + securities)/assets,
mortgage loans/assets, trading assets/assets, consumer loans/assets, non-performing loans/assets, equity/assets, and
deposits/assets. Standard errors are clustered at bank level. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*' denotes significance at
the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level.

                                                              Dependent Variable = Loan Interest Rate

                                                                         Sample 2012-2017,                Sample 2012-2017,
                                         Sample 1997-2017
                                                                          No State Controls               With State Controls

Bank HHIt-1                             -0.537         3.677**          -5.509*        8.195***         -6.686**        5.464**
                                        (0.51)          (2.06)           (1.95)         (3.18)           (2.47)          (2.36)
log (Loan Maturity)                    0.089***       0.229***          0.137**        0.613***          0.133**        0.553***
                                        (2.88)         (3.58)            (2.40)         (3.98)            (2.43)         (3.68)
Bank HHIt-1 x log(Loan Maturity)                       -0.764*                        -2.397***                        -2.109***
                                                        (1.76)                           (3.30)                          (3.14)
log (Loan Size)                       -0.199***       -0.199***        -0.196***      -0.197***         -0.208***      -0.210***
                                        (5.74)          (5.79)           (3.05)         (3.22)            (3.65)         (3.81)
Local Bank Dummy                                                                                         -0.371*         -0.335
                                                                                                          (1.68)         (1.54)
Other Bank Controls                      Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
Other Loan Controls                      Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                    Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
State x Quarter Fixed Effects             -               -                -              -                Yes            Yes
Observations                          1,618,261       1,618,261         467,832        467,832           414,726        414,726
R2                                      79.5%           79.6%            27.3%          28.1%             31.4%          32.0%




                                                                  36
                           Table 5: Bank Deposit Concentration, Loan Maturity, and Loan Interest Rates: by Loan Risk
Panels A and B report the results of the OLS analysis following regression equation (2), where the dependent variable is (log) loan maturity. Panels C
and D report the results following regression equation (3), where the dependent variable is loan interest rate. Bank HHI is a weighted average of
Branch HHIs across all counties where a given bank operates. Each column reports the results of analysis when the sample loans are confined to one
credit risk category. Loan controls include the (log of) loan size; the bank's assessment of borrower risk; an indicator for loans with pre-payment
penalties; and an indicator for secured loans. Bank controls are log of total assets and its square, return on assets (net income/assets), C&I loans/assets,
(cash + securities)/assets, mortgage loans/assets, trading assets/assets, consumer loans/assets, non-performing loans/assets, equity/assets, and
deposits/assets. Standard errors are clustered at bank level. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*' denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5%
level, and '***' the 1% level.

                                                   Risk Rating  2                          Risk Rating = 3                           Risk Rating = 4
Panel A: Log(Days to Maturity), 1997-2017 Sample
Bank HHIt-1                              2.139***              2.165***                1.032**           1.042**                1.305***          1.292***
                                          (2.89)                (2.94)                  (2.35)            (2.40)                 (2.61)             (2.61)
FF Ratet x Bank HHIt-1                                          30.072                                    35.352                                   -20.842
                                                                (0.53)                                    (0.85)                                    (0.48)
Other Bank Controls                             Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Other Loan Controls                             Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                           Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes                   Yes                 Yes
Observations                                  170,400          170,400                 784,008           784,008                663,853           663,853
R2                                             6.0%              6.0%                   5.4%               5.4%                  4.9%                4.9%
Panel B: Log(Days to Maturity), 2012-2017 Sample
Bank HHIt-1                                    2.271*           2.268*                2.425***          2.437***                2.444***          2.540***
                                               (1.91)           (1.90)                 (3.55)             (3.56)                 (3.06)             (3.32)
FF Ratet x Bank HHIt-1                                           6.685                                   -31.187                                  -178.763
                                                                (0.02)                                    (0.20)                                    (1.06)
Other Bank Controls                             Yes               Yes                    Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes
Other Loan Controls                             Yes               Yes                    Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes
State x Quarter Fixed Effects                   Yes               Yes                    Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes
Observations                                   40,270           40,270                 189,536          189,536                 184,856           184,856
R2                                             29.0%            29.0%                   12.6%             12.6%                  12.9%             13.0%
Panel C: Loan Interest Rates, 1997-2017 Sample
Bank HHIt-1                               -0.780                  3.143                -0.146           3.770**                   -0.903            4.225*
                                          (0.73)                 (0.99)                (0.17)             (2.29)                  (0.60)            (1.88)
log (Loan Maturity)                      0.123***                0.252*               0.078***          0.207***                 0.080**          0.254***
                                          (5.48)                 (1.91)                (2.90)             (3.38)                  (1.99)            (3.43)
Bank HHIt-1 x log(Loan Maturity)                                 -0.712                                  -0.704*                                   -0.940*
                                                                 (1.13)                                   (1.74)                                    (1.84)
Other Bank Controls                         Yes                    Yes                   Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes
Other Loan Controls                         Yes                    Yes                   Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                       Yes                    Yes                   Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes
Observations                              170,400               170,400                784,008          784,008                 663,853           663,853
  2                                        78.6%                 78.7%                  81.3%             81.4%                  78.7%              78.8%
R
Panel D: Loan Interest Rates, 2012-2017 Sample
Bank HHIt-1                                -2.472              9.773***               -5.608**            4.969*                -7.863***          5.255*
                                           (0.74)                (3.84)                (2.39)             (1.81)                  (2.86)           (1.84)
log (1+Loan Maturity)                    0.121***               0.523***               0.075*            0.430***                0.155**          0.624***
                                           (4.47)                (4.58)                (1.88)             (2.99)                  (2.31)           (3.58)
Bank HHIt-1 x log(Loan Maturity)                               -2.171***                                -1.817***                                -2.282***
                                                                 (3.52)                                   (2.75)                                   (3.11)
Other Bank Controls                             Yes                Yes                   Yes                Yes                   Yes                Yes
Other Loan Controls                             Yes                Yes                   Yes                Yes                   Yes                Yes
State x Quarter Fixed Effects                   Yes                Yes                   Yes                Yes                   Yes                Yes
Observations                                   40,270            40,270                189,536           189,536                184,856           184,856
R2                                             50.5%             51.1%                  39.5%             40.0%                  30.3%             30.9%




                                                                              37
                                                            Table 6: Out-of-State Bank Deposit Concentration
Panels A reports the results of the OLS analysis following regression equation (2), where the dependent variable is (log) loan maturity. Panel B reports the results following
regression equation (3), where the dependent variable is loan interest rate. Out-of-state Bank HHI is a weighted average of Branch HHI s across all counties where a given
bank operates yet located outside of the state where the loan was originated. Loan controls include the (log of) loan size; the bank's assessment of borrower risk; an
indicator for loans with pre-payment penalties; and an indicator for secured loans. Bank controls are log of total assets and its square, return on assets (net income/assets),
C&I loans/assets, (cash + securities)/assets, mortgage loans/assets, trading assets/assets, consumer loans/assets, non-performing loans/assets, equity/assets, and
deposits/assets. The sample contains small business loans originated between 2012 and 2017. Standard errors are clustered at bank level. T-statistics are reported in
parentheses. '*' denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level.


                                                        2012-2017 Sample                 Risk Rating  2                  Risk Rating = 3                 Risk Rating = 4
Panel A: Log(Days to Maturity)
Out-of-state Bank HHIt-1                              1.852**        1.869**          2.846**       2.715**           1.787**       1.740**            1.428         1.405
                                                      (2.347)        (2.405)           (2.18)        (2.05)            (2.25)        (2.16)            (1.43)        (1.47)
FF Ratet x Out-of-state Bank HHIt-1                                  -36.230                        304.669                         109.286                          42.366
                                                                     (0.218)                         (0.99)                          (0.62)                          (0.21)
log (Loan Size)                                        0.035*         0.035*          0.048**       0.048**            0.034         0.034             0.020         0.020
                                                      (1.707)        (1.706)           (2.54)        (2.52)            (1.55)        (1.55)            (0.67)        (0.67)
Observations                                          391,009        391,009          37,815         37,815           177,197       177,197           175,919       175,919
R2                                                     11.1%          11.1%            30.7%         30.7%             13.2%         13.2%             13.5%         13.5%
Panel B: Loan Interest Rates
Out-of-state Bank HHIt-1                             -8.797***      5.766***            0.357      15.587***         -7.925***       4.786*         -10.806***        3.960
                                                      (3.398)        (2.702)           (0.16)        (7.00)            (3.35)        (1.92)            (4.47)        (1.63)
log (Loan Maturity)                                   0.123**       0.625***          0.112***      0.611***           0.075*       0.500***          0.134**       0.660***
                                                      (2.203)        (4.567)           (4.01)        (5.54)            (1.76)        (3.69)            (2.06)        (4.37)
Out-of-state Bank HHIt-1 x log(Loan Maturity)                       -2.488***                       -2.662***                      -2.151***                       -2.517***
                                                                     (4.527)                          (4.88)                         (3.83)                          (4.53)
log (Loan Size)                                      -0.196***      -0.197***        -0.233***      -0.233***        -0.189***     -0.191***         -0.197***     -0.198***
                                                      (3.637)        (3.831)           (6.03)         (6.05)           (4.14)        (4.34)            (3.58)        (3.76)
Observations                                          391,009        391,009           37,815         37,815          177,197       177,197           175,919       175,919
R2                                                     34.1%          35.0%            52.4%          53.3%            39.6%         40.2%             35.0%         35.9%




                                                                                       38
               Table 7: Bank Deposit Concentration, Loan Maturity, and Loan Interest Rates: Local vs. Non-Local Loans
Panels A reports the results of the OLS analysis following regression equation (2), where the dependent variable is (log) loan maturity. Panel B
reports the results following regression equation (3), where the dependent variable is loan interest rate. Bank HHI is a weighted average of
Branch HHIs across all counties where a given bank operates. Columns 1 and 2 report the results for the 2012-2017 sample of small business
loans, while columns 3-4 and 5-6 split the sample into two sub-samples based on the Local Lender indicator. Loan controls include the (log of)
loan size; the bank's assessment of borrower risk; an indicator for loans with pre-payment penalties; and an indicator for secured loans. Bank
controls are log of total assets and its square, return on assets (net income/assets), C&I loans/assets, (cash + securities)/assets, mortgage
loans/assets, trading assets/assets, consumer loans/assets, non-performing loans/assets, equity/assets, and deposits/assets. Standard errors are
clustered at bank level. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*' denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1%
level.



2012-2017 Sample                                            Full Sample                       Local Banks                Non-Local Banks
Panel A: Log(Days to Maturity)
Bank HHIt-1                                            -1.206         -1.131          3.238***        3.347***         -1.447         -1.675*
                                                       (1.07)         (0.97)            (5.09)          (5.36)         (1.60)          (1.93)
Local Lender                                         -1.362***       -1.363***            -                 -             -              -
                                                       (6.89)          (6.64)             -                 -             -              -
Local Lender x Bank HHIt-1                            4.392***       4.400***             -                 -             -              -
                                                        (4.28)         (4.11)             -                 -             -              -
log (Loan Size)                                        0.039**        0.039**         0.047**         0.047**          0.036          0.036
                                                        (2.04)         (2.03)          (2.40)          (2.39)          (1.60)         (1.60)
Other Bank Controls                                     Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
Other Loan Controls                                     Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
Interactions with FF Ratet                              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
State x Quarter Fixed Effects                           Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
Observations                                          414,726         414,726         373,232         373,232          41,469         41,469
R2                                                     11.0%           11.0%           7.5%            7.5%            29.7%          29.8%
Panel B: Loan Interest Rates
Bank HHIt-1                                          -13.612***       -12.723         -5.709**        4.721**         -9.924**        -10.108
                                                       (2.83)          (1.15)          (2.27)          (2.51)          (2.44)          (0.92)
log (Loan Maturity)                                   0.386***         0.410           0.108*         0.477***        0.297***        0.292
                                                        (3.17)         (1.23)          (1.92)           (3.32)          (2.79)        (1.03)
Bank HHIt-1 x log(Loan Maturity)                                      -0.132              -          -1.834***            -           0.031
                                                                      (0.07)              -            (2.95)             -           (0.02)
Local Lender x Bank HHI                                8.358**        18.436              -                 -             -              -
                                                        (2.13)        (1.57)              -                 -             -              -
Local Lender x log (Loan Maturity)                    -0.284**         0.080              -                 -             -              -
                                                       (2.20)         (0.22)              -                 -             -              -
Local Lender x Bank HHIt-1 x log(Loan Maturity)                       -1.797              -                 -             -              -
                                                                      (0.84)              -                 -             -              -
log (Loan Size)                                      -0.205***       -0.207***       -0.198***       -0.200***        -0.215**       -0.215**
                                                       (3.65)          (3.79)          (3.75)          (3.91)          (2.15)         (2.15)
Other Bank Controls                                     Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
Other Loan Controls                                     Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
State-Quarter Fixed Effects                             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
Observations                                          414,726         414,726         373,232         373,232          41,469         41,469
R2                                                     32.6%           33.0%           32.4%           32.9%           49.2%          49.2%




                                                                       39
                                                             Table 8: Deposit Concentration and Employment Growth
This table reports the results from the OLS regressions following equation (4). The dependent variable is (log) growth in employment measured at county-industry-year level. Panel A
reports the resuls for the full sample covering the 1995-2017 period. Panel B reports the results based on the subsample confined to county-industry-year observations that are
characterized by below-median establishment size. Similarly, Panel C reports the results based on the subsample confined to county-industry-year observations that are characterized by
above-median establishment size. Standard errors are clustered by county and industry-year. T-statistics reported in parentheses. '*' denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5%
level, and '***' the 1% level.

                                                                                              Dependent Variable:  log Employment
                                                                                                Panel B: Counties with Below-Median             Panel C: Counties with Above-Median
                                                       Panel A: Full Sample
                                                                                                    Average Establishment Size                       Average Establishment Size

County Deposit HHIt-1                        0.010                    0.001                       0.010                  -0.005                 -0.013                -0.004
                                             (1.32)                   (0.14)                      (1.03)                 (0.41)                 (1.21)                (0.24)
County Deposit HHIt-1 x LTD                 0.045**                   0.048      0.045         0.075***                 0.086**    0.098**     0.109***               0.062      0.031
                                             (2.20)                   (1.60)     (1.54)          (2.74)                  (2.09)     (2.37)       (3.29)               (1.22)     (0.62)
County Deposit HHIt-1 x FF Rate t          -0.895***                -0.833**                  -0.982***                 -1.017**               -0.517**               -0.420
                                             (4.30)                  (2.36)                     (3.71)                   (2.30)                 (2.20)                (1.09)
Branch Deposit HHIt-1                                   0.010**       0.009                                 0.015**     0.018**                            -0.008     -0.006
                                                         (2.03)       (1.52)                                 (2.30)      (2.14)                            (1.22)     (0.65)
Branch Deposit HHIt-1 x LTD                              0.020*      -0.002      0.001                       0.032*      -0.007    -0.013                 0.062***    0.033      0.044
                                                         (1.70)      (0.11)      (0.08)                      (1.89)      (0.28)    (0.52)                   (3.30)    (1.18)     (1.48)
Branch Deposit HHIt-1 x FF Rate t                      -0.448***     -0.047                                 -0.458***    0.022                            -0.278*     -0.069
                                                         (3.53)      (0.22)                                   (2.94)     (0.08)                            (1.94)     (0.29)

Industry x Year Fixed Effects                 Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes              Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
County Fixed Effect                           Yes         Yes          Yes         -               Yes        Yes         Yes        -           Yes        Yes        Yes         -
County x Year Fixed Effects                    -           -            -         Yes               -          -           -        Yes           -          -          -         Yes

Observations                               1,920,723 1,920,723 1,920,723         1,919,231        960,573   960,573     960,573    958,566     960,118    960,118    960,118    955,221
R2                                           4.2%      4.2%      4.2%            8.9%              3.8%      3.8%        3.8%       11.8%       6.9%       6.9%       6.9%       14.1%




                                                                                             40
                                                                 Table 9: Deposit Concentration and Wage Growth
This table reports the results from the OLS regressions following equation (4). The dependent variable is (log) growth in total wages measured at county-industry-year level. Panel A
reports the results for the full sample covering the 1995-2017 period. Panel B reports the results based on the subsample confined to county-industry-year observations that are
characterized by below-median establishment size. Similary, Panel C reports the results based on the subsample confined to county-industry-year observations that are characterized by
above-median establishment size. Standard errors are clustered by county and industry-year. T-statistics reported in parentheses. '*' denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5%
level, and '***' the 1% level.

                                                                                               Dependent Variable:  log Total Wages
                                                                                                 Panel B: Counties with Below-Median            Panel C: Counties with Above-Median
                                                       Panel A: Full Sample
                                                                                                      Average Establishment Size                     Average Establishment Size
County Deposit HHIt-1                        0.004                     -0.014                     0.009              -0.015                      -0.017            -0.018
                                             (0.43)                    (1.08)                     (0.79)             (0.92)                      (1.42)            (1.05)
County Deposit HHIt-1 x LTD                 0.050**                    0.067*     0.066*        0.087***            0.111**     0.131***        0.077**             0.048  0.004
                                             (2.03)                    (1.81)     (1.90)          (2.81)             (2.32)      (2.72)          (2.12)            (0.87)  (0.07)
County Deposit HHIt-1 x FF Rate t          -1.232***                  -1.021**                  -1.294***          -1.532***                   -0.980***           -0.076
                                             (5.00)                    (2.48)                     (4.52)             (3.07)                      (3.53)            (0.16)
Branch Deposit HHIt-1                                    0.012**      0.019**                             0.020*** 0.027***                               -0.005    0.003
                                                          (2.10)       (2.35)                               (2.61)   (2.65)                               (0.75)   (0.29)
Branch Deposit HHIt-1 x LTD                               0.020        -0.012      -0.008                   0.034* -0.0161       -0.027                  0.044** 0.0217    0.043
                                                          (1.30)       (0.51)      (0.39)                   (1.78)   (0.55)      (0.93)                   (2.08)   (0.69)  (1.30)
Branch Deposit HHIt-1 x FF Rate t                       -0.643***      -0.157                             -0.549*** 0.171                               -0.678*** -0.645**
                                                          (3.98)       (0.58)                               (3.09)   (0.55)                               (3.79)   (2.07)
Industry x Year Fixed Effects                 Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes             Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes             Yes       Yes      Yes    Yes
County Fixed Effect                           Yes          Yes           Yes          -             Yes       Yes      Yes          -             Yes       Yes      Yes      -
County x Year Fixed Effects                    -             -            -         Yes              -         -        -         Yes              -         -        -     Yes
Observations                               1,920,723    1,920,723    1,920,723     1,919,231      960,573 960,573 960,573       958,566         960,118 960,118 960,118 955,221
R2                                           5.2%         5.2%          5.2%       10.2%           4.6%      4.6%     4.6%       12.8%           7.7%      7.7%     7.7%   15.1%




                                                                                             41
                            Table A1: Long-Term Debt-to-Assets (LTD) Ratios
This table reports the long-term debt-to-assets (LTD) ratio for the top 10 and bottom 10 NAICS 3-digit
industries. For each firm in Compustat, we sum up its long-term debt and total assets over the period of
1994-2017 and calculate the ratio of aggregate long-term debt to aggregate total assets. For each
industry, LTD is defined as the (time-invariant) median of the aggregate long-term debt to aggregate
total assets ratio across all firms in the industry. Finance and government related industries are excluded
from the list.


NAICS3     Description                                                                                 LTD
   511     Publishing Industries (except Internet)                                                    0.014
   316     Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing                                                   0.037
   454     Nonstore Retailers                                                                         0.048
   453     Miscellaneous Store Retailers                                                              0.049
   334     Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing                                              0.051
   541     Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services                                           0.056
   519     Other Information Services                                                                 0.059
   325     Chemical Manufacturing                                                                     0.066
   813     Religious, Grantmaking, Civic, Professional, and Similar Organizations                     0.070
   451     Sporting Goods, Hobby, Musical Instrument, and Book Stores                                 0.071
     811   Repair and Maintenance                                                                     0.360
     486   Pipeline Transportation                                                                    0.366
     314   Textile Product Mills                                                                      0.371
     487   Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation                                                      0.375
     517   Telecommunications                                                                         0.379
     713   Amusement, Gambling, and Recreation Industries                                             0.380
     622   Hospitals                                                                                  0.413
     623   Nursing and Residential Care Facilities                                                    0.424
     113   Forestry and Logging                                                                       0.425
     721   Accommodation                                                                              0.481




                                                         42
          Table A2: Bank Deposit Concentration, Loan Maturity, and Loan Interest Rates:
                                Alternative Sets of Bank Controls

Panel A reports the results of the OLS analysis following regression equation (2), where the dependent
variable is (log) loan maturity. Panel B reports the results following regression equation (3), where the
dependent variable is loan interest rate. Bank HHI is a weighted average of Branch HHIs across all
counties where a given bank operates. Loan controls include the (log of) loan size; the bank's assessment
of borrower risk; an indicator for loans with pre-payment penalties; and an indicator for secured loans.
Standard errors are clustered at bank level. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*' denotes significance
at the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level.
Panel A: Log(Days to Maturity), 1997-2017 Sample

Bank HHIt-1                             1.102**                  1.185**                     1.348***
                                         (2.34)                    (2.58)                     (3.22)
log (Loan Size)                         0.079***                 0.074***                    0.073***
                                         (6.04)                    (5.76)                     (5.79)
Log(assets)                             0.468***                 0.370***                     0.238*
                                         (3.01)                    (2.79)                     (1.93)
Log(assets)^2                          -0.015***                -0.013***                    -0.009**
                                         (3.07)                    (3.09)                     (2.40)
NPL/Assets                                                         -1.946                     -1.566
                                                                   (1.43)                     (1.32)
ROA                                                                 13.17                      10.85
                                                                   (1.57)                     (1.50)
C&I Loans/Assets                                                    0.228                      0.681
                                                                   (0.48)                     (1.47)
(Cash + Securities)/Assets                                         -0.443                      0.018
                                                                   (1.39)                     (0.06)
Mortgage Loans/Assets                                             -0.601*                     -0.249
                                                                   (1.96)                     (0.85)
Trading Assets/Assets                                            31.75**                     33.47***
                                                                   (2.34)                     (2.70)
Consumer Loans/Assets                                               0.306                      0.548
                                                                   (0.53)                     (0.98)
Equity/Assets                                                                                  0.679
                                                                                              (0.87)
Deposits/Assets                                                                             -1.128***
                                                                                              (4.50)

Other Loan Controls                       Yes                      Yes                         Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                     Yes                      Yes                         Yes
Observations                            1618261                 1,618,261                   1,618,261
R2                                       3.6%                     4.1%                        4.5%




                                                       43
Panel B: Loan Interest Rates, 1997-2017 Sample

Bank HHIt-1                          3.244*             3.909**    3.677**
                                     (1.75)              (2.06)      (2.06)
log (Loan Maturity)                 0.214***           0.226***    0.229***
                                     (3.11)              (3.50)      (3.58)
Bank HHIt-1 x log(Loan Maturity)     -0.753             -0.785*     -0.764*
                                     (1.51)              (1.74)      (1.76)
Log(assets)^2                       0.028***            0.023**    0.020**
                                     (2.75)              (2.44)      (2.25)
NPL/Assets                                                1.211       0.333
                                                         (0.51)      (0.15)
ROA                                                      -1.004       1.613
                                                         (0.04)      (0.08)
C&I Loans/Assets                                       -1.543**   -2.067***
                                                         (2.06)      (2.64)
(Cash + Securities)/Assets                             -0.881**   -1.449***
                                                         (2.09)      (3.32)
Mortgage Loans/Assets                                     0.519      -0.039
                                                         (1.01)      (0.09)
Trading Assets/Assets                                     2.264       1.363
                                                         (0.09)      (0.06)
Consumer Loans/Assets                                 -4.344***   -4.641***
                                                         (3.09)      (3.52)
Equity/Assets                                                        2.669*
                                                                     (1.78)
Deposits/Assets                                                    2.175***
                                                                     (3.47)

Other Loan Controls                   Yes                Yes         Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                 Yes                Yes         Yes
Observations                       1,618,261          1,618,261   1,618,261
R2                                   78.5%              79.2%       79.6%




                                                 44
           Table A3: Bank Deposit Concentration, Loan Maturity, and Loan Interest Rates: by Loan Size
Panels A and B report the results of the OLS analysis following regression equation (2), where the dependent variable is
(log) loan maturity. Panels C and D report the results following regression equation (3), where the dependent variable is
loan interest rate. Bank HHI is a weighted average of Branch HHIs across all counties where a given bank operates. Each
column reports the results of analysis when the sample loans are confined to one size category. Loan controls include the
(log of) loan size; the bank's assessment of borrower risk; an indicator for loans with pre-payment penalties; and an
indicator for secured loans. Bank controls are log of total assets and its square, return on assets (net income/assets), C&I
loans/assets, (cash + securities)/assets, mortgage loans/assets, trading assets/assets, consumer loans/assets, non-performing
loans/assets, equity/assets, and deposits/assets. Standard errors are clustered at bank level. T-statistics are reported in
parentheses. '*' denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level.

                                                 <$100k loans               $100-250k loans              $250k-1m loans
Panel A: Log(Days to Maturity), 1997-2017 Sample
Bank HHIt-1                                    1.276***                          1.151**                     1.299**
                                                 (2.77)                           (2.25)                      (2.06)
Other Bank Controls                                Yes                              Yes                         Yes
Other Loan Controls                                Yes                              Yes                         Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                              Yes                              Yes                         Yes
Observations                                   1,134,688                         257,536                     226,037
R2                                                4.7%                             3.6%                        2.5%
Panel B: Log(Days to Maturity), 2012-2017 Sample
Bank HHIt-1                                         2.895***                     1.501**                      -0.229
                                                     (3.96)                       (2.36)                      (0.21)
Other Bank Controls                                    Yes                         Yes                         Yes
Other Loan Controls                                    Yes                         Yes                         Yes
State x Quarter Fixed Effects                          Yes                         Yes                         Yes
Observations                                        282,627                      72,640                       59,439
R2                                                   12.6%                        11.3%                       11.3%
Panel C: Loan Interest Rates, 1997-2017 Sample
Bank HHIt-1                                           4.116*                      2.413                        2.850
                                                      (1.93)                      (1.09)                      (1.52)
log (Loan Maturity)                                 0.251***                     0.146**                     0.198***
                                                      (3.02)                      (2.52)                      (3.80)
Bank HHIt-1 x log(Loan Maturity)                      -0.904                      -0.347                      -0.405
                                                      (1.64)                      (0.92)                      (1.25)
Other Bank Controls                                    Yes                         Yes                          Yes
Other Loan Controls                                    Yes                         Yes                          Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                                  Yes                         Yes                          Yes
Observations                                        1,134,688                    257,536                     226,037
R2                                                    78.6%                       83.1%                       82.5%
Panel D: Loan Interest Rates, 2012-2017 Sample
Bank HHIt-1                                     5.033**                            6.504                      4.078
                                                 (2.20)                           (1.63)                      (1.09)
log (Loan Maturity)                             0.639***                         0.297**                      0.226*
                                                 (3.83)                           (2.51)                      (1.81)
Bank HHIt-1 x log(Loan Maturity)               -2.271***                         -1.200**                     -0.762
                                                 (3.22)                           (2.03)                      (1.27)
Other Bank Controls                                Yes                              Yes                        Yes
Other Loan Controls                                Yes                              Yes                        Yes
State x Quarter Fixed Effects                      Yes                              Yes                        Yes
Observations                                    282,627                           72,640                      59,439
R2                                               35.8%                            28.9%                       31.0%




                                                                45
                           Table A4: Bank Deposit Concentration, Loan Maturity, and
                                       Loan Interest Rates: by Bank Size
Panels A and B report the results of the OLS analysis following regression equation (2), where the dependent
variable is (log) loan maturity. Panels C and D report the results following regression equation (3), where the
dependent variable is loan interest rate. Bank HHI is a weighted average of Branch HHIs across all counties where a
given bank operates. Each column reports the results of analysis when the sample loans are confined to one lender
size category. Loan controls include the (log of) loan size; the bank's assessment of borrower risk; an indicator for
loans with pre-payment penalties; and an indicator for secured loans. Bank controls are log of total assets and its
square, return on assets (net income/assets), C&I loans/assets, (cash + securities)/assets, mortgage loans/assets,
trading assets/assets, consumer loans/assets, non-performing loans/assets, equity/assets, and deposits/assets. Standard
errors are clustered at bank level. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*' denotes significance at the 10% level,
'**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level.


                                                        <$50 billion banks                >=$50 billion banks

Panel A: Log(Days to Maturity), 1997-2017 Sample
Bank HHIt-1                                                   0.965**                            2.949***
                                                               (2.22)                              (4.40)
Other Bank Controls                                              Yes                                 Yes
Other Loan Controls                                              Yes                                 Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                                            Yes                                 Yes
Observations                                                  674,009                            944,252
 2                                                              4.6%                                5.9%
R
Panel B: Log(Days to Maturity), 2012-2017 Sample
Bank HHIt-1                                                   0.603                              3.279***
                                                              (0.82)                               (3.50)
Other Bank Controls                                            Yes                                  Yes
Other Loan Controls                                            Yes                                  Yes
State x Quarter Fixed Effects                                  Yes                                  Yes
Observations                                                  96,531                             318,157
R2                                                            21.7%                               10.2%
Panel C: Loan Interest Rates, 1997-2017 Sample
Bank HHIt-1                                                     0.045                             2.263*
                                                               (0.03)                              (1.79)
log (Loan Maturity)                                            0.088*                            0.306***
                                                               (1.88)                              (3.90)
Bank HHIt-1 x log(Loan Maturity)                               -0.015                            -1.045**
                                                               (0.06)                              (2.39)
Other Bank Controls                                              Yes                                Yes
Other Loan Controls                                              Yes                                Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                                            Yes                                Yes
Observations                                                  674,009                            944,252
R2                                                             76.1%                              78.8%
Panel D: Loan Interest Rates, 2012-2017 Sample
Bank HHIt-1                                                    0.898                            15.941***
                                                              (0.25)                               (2.84)
log (1+Loan Maturity)                                          0.149                             0.836***
                                                              (0.94)                               (3.03)
Bank HHIt-1 x log(Loan Maturity)                              -0.181                            -3.686***
                                                              (0.20)                               (2.99)
Other Bank Controls                                             Yes                                 Yes
Other Loan Controls                                             Yes                                 Yes
State x Quarter Fixed Effects                                   Yes                                 Yes
Observations                                                  96,531                             318,157
 2                                                            23.7%                               20.6%
R




                                                                   46
                          Table A5: Bank Deposit Concentration, Loan Maturity, and
                                     Loan Interest Rates: Pre- vs Post-Crisis
Panel A the results of the OLS analysis following regression equation (2), where the dependent variable is
(log) loan maturity. Panel B reports the results following regression equation (3), where the dependent variable
is loan interest rate. Bank HHI is a weighted average of Branch HHIs across all counties where a given bank
operates. Loan controls include the (log of) loan size; the bank's assessment of borrower risk; an indicator for
loans with pre-payment penalties; and an indicator for secured loans. Bank controls are log of total assets and
its square, return on assets (net income/assets), C&I loans/assets, (cash + securities)/assets, mortgage
loans/assets, trading assets/assets, consumer loans/assets, non-performing loans/assets, equity/assets, and
deposits/assets. Standard errors are clustered at bank level. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*' denotes
significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level.


                                                       1997-2007 Sample                 2008-2017 Sample

Panel A: Log(Days to Maturity)
Bank HHIt-1                                                   0.842**                        2.090***
                                                               (2.04)                          (3.01)
Other Bank Controls                                             Yes                             Yes
Other Loan Controls                                             Yes                             Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                                           Yes                             Yes
Observations                                                  859,167                         759,094
R2                                                             3.5%                            6.5%
Panel B: Loan Interest Rates
Bank HHIt-1                                                    0.189                          6.543**
                                                               (0.20)                          (2.15)
log (Loan Maturity)                                            0.049                         0.462***
                                                               (1.63)                          (3.53)
Bank HHIt-1 x log(Loan Maturity)                               0.096                         -1.723**
                                                               (0.70)                          (2.37)
Other Bank Controls                                             Yes                             Yes
Other Loan Controls                                             Yes                             Yes
Quarter Fixed Effects                                           Yes                             Yes
Observations                                                  859,167                         759,094
R2                                                             74.7%                           36.1%




                                                         47
