                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 OUTPUT AND ATTRIBUTE-BASED CARBON REGULATION UNDER UNCERTAINTY

                                         Ryan Kellogg

                                      Working Paper 26172
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26172


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




This paper has benefited from comments and suggestions from conference and seminar audiences
at the AERE Summer Conference, Columbia, the Energy Institute at Haas Energy Camp, the
Maryland Workshop on Environmental Taxes, Stanford, and UCSD. I thank Benjamin Leard,
Joshua Linn, and Virginia McConnell for kindly sharing their data on U.S. fleet-average vehicle
attributes. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ryan Kellogg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Output and Attribute-Based Carbon Regulation Under Uncertainty
Ryan Kellogg
NBER Working Paper No. 26172
August 2019
JEL No. D81,Q54,Q58

                                            ABSTRACT

Output-based carbon regulations--such as fuel economy standards and the rate-based standards
in the Clean Power Plan--create well-known incentives to inefficiently increase output. Similar
distortions are created by attribute-based regulations. This paper demonstrates that, despite these
distortions, output and attribute-based standards can always yield greater expected welfare than
"flat" emission standards given uncertainty in demand for output (or attributes), assuming locally
constant marginal damages. For fuel economy standards, the welfare-maximizing amount of
attribute or mileage-basing is likely small relative to current policy. For the electricity sector,
however, an intensity standard may yield greater expected welfare than a flat standard.


Ryan Kellogg
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
1307 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kelloggr@uchicago.edu




A data appendix is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26172

A repository with all code and a link to all data is available at
https://github.com/kelloggrk/Public_OutputBasedRegs
1     Introduction

Environmental economists have long extolled the virtues of Pigouvian taxation or cap-
and-trade pollution permit systems as efficient public policies for correcting environmen-
tal externalities, and especially for addressing carbon emissions. While such programs
have begun to appear--the European Union's and California's cap-and-trade programs and
British Columbia's carbon tax are notable examples--many policies in practice deviate from
economists' favorite prescription. In the United States, carbon regulations frequently ex-
press the maximum permissible quantity of emissions (or minimum permissible quantity of a
"clean" input) as a function of the output of an underlying good or of attributes such as the
good's size or weight. For instance, state-level renewable portfolio standards mandate that
renewable electricity generation meet a minimum share of total generation (or capacity), fuel
economy standards mandate a maximum amount of fuel use in proportion to vehicle miles
traveled, and the Obama Clean Power Plan allowed states to regulate CO2 emissions as a
proportion of total electricity generation.
    Output-based standards generate well-understood incentives to distort output, as first
recognized in Kwoka (1983). Holland, Hughes, and Knittel (2009) makes this point clearly in
the context of California's Low Carbon Fuel Standard, an intensity standard on the embodied
carbon in transportation fuel that creates an incentive to produce more fuel overall, since
doing so slackens the constraint on CO2 emissions. This intuition applies broadly. Fuel
economy standards, for example, lead to the well-known "rebound effect" that causes an
increase in vehicle miles traveled (see Gillingham (forthcoming) for a survey of the recent
literature on rebound). As for settings where the emissions standard is a function of goods'
attributes rather than output, Ito and Sallee (2018) shows that basing fuel economy standards
on vehicles' weight or footprint results in inefficiently over-sized vehicles.
    In this paper, I ask whether output or attribute-based emissions regulation can actually
be economically advantageous relative to a "flat" emissions standard in the presence of
uncertainty about future abatement costs. The intuition is straightforward. Under cap-and-

                                                1
trade, the quantity of emissions is fixed so that shocks, whether to demand or supply for
the underlying good, or to abatement cost itself, cause fluctuations in marginal abatement
cost. Assuming that the marginal damage from carbon emissions is locally constant--a
reasonable assumption for a global stock pollutant like CO2 (Newell and Pizer 2003)--this
variation reduces welfare relative to the first-best, following the arguments from Weitzman
(1974). Output or attribute-based regulations can dampen these marginal abatement cost
fluctuations and their associated welfare losses because emissions are allowed to vary as
shocks occur.1
       Can the flexibility benefits from output or attribute-based standards outweigh the welfare
losses from the distortions that they impose? To the best of my knowledge, this question
has not been addressed despite the ubiquity of these policies. Holland, Hughes, and Knittel
(2009) briefly notes that intensity standards may yield welfare benefits in an uncertain envi-
ronment, but because the model in that paper is deterministic it does not explore this point
in depth. Similarly, Anderson and Sallee (2016) and Ito and Sallee (2018) raise but do not
answer the question of whether attribute-based fuel economy standards are advantageous
relative to a non-attribute-based standard in the presence of uncertainty.
       I begin by building a partial equilibrium model in which there is a single good, the
production or consumption of which is associated with CO2 emissions. CO2 emissions have
a constant external marginal cost as well as private costs and benefits (e.g., increases in
emissions may be associated with larger fuel costs and lower expenditures on energy-efficient
capital). Consumers and producers in equilibrium choose both the emissions level and either
the good's quantity or the value of one of its attributes. The model can therefore address
emissions standards that are a function of output (like the Low Carbon Fuel Standard)
and standards that are a function of an attribute (like footprint-based U.S. fuel economy
standards). Thus, output and attribute-based standards are in fact conceptually equivalent,
a point that has gone unnoticed in prior work.
   1
    Compliance flexibility was, in fact, one of the justifications offered for the U.S. footprint-based fuel
economy standards. See, for instance, Lutsey (2015).


                                                     2
       Agents' demand for output and emissions in the model is affected by two exogenous
shocks that are uncertain when the regulator sets its policy. First, there may be direct
shocks to marginal abatement cost--agents' willingness to pay for emissions reductions--
holding output (or attributes) fixed. Fuel prices are perhaps the most salient example of
this form of uncertainty. Second, there may be shocks to the marginal value of the good's
output or attribute, holding emissions fixed. For instance, income shocks may lead agents
to want to consume more electricity, more miles traveled, or larger vehicles. These shocks
lead indirectly to uncertainty about marginal abatement cost, since marginal abatement cost
typically increases with output, holding emissions fixed.
       Under a flat emissions standard, either form of uncertainty leads to an expected welfare
loss relative to the first-best, since marginal abatement cost diverges from marginal dam-
age. The first-best welfare outcome can be achieved by a Pigouvian tax or by an emissions
standard that is indexed directly to the exogenous source of uncertainty (gasoline prices,
for example, as shown in Kellogg (2018)).2 But what happens to expected welfare if the
emissions standard is instead a function of the endogenously-determined output or attribute
of the good, as is common in current policy?
       I show that the welfare properties of output or attribute-based standards depend crucially
on which type of uncertainty is present. If uncertainty is due only to shocks to marginal
abatement cost, basing an emissions standard to the good's output or attributes always
strictly reduces welfare relative to a flat standard. This result is a generalization of the
finding in Kellogg (2018) that an attribute-based fuel economy standard strictly reduces
welfare when the only source of uncertainty is the future price of gasoline. The intuition
for this result stems from the fact that both the welfare cost of the distortion to the good's
output or attribute and the welfare benefit from increased flexibility are second-order. I
show that the former effect dominates.
   2
    Pizer and Prest (2016) shows that the first-best outcome can also potentially be achieved using a non-
indexed emissions standard with retroactive quantity updating and banking and borrowing provisions that
extend beyond the policy revision horizon.



                                                    3
   When there are shocks to the marginal value of output, however, expected welfare can
always be strictly increased by at least a small amount of output-basing (the same argument
holds for attributes). This result is driven by the fact that the flexibility benefits of an
output-based standard are now first-order, while the welfare costs of the induced distortions
remain second-order. I show that the optimal amount of output-basing increases with: (1)
uncertainty in future output (relative to the magnitude of the unpriced externality); (2) the
extent to which emissions are affected by output shocks in the absence of regulation; and (3)
the inelasticity of output with respect to the good's cost. It is, moreover, possible that an
intensity standard--an emissions standard that is a linear rather than merely affine function
of output--yields greater expected welfare than a flat standard.
   Is this possibility result important in practice? I quantitatively evaluate the welfare ef-
fects of output and attribute-standards by calibrating the model to three policy settings:
(1) an attribute-based fuel economy standard (holding miles traveled fixed); (2) a fuel econ-
omy standard with endogenous miles traveled (holding vehicle attributes fixed); and (3) an
output-based CO2 standard for electric generation. In each case, I calibrate the model using
estimates from previous studies, and I estimate uncertainty in the net demand for output
and attributes using their historic volatility.
   I find that, even with generous parameter assumptions and estimates of uncertainty
in the demand for vehicle size, the U.S. footprint-based fuel economy standard yields lower
expected welfare than a "flat" non-attribute based standard, and that the welfare-maximizing
footprint-based standard is nearly flat. Similarly, when I treat miles driven as endogenous,
I find that a regulation imposing a ceiling on total gasoline consumption yields greater
expected welfare than a fuel economy standard. These results are mostly driven by the
fact that uncertainty about the future demand for miles traveled, and especially about the
demand for vehicle size, is fairly small.
   In contrast, I find that the welfare-maximizing emissions standard for the U.S. electricity
market is substantially output-based. Depending on parameter inputs, an intensity standard


                                                  4
may even deliver greater expected welfare than a flat standard. This result is driven by the
large uncertainty about the future demand for electric power and by the fact that emissions
vary substantially with output shocks. These industry features are also documented in
Borenstein et al. (forthcoming), which finds substantial uncertainty in the future business-
as-usual emissions path for California's electricity sector.
       My result that output and attribute-based standards can increase expected welfare re-
lates to other work that has raised normative justifications for intensity standards. Holland
(2012) and Fowlie, Reguant, and Ryan (2016), for instance, show that in the presence of
market power or unregulated emissions in substitute sectors, intensity standards can welfare-
dominate a flat standard (or a Pigouvian tax), since the implied subsidy to output mitigates
the pre-existing market distortions. This paper can be viewed as an extension of this second-
best logic to settings where flat standards (though not Pigouvian taxes) fail to achieve the
first-best due to uncertainty in the economic environment.
       This paper also relates to previous research that has studied intensity targets. Ellerman
and Wing (2003), Quirion (2005), Newell and Pizer (2008), Heutel (2012), and Zhao (2018)
consider the consequences of indexing aggregate CO2 emission limits to GDP and conclude
that indexing can improve expected welfare relative to a non-indexed policy.3 This literature,
unlike the modeling framework I develop here, models intensity targets such that they do
not generate output distortions. Zhao (2018), for instance, models a policy that adjusts
an aggregate emissions cap each year in response to GDP shocks but is implemented as
a standard cap-and-trade program, so that firms do not have an incentive to distort their
output. Such a policy would dominate the distortion-inducing regulations that I model here.
In practice, however, emissions standards are overwhelmingly indexed to quantities and
attributes that are manipulable by firms or consumers rather than to exogenous variables
such as GDP or fuel prices. Renewable portfolio standards, energy efficiency standards, fuel
   3
    Indexed regulation is not always superior to non-indexed regulation in these papers because they model
either an upward-sloping marginal damage function (appropriate for local pollutants or for global, long-run
CO2 regulation) or noise in GDP measurements that is not associated with emissions.



                                                    5
economy standards, the Clean Power Plan, and California's Low Carbon Fuel Standard all
generate incentives to distort output or goods' attributes.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the modeling framework, and then
section 3 delivers the main theoretical results of the paper: output or attribute-based emis-
sions standards never increase expected welfare when only the marginal abatement cost is
uncertain, but they do improve welfare relative to a "flat" standard when the marginal value
of output (or an attribute) is uncertain. Section 4 examines the quantitative implications of
this result in three policy applications. Section 5 concludes.



2     Model setup

This section introduces the model that I use throughout the paper. The model is similar
to that in my previous work on fuel economy and gasoline price uncertainty (Kellogg 2018).
Because the main objective of the model is to distill intuition, I abstract away from other
potential market failures such as market power, emissions leakage, or incomplete information.
    The model considers a single carbon-emitting good that is supplied by competitive firms
and demanded by price-taking, fully-informed consumers. In what follows, I frequently refer
to firms and consumers collectively as "agents". The exposition below is framed in terms of
agents' choices over the good's quantity, but with a simple re-labeling (replace every "Q"
with an "A"), the model could instead apply to choices over one of the good's attributes.


2.1    Private agents' supply, demand, and equilibrium

The good's overall output (and consumption) is given by Q, and CO2 emissions are denoted
by E . Agents' choices of Q and E are affected by two additional variables:  and F . 
denotes factors that shift preferences for (or costs of) additional output Q, and F denotes
factors that affect the private costs of additional emissions E .
    The model is designed to be as general as possible regarding the specific objects rep-


                                               6
resented by Q, E ,  , and F . But to briefly fix ideas, the three applications considered in
section 4 will use them to represent:

   1. Attribute-based fuel economy standards: Q denotes the average footprint of
         vehicles sold, E denotes the average fuel economy of vehicles sold,  represents taste
         or income shocks that affect the marginal value of footprint, and F denotes the price
         of fuel. Miles traveled are fixed.

   2. Fuel economy standards with endogenous miles traveled: Q denotes average
         lifetime miles traveled per vehicle, E denotes lifetime average gasoline use per vehicle,
          represents taste or income shocks that affect the marginal value of driving, and F
         denotes the price of fuel. Vehicle attributes are fixed.

   3. Electricity generation: Q denotes total electricity consumption, E denotes total
         CO2 emissions,  represents taste or income shocks that affect the marginal value
         of electricity, and F denotes the relative price of high-emission versus low-emission
         generation fuels.

       Similar to Kellogg (2018), I posit a private net benefits function B (Q, E, , F ) that cap-
tures the difference between consumers' utility (not including any externalities) and firms'
production cost. I assume that B (Q, E, , F ) is twice continuously differentiable and, in
the spirit of Weitzman (1974), that it can be well-approximated by a second-order Taylor
expansion. This assumption substantially enhances the analytic tractability of the model,
and I maintain it throughout the paper. I show in appendix B that B (Q, E, , F ) can be
micro-founded as a summation of individual agents' private benefit functions, and that it will
be a sufficient statistic for utilitarian total private welfare under the regulations I consider
given: (1) restrictions on heterogeneity in agents' valuations of Q and E ; (2) inclusion of
compliance credit trading in any emissions standard; and (3) equal and constant marginal
utility of income (and welfare weights) across all agents.4
   4
    The last of these restrictions rules out distributional preferences as a rationale for output or attribute-
based policies.


                                                      7
       I assume that there are diminishing net returns to both Q and E so that, letting BQQ
and BEE represent the second derivatives of the net benefit function, BQQ < 0 and BEE < 0.
For example, consumers receive declining marginal utility from miles driven, and reducing
vehicles' fuel use per mile becomes increasingly costly as vehicles become more and more
fuel efficient. I also assume that the cross-partial BQE  0 to reflect the fact that in most
applications, reducing emissions is more costly when Q is large.
       I define  and F so that BQ > 0, BQF = 0, BE = 0, and BEF < 0.  should be
thought of as an income or preference shock that affects demand for Q, though it could also
represent a marginal production cost shifter. F should be thought of as the price (= marginal
cost) of carbon-intensive fuel, where increased fuel prices decrease the net marginal benefit
from emissions. It could also, in principle, represent the state of firms' emissions control
technology. The restriction that F does not directly affect the demand for Q is consistent
with an assumption that consumers have quasilinear utility in fuel expenditures.5
       Absent regulation, agents in equilibrium will choose Q and E so that the private first-
order conditions (FOCs) are satisfied: UQ (Q, E, , F ) = 0 and UE (Q, E, , F ) = 0. In
addition to the assumptions above, sufficient conditions for an interior equilibrium are: (1)
BQ (0, E, , F ) > 0 and BE (Q, 0, , F ) > 0 (i.e., consumers' marginal utilities of Q and E
at zero are strictly greater than firms' marginal costs); and (2) satisfaction of the second-
                                 2
order condition (SOC) BQQ BEE - BQE > 0. In addition, application of the implicit function
theorem yields the comparative statics dQ/d > 0, dQ/dF  0, dE/d  0, and dE/dF < 0,
with all inequalities strict iff BQE > 0.6
   5
    The quasilinearity assumption is common in empirical vehicle fuel economy choice models, such as Busse,
Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013), Allcott and Wozny (2014), and Sallee, West, and Fan (2016).
  6
    Formulas for these derivatives are derived and presented in appendix A.




                                                    8
2.2       The externality and regulatory responses

The total external cost of emissions is given by E , so that marginal damage is equal to
, a constant that is proportional to the social cost of carbon.7 The full-information social
planner's problem is then given by:


                                       max B (Q, E, , F ) - E                                           (1)
                                        Q,E



       The planner's FOCs are given by BQ (Q, E, , F ) = 0 and BE (Q, E, , F ) = ,8 and the
SOC is identical to that in the private agents' problem. Intuitively, the planner's solution
involves a lower E than the private optimum, and then conditional on the choice of E the
planner chooses the same Q as private agents.
       I model the regulator's problem in two stages. In the first stage, the regulator must
commit to a policy without knowing what the realized values of  and F will be in the second
stage (the parameters governing the benefits function are, however, common knowledge).
V ( ) and W (F ) denote the regulator's stage 1 rational beliefs about the distributions of
 and F , which have support on [L , H ] and [FL , FH ], respectively. I denote the density
functions by v ( ) and w(F ), and I denote the expected values of  and F by       ¯ . Then
                                                                            ¯ and F
in stage 2 agents choose Q and E given the policy and the realized  and F . I model stage 2
as a single compliance period, though it would be straightforward to the extend the model
to multiple compliance periods, each with a different realization of  and F .
   7
     Per Weitzman (1974), and as in Kellogg (2018), the results of the paper are unchanged if  is defined as
the expected value of uncertain marginal damages, so long as the stochastic component of marginal damage
is uncorrelated with  or F . In this case, what the paper describes as "first-best" is first-best subject to
incomplete information about marginal damage.
   8
     I assume that BE (Q, 0, , F ) > , so that the planner's problem has an interior solution.




                                                     9
3     When do output and attribute-based standards im-

      prove expected welfare?

It is easy to show that a Pigouvian tax  on emissions E achieves the full-information first-
best, since in that case the agents' welfare maximization problem is identical to that of
the social planner. What if a tax policy is not available, and the regulator must instead
use an emissions standard? This section considers the welfare effects of an output-based
standard, in which emissions E are constrained to lie below a function µ(Q) of output. I
focus attention on affine output-based standards µ(Q) = µ0 + Q, which encompass "flat"
standards whenever  = 0 and intensity standards whenever µ0 = 0 and  > 0.
    What are the welfare-maximizing levels of µ0 and  ? In particular, is the optimal reg-
ulation output-based, so that  > 0? I first show that if there is only uncertainty over F ,
then optimal regulation requires  = 0. The argument follows that in Kellogg (2018) for
why attribute-based fuel economy standards are never optimal in the face of gasoline price
uncertainty. The heart of this section of the paper then considers regulation when there is
uncertainty over  . I show that the welfare-maximizing value of  is generically non-zero
and will be strictly greater than zero unless  and F have a large positive correlation.


3.1     Optimal standards under uncertainty in F

Suppose that  is fixed and known by the regulator in period 1, so that there is no uncertainty
in the marginal value of Q (I henceforth suppress  in the notation for the remainder of this
subsection). What are the welfare-maximizing regulatory parameters µ0 and  ?9 It is useful
to begin by building intuition for agents' choices of Q and E in the absence of regulation.
Appendix A provides formal comparative statics for how Q and E vary with F , and these
relationships are illustrated by the upward-sloping line in Q-E space in figure 1, panel (a).
   9
     This subsection closely follows section 6 in Kellogg (2018), replacing a from that paper with Q, and
replacing G with F .




                                                   10
Intuitively, both output and emissions decrease as F rises from FL to FH .10
      At the social optimum, agents internalize the externality . The effects of doing so on Q
and E are equivalent to an increase in F , so the socially optimal Q and E , for a given value
of F , are simply given by a southwestward shift away from the agents' preferred Q and E
along the choice line in figure 1, panel (a).
      Figure 1, panel (b) imposes a "flat" non-output-based standard that is optimally set
                                ^ (µ ). Following Kellogg (2018), the optimality of
at µ0 = µ and binds whenever F  F
µ implies that it satisfies the FOC that its marginal compliance cost, conditional on the
standard binding, equals marginal external damage. Formally, µ satisfies:

                                       ^ (µ )
                                       F
                             1
                                                BE (Q(µ , F ), µ , F )w(F )dF = .                    (2)
                            ^
                         W (F (µ ))   FL



      Note that when the flat µ standard binds, agents' choice of Q is always given by Q , as
shown in figure 1, panel (b), regardless of the realization of F .11 Equivalently, the level set
of agents' private welfare B (Q, E, F ) that corresponds to agents' optimal choice of Q and E
                                                                                        ^.
when constrained by the standard always has a point of tangency at (Q , µ ) for any F < F
      Panels (c) and (d) of figure 1 illustrate agents' choices under an output-based standard
that rotates the flat µ standard around the point (Q , µ ). When  > 0, agents' choices
of Q and E now vary with F when the standard binds, since increasing Q allows agents to
increase E . The covariance between Q and F is proportional to  (see appendix A for formal
comparative statics), so that little variation in Q and E is induced when  is small (panel
(c) of figure 1), but variation in Q and E is substantial when  is large (panel (d)).
 10
      Q and E are affine in F under the second-order Taylor expansion assumption from section 2.1.
 11
      This result follows from the construction that BQF = 0.




                                                      11
        Figure 1: Agents' choices, social optima, and regulations under uncertainty in F

 (a) Agents' unrestricted choices and social optima                                     (b) Optimal flat standard
    E                                                                       E
                                                                                Level set for a particular 
                                                                                                   
                                                                                realization of F < F
                                                Agents' unconstrained                                             Agents' unconstrained
                                                choices as function of F                                          choices as function of F
                                                (slope = -BQQ / BQE)                              
         Socially optimal                                                                         
         choices as a
         function of F                                                      *                                            Standard = *
                                      : choice at FL
                                                                                            
                                      : choice at FH                                                          Agents' choice when
                                     
                                      : social optimum at FL                                                                       )
                                                                                                              constraint binds (F  F
                                                                                                              Choices when constraint
                                       : social optimum at FH
                                                                                                                                )
                                                                                                              doesn't bind (F > F
                                                                                      

                                                                   Q                             Q*                                    Q



           (c) Slightly output-based regulation                                   (d) Heavily output-based regulation
    E                                                                       E
        Level set for a particular                                              Level set for a particular 
                           
        realization of F < F                                                                       
                                                                                realization of F < F
                                                Agents' unconstrained                                             Agents' unconstrained
                                                choices as function of F                                          choices as function of F
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  


   *                                                                        *
   0                                                                                        
                                          Agents' choices when                                                Agents' choices when
                                                               )
                                          constraint binds (F  F            0                                                      )
                                                                                                              constraint binds (F  F
                                          Choices when constraint                                             Choices when constraint
                                                            )
                                          doesn't bind (F > F                                                                   )
                                                                                                              doesn't bind (F > F
                                                                                      

                            Q*                                     Q                             Q*                                    Q



Note: Q denotes the good's output (or an attribute), and E denotes emissions. When unconstrained by
regulation, agents' choices lie on the thin upward-sloping black line between the points XL and XH , where a
lower realized fuel price F leads to higher choices of Q and E . The socially optimal set of outcomes is given
                                                                                                
by a southwestward shift along this line, so that socially optimal choices lie between XL and XH  . FL and FH
denote the lowest and highest possible fuel prices, respectively. The output-based standard µ(Q) = µ0 + Q
binds only for fuel prices less than F^ (µ0 ,  ). See text for details.



    The optimal values for µ0 and  come from solving the regulator's problem:

                             ^ (µ0 , )
                             F
                 max                     (B (Q(µ0 , , F ), E (µ0 , , F ), F ) - E (µ0 , , F )) w(F )dF
                 µ0 ,       FL
                                  FH
                        +                    (B (Q(F ), E (F ), F ) - E (F )) w(F )dF.                                                  (3)
                                 ^ (µ0 , )
                                 F

                                                                       12
       The FOCs are given by (4) and (5) below, where the notation suppresses the dependence
of BQ , BE , dQ/dµ0 , dQ/d , dE/dµ0 , and dE/d on µ0 ,  , and F :

                              ^ (µ0 , )
                              F
                                               dQ       dE    dE
                   FOCµ0 :                BQ       + BE     -         w(F )dF = 0;                  (4)
                             FL                dµ0      dµ0   dµ0
                              ^ (µ0 , )
                              F
                                               dQ      dE   dE
                    FOC :                 BQ      + BE    -          w(F )dF = 0.                   (5)
                             FL                d       d    d

       I show in appendix C that FOCs (4) and (5) reduce to:

                                               ^
                                        F (µ0 , )
                  -(BQE  + BQQ )                             ^ (µ0 ,  ) - F ) w(F )dF = 0;
       FOCµ0 :                                     + BEF (F                                         (6)
               BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ FL
                 W (F ^ )(BQE  + BQQ )
        FOC :                           (2 - BEF  2
                                                    F2
                                                       c ) = 0,                                     (7)
               (BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ )2

             2                                                            12
       where F c is the variance of F conditional on the standard binding.

                                                                                     ^ at which
       FOCµ0 implies that the optimal value of µ0 should be such that the fuel price F
the standard just binds is invariant to  . Thus, the standards in panels (b), (c), and (d) of
figure 1 all intersect agents' unrestricted choice line at the same "pivot point" (Q , µ ).
       FOC is solved by setting  = 0 so that the optimal standard, when there is only
uncertainty in F , is flat rather than output-based.13 The intuition for this result flows from
the fact that output-based regulation's welfare effects stemming from both the distortion to
Q and the flexibility in E are second-order in  . The argument for why the distortion to Q is
second-order is standard: output-based regulation's implicit subsidy to Q creates a Harberger
deadweight loss triangle (Ito and Sallee 2018). The flexibility benefit is also second-order
because: (1) the response of Q to shocks to F is proportional to  (as illustrated in figure 1,
panels (c) and (d)); and (2) changes in E are given by the product of  with changes in Q.
Thus, dE/dF is proportional to  2 (also see equation (29) in appendix A).
  12           2                ^ 
     That is, F  c  Var(F |F  F (µ )).
  13
      = -BQQ /BQE is also a solution to FOC . Kellogg (2018) shows, however, that only the  = 0 solution
satisfies the SOC, so long as µ0 is chosen optimally (guaranteeing that 2 > BEF
                                                                             2  2
                                                                                F c ).




                                                    13
3.2       Optimal standards under uncertainty in 

I now consider optimal regulation under uncertainty in the marginal value of Q, denoted
by  . This subsection assumes that F is fixed and known by the regulator; section 3.3 will
consider uncertainty in both  and F .
       As with subsection 3.1, it is helpful to begin here by building intuition for agents' equi-
librium choices of Q and E in the absence of regulation (the formal comparative statics are
ensconced in appendix A). These choices are illustrated in figure 2, panel (a). Both Q and
E increase with  , so that the line denoting agents' private choices is upward sloping in Q-E
space. However, this line has a flatter slope than was the case under uncertainty in F (figure
1); this result is a consequence of the fact that the uncertainty now directly affects Q rather
than E .14
       Under uncertainty in F , internalization of the externality  was isomorphic to an increase
in F . This relationship does not hold for  , so that the line denoting socially optimal Q and
E now sits below rather coincident with the line denoting agents' unconstrained choices, as
shown in figure 2, panel (a).
       Panel (b) of figure 2 illustrates an optimal flat standard, µ . The FOC that governs this
standard, given by equation (8) below, is similar to that of equation (2), which applied when
F was uncertain. ^ denotes the value of  at which the standard just binds:

                                          H
                               1
                                                 BE (Q(µ ,  ), µ ,  )v ( )d = .                   (8)
                                 (µ ))
                         1 - V (^        ^(µ )
                                         



       In panel (b) of figure 1, agents' choice of Q was fixed at Q whenever the standard bound,
regardless of the realization of F . In figure 2, panel (b), however, Q varies with  when the
standard is binding. Intuitively, increases in  (the marginal value of Q) lead agents to
increase Q in equilibrium, holding E fixed at µ . This variation in Q is important because
  14
    The slope dE/dQ induced by variation in  is -BQE /BEE , while the slope induced by variation in F
is -BQQ /BQE . The former slope is smaller assuming that the SOC for agents' interior private optimum,
             2
BQQ BEE - BQE   > 0, holds.



                                                     14
        Figure 2: Agents' choices, social optima, and regulations under uncertainty in 

 (a) Agents' unrestricted choices and social optima                                   (b) Optimal flat standard
    E                                                                    E                                                 
        Agents' unconstrained                                                Agents' unconstrained
        choices as function of                                               choices as function of 
                                                                                                                    
        (slope = -BQE / BEE)                                                                                        
                                               Socially optimal              Level set for a particular
                                               choices as a                  realization of  > 
                                               function of                                                          Standard = *
                                               (slope = -BQE / BEE)      *
                   
                                   : choice at L
                                                                                                          Agents' choices when
                                                                                                          constraint binds (   )
                                   : choice at H
                                                                                                          Choices when constraint
                                   : social optimum at L
                                                                                                          doesn't bind ( <  )
                                    : social optimum at H                        
                                                                Q                                                                  Q



               (c) Output-based regulation                                              (d) Intensity standard
    E                                                                    E                                                 
        Agents' unconstrained                                                Agents' unconstrained
        choices as function of                                               choices as function of 
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
        Level set for a particular                                           Level set for a particular
        realization of  >                                                    realization of  > 

   *                                                                     *
   0                                   Agents' choices when                                               Agents' choices when
                                       constraint binds (   )                                             constraint binds (   )
                                       Choices when constraint
                                       doesn't bind ( <  )                       
                                                                                 
                                                                Q                                                                  Q



Note: Q denotes the good's output (or an attribute), and E denotes emissions. When unconstrained by
regulation, agents' choices lie on the thin upward-sloping black line between the points XL and XH , where
a higher realization of  leads to higher choices of Q and E . The socially optimal set of outcomes is given
                                                                                               
by the lower, parallel green line, so that socially optimal choices lie between XL        and XH . L and H
denote the lowest and highest possible realized net demands for Q, respectively. The output-based standard
µ(Q) = µ0 + Q binds only for values of  greater than     ^(µ0 ,  ). See text for details.



it implies that under output-based regulation, variation in E will be first-order rather than
second-order in  . This fact gives rise to the main result of this section of the paper: under
uncertainty in  , the optimal value of  strictly exceeds zero.
    The regulator's FOCs for µ0 and  are given by equations (9) and (10) (suppressing the

                                                                    15
dependence of BQ , BE , dQ/dµ0 , dQ/d , dE/dµ0 , and dE/d on µ0 ,  , and  ):

                                H
                                             dQ        dE    dE
                    FOCµ0 :               BQ     + BE     -        v ( )d = 0;                     (9)
                               ^(µ0 , )      dµ0      dµ0    dµ0
                                H
                                             dQ       dE    dE
                     FOC :                BQ     + BE     -      v ( )d = 0.                      (10)
                               ^(µ0 , )      d        d     d

       I show in appendix D that FOCs (9) and (10) reduce to equations (11) and (12) below,
      2
where c denotes the variance of  conditional on the standard binding:

                                           H
              -(BQE  + BQQ )                         BQE + BEE 
FOCµ0 :                                                         BQ ( - ^(µ0 ,  )) +  v ( )d = 0;
            BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ          ^(µ0 , )   BQE  + BQQ
                                                                                                  (11)
                                                           2  2
                     (µ0 ,  )))(BQE  + BQQ )2 BQE + BEE  BQ
            (1 - V (^                                        c
 FOC :                                                   ·      +  = 0.                           (12)
                (BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ )2      BQE  + BQQ    2

       FOC 's solution requires a unique   (0, -BQE /BEE ).15 The optimal standard is there-
fore output-based, though the optimal slope   is always strictly less than the slope of the
line denoting agents' unconstrained choices in (Q, E ) space. The intuition that the flexibility
benefits of output-based regulation are now first-order is expressed formally by the term that
is not proportional to  inside the brackets in equation (12).
       An optimal output-based standard is depicted in panel (c) of figure 2. Visually, this
output-based standard does a better job of of minimizing the average (over v ( )) distance
between agents' induced choices and the social optima than does the flat standard in panel
(b). Also, this standard intersects agents' unconstrained choice line at a lower point than does
the flat standard. This intersection is governed by FOCµ0 (equation (11)), which requires
that ^ decrease as  increases.
  15
    For   [0, -BQE /BEE ], the term in FOC (12) to the left of the brackets is strictly negative due to
                                                                   2
the BQE  + BQQ term and to agents' private SOC, BQQ BEE - BQE         > 0. Inside the brackets, (BQE +
BEE  )/(BQE  + BQQ ) is strictly negative on [0, -BQE /BEE ) and approaches zero as   -BQE /BEE .
Thus, the left hand side of FOC is strictly positive at  = 0 and strictly negative at  = -BQE /BEE ,
implying an interior optimum. Furthermore, the optimal  is unique, since the derivative of the term in
brackets with respect to  is strictly positive for   (0, -BQE /BEE ).




                                                      16
       Figure 2 and equation (12) together also provide guidance on when a large degree of
output-basing (i.e., a large value of  ) will be welfare-maximizing. First, the optimal  , which
I denote   , increases with the ratio of the variance of output (driven by the BQ
                                                                                2 2
                                                                                  c term) to
the externality . Intuitively, output-basing is valuable when the uncertainty faced by the
regulator is economically large. Second,   is large when the rate at which unconstrained
agents vary E relative to Q in response to shocks to  (i.e., the slope -BQE /BEE ) is large,
since in this case output shocks can generate large changes in marginal abatement cost under
a flat standard. Third,   increases with the insensitivity of agents' choice of Q to changes
in the cost of Q (conditional on the variance of output), since an inelastic net demand for Q
implies small welfare losses from the distortion to Q induced by output-based regulation.16
       Finally, it is possible that   is so large that an intensity standard, which fixes µ0 = 0,
yields greater expected welfare than does a flat standard. For instance, figure 2, panel (d)
depicts an intensity standard that at least visually yields choices of Q and E that are closer
to the first-best than does a flat standard.


3.3       Uncertainty in both  and F

Finally, consider optimal output-basing when the regulator faces uncertainty in both  and
F . I show in appendix E that the sign of   is given by equation (13), assuming that the
uniqueness of the solution to the regulator's FOCs continues to hold:

                                                BQQ BEF          ^ (Ec [ ]))( - Ec [ ])] ,
         sign   = sign Ec [( - Ec [ ])2 ] -             Ec [(F - F                                      (13)
                                                BQE BQ

             ^ ( ) denotes the fuel price at which the standard just binds, given  , and Ec
       where F
denotes an expectation conditional on the standard binding.
  16
     To see this last result, note that the variance of output Q under the standard is equal to
 2 2
BQ c /(BEE  2 +2BQE  +BQQ )2 ,       using equation (26) from appendix A. The magnitude of the response of Q
to shocks to the cost of (or net demand for) Q decreases with the magnitude of BEE  2 +2BQE  + BQQ . Multi-
ply and divide the left term in brackets in equation (12) by (BEE  2 +2BQE  + BQQ )2 to see that, holding the
variance of output fixed, the welfare-maximizing  increases with the magnitude of BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ .



                                                     17
    If F is uncorrelated with  , then equation (13) indicates that sign   > 0, as was the case
in equation (12) with no uncertainty in F . If the covariance between  and F is positive
and sufficiently large relative to the variance of  , however, equation (13) shows that the
optimal value of  may be zero or even negative. Moving in the other direction, a negative
correlation between  and F implies an increase in   relative to the case when they are
uncorrelated.
    The intuition behind these results flows from the fact that when F is correlated with  , an
output-based standard provides a means for the regulator to index the standard to F . That
is, variation in output becomes a proxy for variation in F , so that an output-based standard
adds value by dampening variation in marginal abatement cost induced by shocks to F . For
instance, when  and F are negatively correlated, positive shocks to  are associated with
low fuel prices and therefore high marginal abatement costs. Expected welfare is therefore
increased by allowing agents to emit more pollution when there is high demand for output,
so that the optimal standard is heavily output-based. The reverse intuition holds when  and
F are positively correlated. These results are related to the fact that, in general, indexing
the emissions standard to any variable that is correlated with F (or to F itself, as discussed
in Kellogg (2018)) will improve expected welfare.



4     Output and attribute-based standards in three set-

      tings

Section 3 presented a model showing that output or attribute-based emissions standards
can increase expected welfare, relative to a flat standard, in the presence of uncertainty
about agents' future marginal valuation of output (or attributes). This section evaluates the
quantitative importance of this result by calibrating the model to reflect three U.S. policy
settings: (1) an attribute-based fuel economy standard (holding vehicle miles traveled fixed);
(2) a fuel economy standard in the presence of endogenously-chosen miles traveled (holding


                                              18
            Table 1: Interpretation of key variables in each application of the model
  Application                        Q                    E                                      F
  Footprint-based fuel            Vehicle             Gallons        Marginal value of        Gasoline
  economy standards            footprint (ft2 )    per 100 miles     footprint ($/ft2 )     price ($/gal)

  Fuel economy standard       Lifetime 1000s of   Lifetime gallons   Marginal value of        Gasoline
  with endogenous              miles traveled      consumed per       miles traveled        price ($/gal)
  miles traveled                 per vehicle           vehicle        ($/1000 miles)

  Output-based CO2               Electricity      CO2 emissions      Marginal value of       Negative of
  regulation of                  generation       (Mmtons/yr)           electricity          natural gas
  electricity generation         (TWh/yr)                             ($/TWh/yr)          price ($/mmBtu)

       Units: ft2 = square feet; gal = gallons; TWh/yr = Terawatt hours per year; Mmtons/yr = millions
       of metric tons per year; mmBtu = millions of British Thermal Units.



vehicle attributes fixed); and (3) an output-based CO2 standard for electric generation.17
Table 1 summarizes the interpretation of the variables Q, E ,  , and F in each application.
In each case, I use the model to evaluate the expected welfare obtained from both a flat
standard and an intensity standard, and I then compute the welfare-maximizing output or
attribute-based standard.
       In all three settings, I apply the modeling framework from sections 2 and 3 directly,
abstracting away from heterogeneity or other institutional features, and maintaining the
second-order Taylor approximation for B (Q, E, , F ). Consequently, the quantitative exer-
cises below should not be viewed as providing definitive answers but rather as providing
diagnostics for when heavily output or attribute-based standards might improve expected
welfare. These results can therefore guide future research that would more precisely model
the relevant agents and institutions in specific settings. In addition, the fidelity of these
exercises to the model helps to tightly link the results to the core intuition underlying the
model and to the comparative statics discussed at the end of section 3.2.
       In each setting, I allow for uncertainty in both  and F , even though volatility in F
  17
    Attribute-based fuel economy standards are properly modeled as an intensity standard (on fuel use as
a function of miles driven) that is in turn attribute-based. Modeling the dependence of a fuel use standard
on both miles driven and vehicle attributes simultaneously is beyond the scope of this paper; I therefore
model the mileage-based and footprint-based aspects of U.S. fuel economy standards one at a time rather
than jointly.


                                                     19
cannot on its own motivate output or attribute-based standards. Incorporating uncertainty
in F does, however, highlight the substantial difference between the first-best outcome and
outcomes under emissions standards (output-based or not) when fuel price uncertainty is
large, as it is in all three applications.18 I assume that the correlation between  and F is
zero, so that the welfare effects of output-basing are driven solely by the intuition presented
in section 3.2 rather than by the possibility that shocks to output act as a proxy for shocks
to fuel prices, as discussed in section 3.3. I do so for three reasons. First, my empirical
estimates of the correlation between  and F are imprecise because only limited time series
data are available to measure fluctuations in  . Yet at the same time, I find that even
modest correlation between  and F greatly affects the optimal amount of output-basing,
since expected welfare can be substantially increased by indexing the standard to  when it is
correlated with F .19 Second, estimates using longer time series suggest that the correlation
between broad economic shocks--the primary driver of  --and fuel price shocks is small.
Anderson, Kellogg, and Salant (2018), for instance, finds that the CAPM beta for the price
of crude oil is only 0.05, using monthly data from 1983 to 2015. Third, in practice I am
not aware of any emissions standard that is indexed directly to fuel prices. Thus, it seems
appropriate to eliminate this potential motivation for output-based standards here.
       In each of the three applications, quantifying welfare effects requires estimates of the
parameters governing B (Q, E, , F ), the externality , the uncertainty in  and F faced by
                   ¯ and E
the regulator, and Q     ¯ --the values of Q and E that would be chosen in the absence

of regulation at the expected values of  and F . To calibrate these values, I use estimates
  18
     When I run the models with a non-stochastic and constant fuel price, the welfare rankings of flat versus
intensity standards and the optimal output-based slopes  are qualitatively unchanged from those presented
below. The optimal slopes are 0.0081 gal/100mi/ft2 , 0.68 gal/100mi, and 0.36 Mmtons CO2 /TWh in the
footprint, miles traveled, and electricity applications, respectively. The expected welfare associated with
these optimal slopes is substantially larger, however, than what is presented below: $68/vehicle, $68/vehicle,
and $2.8 billion/year.
  19
     For instance, to estimate the correlation between  and F for the footprint-based standards application
in section 4.1, there exist only 14 observations of year-to-year first differences in footprints and the price
of gasoline. The estimated correlation coefficient is -0.34 but with a p-value of 0.23 (assuming spherical
disturbances). However, this correlation is large enough in magnitude to imply that a fuel economy standard
that is linear (not just affine) in footprint yields greater expected welfare than a flat standard, a result
markedly different than that given in figure 3 below.


                                                     20
from previous studies and my own estimates of the historic volatility of attributes, output,
and fuel prices. Where there are a range of plausible parameters that could be used, I select
parameters that favor more output or attribute-basing, since I am interested in assessing
whether substantially output or attribute-based standards might plausibly yield greater ex-
pected welfare than a flat standard. In particular, I will choose approaches that result in
large estimates of the long-run uncertainty in  .


4.1       Footprint-based fuel economy standards

I first consider U.S. footprint-based fuel economy standards, holding vehicle miles traveled
fixed. As shown in table 1, this model defines Q as vehicle footprint in square feet (ft2 ) and
E as vehicle fuel economy in gallons per 100 miles (gal/100mi). I measure private welfare
B (Q, E, , F ) as $ per vehicle, normalized to zero at agents' unconstrained choices at each
possible realization of  and F .
       Table 2 presents the calibrated parameter values for this application. My estimate of
BQQ comes from Ito and Sallee (2018), which estimates this parameter using changes in the
weight of Japanese vehicles following changes in Japan's weight-based fuel economy subsidies
in 2009 (I am not aware of any papers that estimate this parameter in the U.S. market). I
convert that paper's estimate of BQQ in $ per kg2 to $ per ft2 using engineering estimates
from Whitefoot and Skerlos (2012).20 I obtain BEE from National Research Council (2015),
which estimates "pathways" by which fuel economy can be improved via sequential addition
of fuel-saving technology to a baseline vehicle.21 And I derive BQE from the fact that the
actual slope parameter  for U.S. fuel economy regulations was drawn to match -BQE /BEE ,
  20
      Table 3, column (2) in Ito and Sallee (2018) provides an estimate of BQQ of -$0.230/kg2 . Whitefoot
and Skerlos (2012) finds that a 1 log point increase in footprint is associated with an increase of 0.53 to 1.31
log points in weight, depending on specification. I roughly split the difference and assume that weight and
footprint are 1:1 in logs. Finally, data provided by Leard, Linn, and McConnell (2017) indicate that in 2012,
the average U.S. vehicle had a footprint of 56.9ft2 and weighed 3,666lb. Multiplying Ito and Sallee (2018)'s
-$0.230/kg2 by the square of this weight-to-footprint ratio yields the BQQ of -$197/ft4 in table 2.
   21
      I follow the procedure discussed in Kellogg (2018) to derive BEE = -$1, 756 per (gallon/100 miles)2
from National Research Council (2015).




                                                      21
        Table 2: Calibrated parameters for U.S. footprint-based fuel economy standards
        Parameter   Value                      Main sources
        BQQ         -$197 / ft4                Ito and Sallee (2018), table 3, column (2)
        BEE         -$1756 / (gal/100mi)2      National Research Council (2015), tables 8.4a and 8.4b
        BQE         $77.9 / (gal·ft2 /100mi)   BEE times slope of U.S. footprint-based standard
        BEF         -115644 miles              Discounted vehicle lifetime from Busse et al. (2013)
        BQ          1                          normalization
        F           $0.35 / gal                historic volatility of gasoline prices
                    $76.83 / ft2               historic volatility of vehicle footprints
                    $486 / (gal/100mi)         Kellogg (2018) externality of $0.42/gal, converted to
                                               vehicle lifetime using Busse et al. (2013)



the rate at which private agents increase E with Q.22
       BEF in this application represents the (negative) lifetime discounted miles traveled for
new vehicles. I derive BEF = -115,644 miles using data from Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer
(2013) on fleet-average scrappage probabilities and miles traveled for new vehicles, along with
a discount rate of 6.2% from Allcott and Wozny (2014).23
       I capture uncertainty in  and F from the perspective of a regulator setting an emissions
standard that will apply for 10 years into the future. This approach is aligned with actual
U.S. fuel economy policy, as the standards set in 2012 will apply through at least 2021 and
possibly 2025 (see Kellogg (2018) for a discussion). I assume that  and F are normally
distributed, with the mean of F equal to the average retail gasoline price prevailing in 2012
of $3.69/gallon.24 , 25 The expected value of  is normalized to zero.
  22
      The original footprint-based regulation (71 FR 17565) states on p.17596 that "the agency adds fuel
saving technologies to each manufacturer's fleet until the incremental cost of improving its fuel economy
further just equals the incremental value of fuel savings and other benefits from doing so" for each vehicle
model, and then statistically fits a line to the resulting relationship between fuel use and footprint. This
slope from this line is exactly what is described by -BQE /BEE . The average slopes for 2017­2025 vehicles
in the final rule (77 FR 62623, p.62782) are 3.87g CO2 per ft2 for cars and 4.04g CO2 per ft2 for trucks.
Averaging these two values, applying the gasoline emissions factor of 8.91 kg CO2 per gallon (EIA 2011),
and multiplying by BEE yields the $77.9 / (gal·ft2 /100mi) in table 2.
   23
      I use the new vehicle data from Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013) that were originally sourced from
the National Highway Transportation Survey.
   24
      I use the tax-inclusive all grades and all formulations retail gasoline price series from the EIA (available
at https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet pri gnd dcus nus a.htm), deflated by the Bureau of Labor Statistic's
CPI for all urban consumers, all items less energy, not seasonally adjusted (series CUUR0000SA0LE), using
2012 as the base year.
   25
      A no-change forecast assumption is consistent with results on the relative accuracy of no-change forecasts
of the long-run real price of oil (Alquist, Kilian, and Vigfusson 2013) and relates to evidence that consumers
hold no-change beliefs about future gasoline prices (Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee 2013).


                                                       22
       To obtain an estimate of F , I estimate, over the ten-year regulatory horizon, the volatil-
ity of the three-year moving average of historic monthly U.S. gasoline prices.26 I use the
moving average rather than the raw monthly data because automakers can typically only
adjust their vehicles' fuel economy during a model "refresh", and a complete refresh cycle
usually takes three or four years.27 For each month t  [1, 120], I compute the historic
volatility of this moving average by taking the standard deviation of t-month differences in
the moving average.28 Volatility increases with the time horizon: the one-month volatility
is $0.02/gallon, while the ten-year volatility is $0.47/gallon. I set F equal to the average
volatility across all horizons t  [1, 120], yielding F = $0.35/gallon.29
       I identify  using the fact that under a flat fuel economy standard, the standard deviation
of Q is equal to BQ  /BQQ (see equation (26) in appendix A). I therefore adopt the
normalization BQ = 1 and obtain an estimate of  by estimating the volatility of vehicle
footprints, Q, over a ten-year horizon, using historic data on average U.S. vehicle footprints
from Leard, Linn, and McConnell (2017). Because these data are annual and only go back to
1996, it is not practical to estimate  by taking long differences, as I did for F .30 Instead, I
estimate one-year volatility in Q and then extrapolate that volatility over the ten-year policy
horizon under an assumption that  follows a random walk.31 This assumption will yield
larger estimates of volatility over long time horizons than would a model of mean-reversion.
Finally, I obtain  by averaging volatility over the 10 years.
  26
     The three-year moving average in each month t uses data from t and from the prior 35 months.
  27
     Were I to instead use the raw monthly data, I would instead estimate F = $0.65, in which case even
the optimally-set attribute-based standard would achieve a welfare gain of only $7 per vehicle. This optimal
standard is essentially flat, similar to the results below.
  28
     I use differences from January, 2004--the first month for which a ten-year difference can be calculated--
through 2012.
  29
     In principle, the calculations below of the optimal standards and their welfare outcomes should integrate
over welfare effects for each month in which the standard is applied, rather than be calculated from the
average volatility over this time. As in Kellogg (2018), I use the latter approach here because it is easier to
implement and because it more tightly connects to the model presented in sections 2 and 3.
  30
     In addition, I only use data through 2010, since after that time fuel economy standards for cars became
attribute based and started increasing in stringency.
  31
     Specifically, I take one-year differences in Q and obtain the one-year volatility of Q by estimating the
standard deviation    of these differences. I then extrapolate this volatility for each policy year t, t  [1, 10],
by multiplying by t.



                                                       23
       To obtain , I begin with the externality of $0.42/gal used in Kellogg (2018), which
combines the social cost of carbon from Interagency Working Group (2013) with an estimate
of the foreign oil dependency externality from Parry, Wells, and Harrington (2007). I convert
this value to units of $ per (gal/100mi) by multiplying by -BEF .
                         ¯ and E
       Finally, I obtain Q     ¯ using: (1) the U.S. average footprint and fuel economy in 2012

from Leard, Linn, and McConnell (2017); and (2) data from Leard and McConnell (2017) on
the shadow value of the 2012 fuel economy constraint.32 I can then use the model to back
                  ¯ and E
out the values of Q     ¯ .33

       Given these inputs, figure 3 presents footprint, fuel economy, and welfare outcomes under
                                                           ¯ E
various forms of fuel economy regulation. The "x" denotes (Q, ¯ ), and the  and F arrows

in the top-left of the figure indicate the magnitude and direction of changes in Q and E
induced by a one standard deviation increase in  and F , respectively. The representation
of agents' choices of Q and E when unconstrained by regulation now takes the form of an
ellipse rather than a line (as in figures 1 and 2), owing to the presence of uncertainty in
both  and F . The area encircled by the dashed black ellipse denotes agents' unconstrained
choices given realizations of  and F that account for 95% of their joint probability mass.
The lower dashed green ellipse indicates socially optimal choices. With the expected welfare
of unregulated agents normalized to zero, the welfare gain from a Pigouvian tax on emissions
is $68 per vehicle.
       The flat, solid black line (which is mostly hidden behind the red line) in figure 3 indicates
the optimal flat emissions standard. This standard binds somewhat more than half the time
                               ¯ E
(it is located slightly below (Q, ¯ )) and captures welfare gains of $33 per vehicle, just 48%

of the gain under the social option. This shortfall is a consequence of the large uncertainty
in F , which results in substantial expected variation in marginal abatement costs when the
  32
     Leard and McConnell (2017) use information on the price of tradeable fuel economy credits from Tesla
Motors' 2013 SEC 10-K filing.
  33
     Let Q0 and E0 denote the average 2012 footprint and fuel economy, and let 0 denote the shadow
value of the actual 2012 fuel economy standard. Define D = -(BEE 0 + BQE )/(BQE 0 + BQQ ). Then
¯ = E0 - 0 /(BEE + BQE D), and Q
E                                  ¯ = Q0 + (E¯ - E0 )D.



                                                   24
    Figure 3: Fuel economy, vehicle footprints, and welfare under footprint-based fuel
                                  economy standards




                                 5



                                        F
        Gallons per 100 miles




                                4.5




                                 4


                                                                       Expected welfare ($/vehicle)
                                                                      Expected unconstrained choice: $0
                                3.5                                   Unconstrained choices:         $0
                                                                      Socially optimal choices:      $68
                                                                      Optimal flat std:              $33
                                                                      Optimal intensity std:         $31
                                                                      Optimal footprint-based std:   $33
                                 3
                                 55.5       56   56.5            57             57.5       58          58.5
                                                        Footprint (square ft)

      Note: Expected welfare is normalized to zero for agents' unconstrained choices. Ellipses
      indicate agents' choices of footprints and fuel economy associated with realizations of  and
      F that lie on the iso-pdf of their bivariate normal distribution that encompasses 95% of the
      probability mass. The  and F arrows indicate the changes in footprint and fuel economy
      induced by a one standard deviation change in  and F when agents are unconstrained. See
      text for details.



standard binds.
   The optimal amount of attribute-basing is small: the optimal value of  is 0.008 gallons
per 100 miles per ft2 , equal to only 18% of the slope of the actual U.S. regulation. This
optimal attribute-based standard is given by the solid red line in figure 3. In addition, the
optimal intensity standard--represented by the dashed blue line--reduces welfare relative to
the flat standard (and has a slope 65% greater than the actual U.S. regulation).
   The limited value of attribute-based standards in this application is a consequence of

                                                               25
the small variance in  , the marginal value of vehicle footprint, relative to the magnitude
of the externality. As can be seen in figure 3, the variance of footprint Q when agents are
unconstrained is quite small in percentage terms (the scale of the horizontal axis in figure 3
visually exaggerates this variance).


4.2        Fuel economy standards with endogenous miles traveled

In this subsection, I fix vehicle attributes and instead let Q represent lifetime miles traveled
per vehicle. E now represents total lifetime gallons of gasoline consumed per vehicle, and
I continue to measure private welfare B (Q, E, , F ) as $ per vehicle, normalized to zero for
agents' unconstrained choices at each F and  .34
       To calibrate the values of BQQ , BQE , and BEE , I first rewrite B (Q, E, , F ) as a sum-
mation of objects that have empirical counterparts in the literature: the utility U (Q,  )
from miles traveled, fuel costs -EF , and the vehicle cost -C (E/Q). Thus, B (Q, E, , F ) =
U (Q,  ) - EF - C (E/Q).35 Taking derivatives then yields:36


                                 BQQ = UQQ - C E 2 Q-4 - 2C EQ-3                                           (14)

                                 BQE = C EQ-3 + C Q-2                                                      (15)

                                 BEE = -C Q-2                                                              (16)


       UQQ relates directly to the elasticity of miles traveled with respect to the price of gasoline
F , holding fuel economy constant, since in that case dQ/dF = E/(QUQQ ). I use an elasticity
  34
     More precisely, B (Q, E, , F ) denotes expected lifetime private welfare per vehicle at the time it is
purchased new, given a no-change forecast for future gasoline prices (Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee 2013)
and demand for miles ( ). Realized utility for each vehicle will be a function of realized shocks.
  35
     This formulation for B (Q, E, , F ) assumes that vehicle depreciation is entirely a function of time rather
than mileage. To the extent that depreciation is a function of miles driven (and consumers account for
depreciation when making driving choices), then a fuel economy policy behaves more like an emissions cap,
and in fact becomes equivalent to an emissions cap in the limit in which depreciation is solely a function of
mileage. I thank Mark Jacobsen for alerting me to this insight.
  36
     I assume that B (Q, E, , F ) is a second-order Taylor approximation local to the actual values of Q0 and
E0 for new U.S. vehicles in 2012. I use Q0 = 115, 644 miles, consistent with the value of -BEF from the
footprint-based regulation application in section 4.1. I calculate E0 as the product of Q0 with the 2012 U.S.
average fuel economy of 4.01 gallons per 100 miles from Leard, Linn, and McConnell (2017).


                                                      26
Table 3: Calibrated parameters for U.S. fuel economy standards with endogenous vehicle
                                    miles traveled
            Parameter   Value                    Main sources
            BQQ         -$14.96 / (1000mi)2      Gillingham (forthcoming)
            BEE         -$0.0013 / gallon2       BEE from table 2, scaled by vehicle lifetime miles
            BQE         $0.016 / (gal·1000mi)    BEE from table 2; Leard and McConnell (2017)
            BEF         -1                       by construction
            BQ          1                        normalization
            F           $0.35 / gal              historic volatility of gasoline prices
                        $55.50 / 1000mi          historic volatility of miles traveled
                        $0.42 / gallon           Kellogg (2018)

       Note: Calibration of BQQ , BQE , and BEE also uses vehicle lifetime mileage assumptions from
       Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013) and average 2012 U.S. fuel economy from Leard, Linn,
       and McConnell (2017). See text for details.



of -0.081 from Gillingham (forthcoming)'s recent survey of the literature on the rebound
effect.37
       C is the same object as BEE from the footprint application in table 2. I calculate C
using the equilibrium relationship that -C is equal to expected lifetime discounted fuel
costs plus the shadow value of the fuel economy standard. I obtain the 2012 shadow value
from Leard and McConnell (2017), and I calculate expected fuel costs as the product of Q
with the 2012 average retail gasoline price of $3.69/gallon. Together, the estimates of UQQ ,
C , and C yield the values of BQQ , BQE , and BEE shown in table 3. I follow Kellogg (2018)
in adopting the externality  = $0.42 per gallon.
       The calibration of F is the same as in the footprint-based standard application in section
4.1. To calibrate  , I use the fact that volatility in miles traveled induced by volatility in 
is given by dQ/d times  .38 I obtain historical data on average U.S. vehicle miles traveled
(VMT) from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.39 Because shocks to fuel prices F induce
  37
     Of the papers on the rebound effect that Gillingham (forthcoming) surveys, -0.081 is the average elasticity
among papers that use odometer readings as the primary data source.
  38                                  2
     dQ/d is given by -BQ /(BEE 0       + 2BQE 0 + BQQ ), as derived for constrained agents in appendix A,
equation (26), where 0 denotes the 2012 average fleet-wide fuel economy of 4.01 gallons per 100 miles.
  39
     Annual U.S. VMT data were accessed from https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TRFVOLUSM227NFWA
on 2 May, 2018. I use data from 1990­2010, during which time the U.S. fuel economy standard for passenger
cars was constant. To convert these data from total miles traveled to miles traveled per vehicle, I scale them
by multiplying by Q0 (defined in footnote 36) and dividing by total miles traveled in 2012.



                                                      27
     Figure 4: Gasoline consumption, miles traveled, and welfare under fuel economy
                       standards with endogenous miles traveled


                                                            5600
       Lifetime discounted gasoline use per vehicle (gal)




                                                            5400

                                                            5200
                                                                   F
                                                            5000

                                                            4800

                                                            4600

                                                            4400

                                                            4200                                         Expected welfare ($/vehicle)
                                                                                                        Expected unconstrained choice: $0
                                                            4000                                        Unconstrained choices:         $0
                                                                                                        Socially optimal choices:      $68
                                                            3800                                        Optimal flat std:              $32
                                                                                                        Optimal intensity std:         $25
                                                            3600                                        Optimal mileage-based std:      $32
                                                                       105          110           115             120            125
                                                                        Lifetime discounted thousands of miles driven per vehicle

       Note: Expected welfare is normalized to zero for agents' unconstrained choices. Ellipses
       indicate agents' choices of miles traveled and fuel economy associated with realizations of
        and F that lie on the iso-pdf of their bivariate normal distribution that encompasses
       95% of the probability mass. The  and F arrows indicate the changes in miles traveled
       and fuel economy induced by a one standard deviation change in  and F when agents are
       unconstrained. See text for details.



changes to miles traveled, I must adjust the miles traveled time series for these shocks in
order to isolate volatility induced by  . I do so by subtracting, in each year t, miles traveled
equal to dQ/dF · (Ft - F0 ), where F0 denotes the 2012 gasoline price of $3.69/gallon.40 I then
compute  by following the same procedure used in the footprint-based standard application
in section 4.1: I compute annual volatility in miles traveled, extrapolate to a 10-year horizon
  40                                  2
     dQ/dF is given by -BEF 0 /(BEE 0   + 2BQE 0 + BQQ ), as derived for constrained agents in appendix
A, equation (27), where 0 denotes the 2012 average fleet-wide fuel economy of 4.01 gallons per 100 miles.



                                                                                                 28
under a random walk assumption, and then covert to  by dividing by dQ/d .
   I use the calibrated parameters in table 3 to generate the results in figure 4, which
illustrates miles traveled, fuel economy, and welfare outcomes using the same scheme as
figure 3. Relative to the footprint-based standards application, volatility in Q is somewhat
larger, so that the optimal standard is noticeably output-based. However, the optimal slope
 of 0.74 gallons per 100 miles is considerably less than the slope of 4.07 gallons per 100
miles associated with the optimal intensity standard. Consequently, the optimal output-
based standard achieves modestly greater expected welfare than a flat standard ($32.3 versus
$32.0 per vehicle), while the welfare associated with the intensity standard is substantially
less ($25.1 per vehicle). The relatively poor performance of the intensity standard is driven
by: (1) the incentive it generates to increase miles traveled, even with this calibration's fairly
small driving elasticity of -0.081; and (2) the fact that fuel consumption increases less than
one-for-one with miles traveled in response to  shocks, since consumers choose more efficient
vehicles when they plan to drive more.
   Finally, as was the case in the footprint-based results in figure 3, even the optimal output-
based standard obtains less than half the expected welfare than the Pigouvian tax. This
result is again a consequence of the large uncertainty in F .


4.3    Electricity sector emissions standards

Finally, I apply the model to the U.S. electricity sector. In this model, Q represents electricity
generation and consumption (in TWh per year) and E represents CO2 emissions (in Mmtons
per year), as shown in table 1. The sources of uncertainty are  , representing the marginal
value of electric power, and F = -Pg , representing the negative price of natural gas. I use
the negative price because low natural gas prices increase substitution from coal to gas, which
reduces rather than increases CO2 emissions, holding Q fixed. B (Q, E, , F ) here denotes
total annual private welfare from the U.S. electric sector. I use 2015, the year the Clean




                                               29
Power Plan was finalized in the Federal Register, as the base year for the calibration.41
        and F experience both high and low frequency variation. Power demand, for instance,
fluctuates considerably within each day but also varies across years, following economic
cycles. I follow Borenstein et al. (forthcoming) by focusing on this lower-frequency variation
when I calibrate the model, since electric sector carbon regulation typically involves long
time horizons and annual (rather than daily) compliance periods.
       The calibrated parameters I use are presented in table 4. To calibrate BQQ , I use the
estimated demand elasticity of -0.088 from Ito (2014), which uses residential billing data
from California and incorporates responses to price lags of up to four months.42 To calculate
BQQ , I then use the fact that dQ/dP = 1/BQQ .43
       To calibrate BEE , I use Cullen and Mansur (2017)'s estimates of the effect of carbon
pricing on U.S. electric sector emissions, holding electricity output fixed. That paper's
estimate that a $40 per ton tax on CO2 will reduce emissions by 7.9% yields an estimate
of BEE via the relationship dE/d = 1/BEE .44 To obtain BQE , I leverage the assumption
                                                                       ¯ Q
that the electric sector is constant returns to scale, so that dE/dQ = E/ ¯ = 0.50 Mmton

CO2 per TWh.45 I then obtain BQE via the relationship dE/dQ = -BQE /BEE . Finally, I
estimate BEF using logic from Cullen and Mansur (2017) that the effects of changes in the
price of natural gas, Pg , can be mapped to the effects of carbon pricing, given the difference
in CO2 emissions between coal and natural gas.46
  41
     See Federal Register (23 Oct., 2015), Vol. 80, No. 205, pp. 64661­65120.
  42
     By focusing on the demand side only when calibrating BQQ , I am implicitly assuming that electricity
supply is constant returns to scale. For year-to-year variation in load, marginal generation costs may also
increase with load, so that I am underestimating the total magnitude of BQQ .
  43                                                                  ¯ = 4, 078 TWh and the 2015 average
     I also use the value of U.S. total power consumption for 2015 of Q
retail price to residential end users of $0.1265/kWh. I sourced the former value from the EIA's table of
state-level generation, available at https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/state/annual generation state.xls.
I sourced the latter value from the EIA's 2016 Electric Power Annual Table 2.4, available at
https://www.eia.gov/electricity/annual/archive/03482016.pdf.
  44
     I also use E¯ = 2, 031 Mmton CO2 for 2015, per the EIA's 2015 Electric Power Annual, available at
https://www.eia.gov/electricity/annual/html/epa 01 02.html.
  45
     In comparison, Graff Zivin et al. (2014) estimates, on average across the U.S., that dE/dQ = 0.55
Mmton CO2 per TWh for hourly changes in Q.
  46
     Cullen and Mansur (2017) shows that the change in Pg locally equivalent to a $1/Mmton change in
the carbon price, equivalent to 1/BEF , is given by (CR · CO2g - CO2c )/CR, where CO2g and CO2c are
the carbon intensities of natural gas and coal, respectively, and CR denotes cost ratio of coal to gas in the


                                                     30
              Table 4: Calibrated parameters for U.S. electricity sector emissions
      Parameter     Value                                  Main sources
      BQQ           -$352536 / TWh2                        Ito (2014), table 3
      BEE           -$274745 / Mmton2                      Cullen and Mansur (2017), table 2
      BQE           $136877 / (TWh·Mmton)                  constant returns to scale assumption
      BEF           -11.3 million mmBtu per Mmton          Cullen and Mansur (2017) and EIA
      BQ            1                                      normalization
      F             $2.59 / mmBtu                          historic volatility of natural gas prices
                    $57.0 million / TWh                    historic volatility of electricity consumption
                    $38 million / Mmton                    Interagency Working Group (2013)



    To calculate F , I use monthly data on the front-month futures price for natural gas
delivery to Henry Hub, Louisiana, which are available from the EIA back to January, 1994.47
I focus on the price of natural gas both because it is volatile and because this price is an
important driver of switches between coal and natural-gas fired generation, where natural
gas involves substantially less CO2 per TWh generated than coal (Cullen and Mansur 2017).
I calculate F from these data using the same long-difference procedure discussed in section
4.1 to calculate F for gasoline prices, except that here I: (1) use the raw monthly data
rather than a moving average; and (2) use a 15-year regulatory horizon that corresponds to
the Clean Power Plan's target year of 2030.48 I estimate F = $2.59/mmBtu.
    I estimate  using annual data on net electricity generation from the electric power
industry, dating back to 1990, available from the EIA.49 The procedure I use is similar to
that from the VMT application in section 4.2. First, I adjust the generation time series for
absence of carbon pricing. The input values for CO2g and CO2c are 117.00 and 210.86 pounds CO2 /mmBtu,
respectively, from Cullen and Mansur (2017). To calculate CR, I use the 2015 average delivered coal price of
$42.58 per short ton from table 34 of the 2016 EIA Annual Coal Report, the 2015 conversion of 19.146 mmBtu
per short ton from table A5 of the EIA Monthly Energy Review, and the EIA's 2015 average purchased price
of natural gas of $3.29/mmBtu (data discussed in footnote 50).
  47
     These data are available at https://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/hist/rngc1m.htm. I deflate these data to
January, 2016 dollars using the CUUR0000SA0LE CPI series from the BLS. I use these data rather than
purchase prices for the electric power sector (discussed in footnote 50) because those prices are available at
a monthly frequency only back to 2002.
  48
     I use the raw annual natural gas price data rather than a moving average because a substantial mechanism
for emissions reductions from the power sector is change in utilization of coal versus gas-fired generators from
the existing fleet, rather than new investment.
  49
     I use national-level data that are aggregated from EIA form 923 reports. These data are available at
https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/state/annual generation state.xls.




                                                      31
changes induced by fluctuations in the price of natural gas.50 Then, I take first (i.e., annual)
differences in the adjusted generation time series, calculate annual volatility as the standard
deviation of these differences, and project volatility to a 15-year horizon using a random
walk assumption. I convert the average 15-year volatility of Q to  using the fact that the
volatility of Q equals dQ/d times  .51 The resulting  equals $57.0 million per TWh.
       Finally, to calibrate  I use the Interagency Working Group (2013)'s social cost of carbon
of $38/mton.
       The model's output is presented in figure 5. For the U.S. electricity market, I find that
an optimally-set intensity standard slightly outperforms an optimal flat standard, yielding
expected welfare gains of $1.42 rather than $1.23 billion/year (relative to no regulation). The
optimal output-based regulation has a slope parameter  = 0.33 Mmtons CO2 per TWh,
equal to 69% of the slope of the intensity standard.
       This substantial difference in results, relative to the passenger vehicle applications in
sections 4.1 and 4.2, derives from two factors. First, the variance in  , the marginal value of
electricity (Q), is relatively large in this application:  is equal to 4.9% of its expected value.
Second, electric sector CO2 emissions vary nearly linearly with output when generators are
not restricted by regulation and experience demand shocks. The comparable slopes dE/dQ
are much flatter in the two vehicle-related applications.
       The welfare ranking of the intensity standard to the flat standard is sensitive to the
assumed elasticity of demand for electric power. If I use the long-run elasticity from Deryug-
  50
      I use annual data from the EIA on the purchase price of natural gas for the electric power sector,
covering 1997­2018. These data are available at https://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/hist/n3045us3A.htm. I de-
flate them to January 2016 dollars using the CUUR0000SA0LE CPI series from the BLS, and I convert
them from $ per thousand cubic feet to $/mmBtu using a conversion factor of 1.036 mmBtu/mcf from
https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=45. I also use a value of dQ/dF calculated via equation (21),
for unconstrained agents, in appendix A. Note that, unlike the two passenger vehicle applications, changes
in the price of natural gas directly affect the marginal value of Q, holding E fixed, since the gas price directly
affects the marginal cost of power (i.e., BQF = 0). Because I adjust the generation data only for the indirect
effect of gas prices on Q, via equation (21), the direct effect is incorporated into my estimate of  . Though
this direct effect should induce a positive correlation between F (=-Pg ) and  , I estimate an overall small
negative correlation of -0.07, since shocks to power demand are on average negatively correlated with F . In
the calibration I enforce  = 0.
   51                                                2
      dQ/d is given by -BEE BQ /(BQQ BEE - BQE           ), as derived for unconstrained agents in appendix A,
equation (20).


                                                       32
       Figure 5: CO2 emissions, electricity consumption, and welfare under output-based
                                electricity emission standards

                                                            2500
        Annual CO2 emissions (millions of mtons per year)



                                                            2400

                                                            2300

                                                            2200

                                                            2100      F

                                                            2000

                                                            1900

                                                            1800
                                                                                                   Expected welfare ($billion/yr)
                                                            1700
                                                                                                  Expected unconstrained choice: $0
                                                                                                  Unconstrained choices:         $0
                                                            1600                                  Socially optimal choices:      $3.26
                                                                                                  Optimal flat std:              $1.23
                                                            1500                                  Optimal intensity std:          $1.42
                                                                                                  Optimal output-based std:       $1.49
                                                            1400
                                                               3400   3600      3800       4000        4200        4400        4600
                                                                          Annual electricity consumption (TWh per year)

        Note: Expected welfare is normalized to zero for agents' unconstrained choices. Ellipses
        indicate agents' choices of electricity consumption and CO2 emissions associated with re-
        alizations of  and F that lie on the iso-pdf of their bivariate normal distribution that
        encompasses 95% of the probability mass. The  and F arrows indicate the changes in
        electricity consumption and CO2 emissions induced by a one standard deviation change in
         and F when agents are unconstrained. See text for details.



ina, MacKay, and Reif (forthcoming) of -0.30 rather than the elasticity of -0.088 from Ito
(2014), the flat standard achieves an expected welfare gain of $2.00 billion per year, relative
to $1.69 billion per year under the intensity standard.52 Still, even in this case I find that
the welfare-maximizing standard is substantially output-based, with a slope of 0.28 Mmtons
CO2 per TWh.
  52
    With a higher demand elasticity, all welfare outcomes increase. The Pigouvian tax achieves a gain of
$7.7 billion per year.



                                                                                             33
    Finally, the substantial volatility of both  and F causes even the optimal output-based
standard to realize substantially less expected welfare than a Pigouvian tax on emissions,
which would achieve a welfare improvement of $3.26 billion/year. The fact that uncertainty is
large relative to the externality is also reflected by the fact that the flat, intensity, and optimal
output-based standards all would bind only slightly more than 50% of the time. These
findings are closely related to the results presented in Borenstein et al. (forthcoming), which
studies California's cap-and-trade program and finds that uncertainty about future emissions
paths is sufficiently large that the market is exceedingly likely to have an equilibrium price
that lies at the administrative price floor or ceiling.



5     Conclusions

The consensus in the literature on pollution control is that, in the absence of clear pre-
existing market distortions such as taxes, market power, or "leakage" to other sectors, CO2
emissions standards that are output or attribute-based reduce welfare relative to simple,
"flat" emissions limits. This paper demonstrates that this prevailing welfare result holds
only when the policy-maker is certain of the demand and supply for the good(s) on which
the policy is being applied. I show that in the presence of uncertainty in the marginal value
of a good's output or attribute, expected welfare can always be increased by transforming a
flat emissions standard into one that is output or attribute-based.
    The degree to which the welfare-maximizing emissions standard depends on output or
attributes is context-dependent. For U.S. attribute-based fuel economy standards, I find
that the welfare-maximizing amount of attribute-basing is sufficiently small that the welfare
improvement relative to a flat standard is negligible. For U.S. electricity generation, however,
uncertainty about the demand for power is sufficiently large that the welfare-maximizing
emissions standard is substantially output-based. Furthermore, an intensity standard may
lead to greater expected welfare than a flat CO2 emissions limit. This result is suggestive, as



                                                 34
it is sensitive to a range of plausible parameter inputs and is derived from a highly aggregated
model that omits important features of the electric sector. It therefore calls for future work
that would more precisely evaluate the tradeoffs between different emissions control policies
in the presence of the substantial uncertainties faced by policy-makers.
   Finally, it is important to not lose sight of the fact that even optimally-set output or
attribute-based CO2 standards fail to achieve the first-best welfare outcome in uncertain
economic environments. A Pigouvian tax yields strictly greater expected welfare than any of
the policies considered in this paper, as would an emissions cap that is indexed to exogenous
sources of uncertainty (such as fuel prices or GDP) rather than to endogenously-determined
objects such as goods' output or attributes. There is therefore a need for future research
that might explain why emissions policies in practice have tended to take the form of output
or attribute-based standards rather than Pigouvian taxes or exogenously-indexed emissions
regulation.



References

 [1] Allcott, Hunt and Nathan Wozny (2014), "Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the
    Energy Paradox", Review of Economics and Statistics 96(5), 779-795.

 [2] Alquist, Ron, Lutz Kilian, and Robert J. Vigfusson (2013), "Forecasting the Price of
    Oil", in Graham, Elliot and Allan Timmerman (Eds.), Handbook of Economic Forecast-
    ing vol.2. Amsterdam: North Holland.

 [3] Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and Stephen W. Salant (2018), "Hotelling Under
    Pressure", Journal of Political Economy 126, 984-1026.

 [4] Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and James M. Sallee (2013), "What Do Consumers
    Believe About Future Gasoline Prices?" Journal of Environmental Economics and Man-
    agement 66, 383-403.


                                              35
 [5] Anderson, Soren T. and James M. Sallee (2016), "Designing Policies to Make Cars
    Greener: A Review of the Literature", Annual Review of Resource Economics 8, 157-
    180.

 [6] Borenstein, Severin, James Bushnell, Frank A. Wolak, and Matthew Zaragoza-Watkins
    (forthcoming), "Expecting the Unexpected: Emissions Uncertainty and Environmental
    Market Design", American Economic Review.

 [7] Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer (2013), "Are Con-
    sumers Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases", American Economic
    Review 103(1), 220-256.

 [8] Cullen, Joseph A. and Erin T. Mansur (2017), "Inferring Carbon Abatement Costs
    in Electricity Markets: A Revealed Preference Approach Using the Shale Revolution"
    American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9(3), 106-133.

 [9] Deryugina, Tatyana, Alexander MacKay, and Julian Reif (forthcoming), "The Long-
    Run Dynamics of Electricity Demand: Evidence from Municipal Aggregation", Ameri-
    can Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

[10] Ellerman, A. Denny and Ian Sue Wing (2003), "Absolute vs. Intensity-Based Emission
    Caps", MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change report #100.

[11] Energy   Information     Administration    (2011),    "Voluntary      Reporting     of
    Greenhouse    Gases   Program:     Fuel    Emission   Coefficients".   Accessed    from
    http://www.eia.gov/oiaf/1605/coefficients.html#tbl2 on 11 April, 2016.

[12] Fowlie, Meredith, Mar Reguant, and Stephen P. Ryan (2016), "Market-Based Emissions
    Regulation and Industry Dynamics", Journal of Political Economy 124(1), 249-302.

[13] Gillingham, Kenneth (forthcoming), "The Rebound Effect and the Rollback of Fuel
    Economy Standards", Review of Environmental Economics and Policy.


                                          36
[14] Graff Zivin, Joshua S., Matthew J. Kotchen, and Erin T. Mansur (2014), "Spatial
    and Temporal Heterogeneity of Marginal Emissions: Implications for Electric Cars and
    Other Electricity-Shifting Policies", Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
    107, 248-268.

[15] Heutel, Garth (2012), "How Should Environmental Policy Respond to Business Cycles?
    Optimal Policy Under Persistent Productivity Shocks", Review of Economic Dynamics
    15, 244-264.

[16] Holland, Stephen P. (2012), "Emissions Taxes Versus Intensity Standards: Second-
    Best Environmental Policies with Incomplete Regulation", Journal of Environmental
    Economics and Management 63, 375-387.

[17] Holland, Stephen P., Jonathan E. Hughes, and Christopher R. Knittel (2009), "Green-
    house Gas Reductions under Low Carbon Fuel Standards?", American Economic Jour-
    nal: Economic Policy 1(1), 106-146.

[18] Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon (2013), "Technical Support
    Document: Technical Update of the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact
    Analysis Under Executive Order 12866". United States Government. Accessed from
    https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/social cost of carbon for
     ria 2013 update.pdf on 19 May, 2016.

[19] Ito, Koichiro (2014), "Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence
    from Nonlinear Electricity Pricing" American Economic Review 104(2), 537-563.

[20] Ito, Koichiro and James M. Sallee (2018), "The Economics of Attribute-Based Regula-
    tion: Theory and Evidence from Fuel Economy Standards", Review of Economics and
    Statistics 100(2), 319-336.

[21] Kellogg, Ryan (2018), "Gasoline Price Uncertainty and the Design of Fuel Economy
    Standards", Journal of Public Economics 160, 14-32.

                                            37
[22] Kwoka, John E. (1983), "The Limits of Market-Oriented Regulatory Techniques: The
    Case of Automotive Fuel Economy", Quarterly Journal of Economics 98(4), 695-704.

[23] Leard, Benjamin, Joshua Linn, and Virginia McConnell (2017), "Fuel Prices, New Ve-
    hicle Fuel Economy, and Implications for Attribute-Based Standards", Journal of the
    Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 4(3), 659-700.

[24] Leard, Benjamin and Virginia McConnell (2017), "New Markets for Credit Trading
    under U.S. Automobile Greenhouse Gas and Fuel Economy Standards", Review of En-
    vironmental Economics and Policy 11(2), 207-226.

[25] Lutsey, Nic (23 Jan., 2015), "Do the automakers really need help with the U.S. effi-
    ciency standards?" International Council on Clean Transportation. Blog post. Accessed
    from http://www.theicct.org/blogs/staff/do-automakers-really-need-help-us-efficiency-
    standards on 29 Dec., 2015.

[26] National Research Council (2015), Cost, Effectiveness, and Deployment of Fuel Econ-
    omy Technologies for Light-Duty Vehicles. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

[27] Newell, Richard G. and William A. Pizer (2003), "Regulating Stock Externalities Under
    Uncertainty", Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 45, 416-432.

[28] Newell, Richard G. and William A. Pizer (2008), "Indexed Regulation", Journal of
    Environmental Economics and Management 56, 221-233.

[29] Parry, Ian W.H., Margaret Wells, and Winston Harrington (2007), "Automobile Exter-
    nalities and Policies", Journal of Economic Literature 45(2), 373-399.

[30] Pizer, William A. and Brian Prest (2016), "Prices versus Quantities with Policy Updat-
    ing", NBER working paper #22379.

[31] Quirion, Philippe (2005), "Does Uncertainty Justify Intensity Emission Caps?", Re-
    source and Energy Economics 27, 343-353.

                                            38
[32] Sallee, James M., Sarah E. West, and Wei Fan (2016), "Do Consumers Recognize the
    Value of Fuel Economy? Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctua-
    tions", Journal of Public Economics 135, 61-73.

[33] Weitzman, Martin L. (1974), "Prices vs. Quantities", Review of Economic Studies 41(4),
    477-491.

[34] Whitefoot, Kate S. and Steven J. Skerlos (2012), "Design Incentives to Increase Vehicle
    Size Created from the U.S. Footprint-Based Fuel Economy Standards" Energy Policy
    41, 402-411.

[35] Zhao, Jinhua (2018), "Aggregate Emission Intensity Targets: Applications to the Paris
    Agreement", working paper.




                                            39
Appendix
A      Comparative statics of the model
This appendix derives the comparative statics for dQ/d , dQ/dF , dE/d , and dE/dF , both
when agents choices' are unconstrained and when they are constrained by output-based
emissions regulation.
   When choices are unconstrained, agents solve the problem:

                                      max B (Q, E, , F ).                              (17)
                                      Q,E


    The FOCs for this problem are given by:

                                FOCQ : BQ (Q, E, , F ) = 0                             (18)
                                FOCE : BE (Q, E, , F ) = 0.                            (19)
                                  2
    And the SOC is BQQ BEE - BQE     > 0. The implicit function theorem then yields the
following comparative statics when agents' choices are unconstrained:

                                  dQ       -BEE BQ
                                       =            2
                                                                                       (20)
                                  d      BQQ BEE - BQE
                                  dQ        BQE BEF
                                       =            2
                                                                                       (21)
                                  dF     BQQ BEE - BQE
                                  dE        BQE BQ
                                       =            2
                                                                                       (22)
                                  d      BQQ BEE - BQE
                                  dE       -BQQ BEF
                                       =            2
                                                       .                               (23)
                                  dF     BQQ BEE - BQE

    When agents are constrained to the regulation E = µ0 + Q, they instead solve:

                                 max B (Q, µ0 + Q, , F ).                              (24)
                                  Q


    The FOC for this problem, using the notation E (Q) = µ0 + Q, is given by:

                  FOCQ : BQ (Q, E (Q), , F ) + BE (Q, E (Q), , F ) = 0.                (25)

    And the SOC is BEE  2 +2BQE  + BQQ < 0. The implicit function theorem then yields the
following comparative statics when agents' choices are constrained by output-based emissions
regulation (where the notation suppresses the dependence of BQ , BE , dQ/d , dQ/dF , dE/d ,




                                             A-1
dE/dF , dQ/dµ0 , dE/dµ0 , dQ/d , and dE/d on µ0 ,  ,  , and F ):

                        dQ              -BQ
                              =                                                             (26)
                         d          2
                                BEE + 2BQE  + BQQ
                        dQ             -BEF 
                              =      2
                                                                                            (27)
                        dF      BEE  + 2BQE  + BQQ
                        dE              -BQ 
                              =      2
                                                                                            (28)
                         d      BEE  + 2BQE  + BQQ
                        dE             -BEF  2
                              =                                                             (29)
                        dF      BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ
                        dQ        -(BEE  + BQE )
                              =                                                             (30)
                        dµ0     BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ
                        dE          dQ         BQE  + BQQ
                              =1+        =                                                  (31)
                        dµ0         dµ0    BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ
                        dQ      -(BE + BEE Q + BQE Q)
                              =                                                             (32)
                         d       BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ
                        dE           dQ    -BE  + BQE Q + BQQ Q
                              =Q+        =                       .                          (33)
                         d            d     BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ

B     Representative consumer model
Consider a unit mass of agents i, each of whom purchases a good with quantity (or attribute)
Qi and emissions Ei , yielding private benefit B i (Qi , Ei , , F ) that can be well-approximated
by a second-order Taylor expansion. This section, which closely follows Kellogg (2018),
proves that a sufficient statistic for the effects of emissions standards on utilitarian social
welfare is given by the private benefit function B (Q, E, , F ) less damages E , where Q and
E are the sum (or average) of the Qi and Ei , and the first derivatives of B equal the sum
                      i       i
(or average) of the BQ  and BE  , assuming: (1) all second derivatives of B are identical across
agents; (2) inclusion of compliance trading in any emissions standard; and (3) equal and
constant marginal utility of income (and welfare weights) across agents.
    To begin, note that with compliance trading, and given values for  and F , any emissions
standard is equivalent to a policy that taxes (or subsidizes) Q and E , since all agents must
face the same permit price in competitive equilibrium. Given a regulatory slope  , FOCQ
                                                          i           i
in equation (25) must hold for all agents, so that BQ         = -BE     i. And if the price of an
                                            i                   i
emissions permit is given by  , we have BQ = - and BE =  i. Thus, given values for 
and F , I can model agents' welfare under an emissions standard by instead modeling a tax
 on E and a tax Q  - on Q.
    Next, I show that imposition of a tax  on E and a tax Q  - on Q yields identical
changes in Q and E for all agents. A given agent i's FOCs under these taxes are given by:

                                  FOCQ : BQ (Q, E, , F ) = Q                                (34)
                                  FOCE : BE (Q, E, , F ) = .                                (35)



                                              A-2
   Following appendix A, application of the implicit function theorem yields the following
comparative statics:
                              dQi        BEE                   dQi       -BQE
                                  =            2
                                                  ;                =            2
                                                                                   ;                            (36)
                              dQ    BQQ BEE - BQE               d    BQQ BEE - BQE
                              dEi       -BQE                   dEi        BQQ
                                  =            2
                                                  ;                =            2
                                                                                   .                            (37)
                              dQ    BQQ BEE - BQE              d     BQQ BEE - BQE

    If all second derivatives of B are identical for all agents, then each of the above derivatives
will also be identical for all agents. Thus, emissions standards in this setting will have
identical effects on each agent's choices of Q and E .
    Finally, I show that the aggregate social welfare function i (B i (Qi , Ei , , F ) - Ei )di can
be written as the sum of the representative agent's welfare function B (Q, E, , F ) in the text
(where Q = i Qi di and E = i Ei di), -E , and terms that are policy-invariant. Let Q0
and E0 denote total quantity and emissions with no emissions policy and with  =              ¯ and
       ¯
F = F (where            ¯
                 ¯ and F denote the expected values of  and F ). Using a second-order Taylor
approximation around Q0 , E0 ,    ¯, and F¯ , social welfare is then given by:53


           (B i (Qi , Ei , , F ) - Ei )di =        i
                                                  BQ 0 (Qi - Q0 )di +
                                                                             i
                                                                            BE 0 (Ei - E0 )di
       i                                      i                         i
                                         1                                 1
                                        + BQQ              (Qi - Q0 )2 di + BEE         (Ei - E0 )2 di
                                         2               i                 2        i

                                        + BQE            (Qi - Q0 )(Ei - E0 )di + BQ            (Qi - Q0 )( - ¯)di
                                                     i                                      i

                                        + BEF                           ¯ )di - E,
                                                         (Ei - E0 )(F - F                                       (38)
                                                     i

   where BQ i         i                                                     i                 ¯ ).
              0 and BE 0 denote the values of agents' first derivatives of B at (Q0 , E0 , ¯, F
   Replace the (Qi - Q0 ) terms in equation (38) with (Qi - Q + Q - Q0 ) and do likewise
                                             i                      i
with the (Ei - E0 ) terms. Define BQ0  i BQ    0 di and BE 0  i BE 0 di. After removing terms

  53
    The assumption of equal and constant marginal utility of income (and welfare weights) across agents is
necessary for equation (38) to represent utilitarian social welfare, since in this case all wealth effects across
agents cancel out in aggregate.




                                                             A-3
for which the expectation is zero, and after grouping related terms together, we obtain:
                                                                          1
        (B i (Qi , Ei , , F ) - Ei )di = [BQ0 (Q - Q0 ) + BE 0 (E - E0 ) + BQQ (Q - Q0 )2
      i                                                                   2
                                         1
                                       + BEE (E - E0 )2 + BQE (Q - Q0 )(E - E0 )
                                         2
                                       + BQ (Q - Q0 )( -                          ¯ ) - E ]
                                                           ¯) + BEF (E - E0 )(F - F
                                            i                        i
                                  +[       BQ 0 (Qi - Q)di +        BE 0 (Ei - E )di
                                       i                        i
                                   1                              1
                                  + BQQ             (Qi - Q)2 di + BEE          (Ei - E )2 di
                                   2              i               2         i

                                  + BQE           (Qi - Q)(Ei - E )di]                          (39)
                                              i

    The first bracketed term in equation (39) is the second order Taylor expansion of B (Q, E, , F )-
E . The second bracketed term is policy-invariant, since Qi - Q and Ei - E are constant
for each i. Thus, B (Q, E, , F ) - E is a sufficient statistic for the social welfare impacts of
the emissions standards considered in the paper.


C      Welfare-maximizing standard under uncertainty in
       F
This appendix derives equations (6) and (7) in the main text. The argument closely follows
appendix B.3 in Kellogg (2018).
   Begin by developing simple expressions for BE and BQ while the agents are constrained.
                    ^ denote the fuel price at which the standard just binds, and let Q
Given µ0 and  , let F                                                                 ^ and
^ denote the agents' choices of Q and E at F
E                                              ^ . Because BQ (Q,
                                                               ^ E,
                                                                  ^ F ) = 0 F (recall that
BQF = 0), we may write the Taylor expansion for BQ as:

                                                 ^ ) + BQQ (Q - Q
                        BQ (Q, E, F ) = BQE (E - E              ^)                              (40)

                                                                           ^ and Q - Q
    On the E = µ0 + Q standard, use equations (27) and (29) to replace E - E         ^
in (40), yielding:

                                        - (BQE  + BQQ )             ^ ).
                    BQ (Q, E, F ) =                        BEF (F - F                           (41)
                                      BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ

    In addition, equation (25) implies that BE = -BQ / , implying:

                                          BQE  + BQQ                ^ ).
                    BE (Q, E, F ) =                        BEF (F - F                           (42)
                                      BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ

    Now, we can use equations (25), (30), (31), and (42) to derive equation (6) from equation
(4) in the main text. Streamlining notation by defining S  BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ , we


                                                   A-4
have:
                 ^
                 F
                              dE    dQ     dE
  FOCµ0 :             BE (        -     )-             w(F )dF = 0                       (43)
              FL              dµ0   dµ0    dµ0
                       ^
              1        F                              ^ )S
                                (BQE  + BQQ )BEF (F - F
                                                           - (BQE  + BQQ ) w(F )dF = 0 (44)
              S       FL                   S
                                                   ^
                                                   F
                   -(BQE  + BQQ )                              ^ - F ) w(F )dF = 0.
                                                        + BEF (F                         (45)
                 BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ             FL

   Equation (45) matches equation (6) in the main text.
   Now work with the FOC for  , given by equation (5) in the main text. Applying equations
(25), (32), (33), and (42), we obtain:
             ^
             F
                     dE     dQ     dE
FOC :                   -
                     BE (      )-        w(F )dF = 0                        (46)
             FL      d      d       d
         ^
  1      F                           ^ )SQ
               (BQE  + BQQ )BEF (F - F
                                           - (-BE  + BQE Q + BQQ Q) w(F )dF = 0
  S     FL                  S
                            ^
                            F
    BQE  + BQQ                             ^ )Q - Q)S + BEF (F - F
                                                                 ^ ) w(F )dF = 0.
                                 (BEF (F - F                                             (47)
        S2                 FL

  Now use FOCµ0 (equation (45)) to simplify further. In particular, use the fact that
   ^
^ F
Q            ^ - F ) w(F )dF = 0 to transform equation (47) to:
      + BEF (F
  FL

                                      ^
                                      F
          BQE  + BQQ                           ^ )(BEF (F - F
                                                            ^ ) - )S + 2  w(F )dF = 0.
                                          (Q - Q                                         (48)
              S2                     FL

                                                                        ^ term:
   Then apply the derivative dQ/dF (equation (27)) to eliminate the Q - Q
                                 ^
                                 F
     BQE  + BQQ                                 ^ )(BEF (F - F
                                                             ^ ) - ) + 2  w(F )dF = 0.
                                     -BEF  (F - F                                        (49)
         S2                     FL

   Applying FOCµ0 (equation (45)) again yields:
                                              ^
                                              F
                     (BQE  + BQQ )                  2       ^ )2 + 22 w(F )dF = 0.
                                                  -BEF (F - F                            (50)
                          S2                 FL

                                F^
   Define F            1
                       F w(F )dF (i.e., F is the expected value of F conditional on the
                     W (F^)     FL
standard binding). We can then simplify the -BEF 2
                                                   (F - F^ )2 term inside the integral in




                                                       A-5
equation (50) as follows:
                      ^
                      F                              ^
                                                     F
               2
              BeF              ^ )2 w(F )dF = B 2
                          (F - F                         (F - F +F -F
                                                                    ^ )2 w(F )dF
                                               eF
                     FL                             FL
                                                ^ )B 2 ( 2 + (F
                                           = W (F               -F^ )2 )
                                                    eF  Fc
                                                ^ )(B 2  2 + 2 ),
                                           = W (F                                        (51)
                                                         eF   Fc


    where the last line makes use of equation (45) and the definition of F.
    Finally, substitute equation (51) into equation (50) to obtain:

                                W (F^ )(BQE  + BQQ )
                    FOC :                            (2 - BEF
                                                           2  2
                                                              F c ) = 0,                 (52)
                              (BEE  + 2BQE  + BQQ )2
                                   2


    which matches equation (7) in the main text.


D      Welfare-maximizing standard under uncertainty in
       
This appendix derives equations (11) and (12) in the main text.
   Begin by developing simple expressions for BE and BQ while the agents are constrained.
Given µ0 and  , let  ^ denote the value of  (the shock to the marginal value of Q) at which
                                 ^ and E
the standard just binds, and let Q     ^ denote the agents' choices of Q and E at ^. Because
     ^  ^
BE (Q, E,  ) = 0  (recall that BE = 0), we may write the Taylor expansion for BE as:

                                                   ^ ) + BEE (E - E
                           BE (Q, E,  ) = BQE (Q - Q              ^)                     (53)

                                                                           ^ and E - E
    On the E = µ0 + Q standard, use equations (26) and (28) to replace Q - Q         ^
in (53), yielding:

                                        -(BQE + BEE  )
                     BE (Q, E,  ) =                        BQ ( - ^).                    (54)
                                      BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ

    Now, we can use equations (25), (30), (31), and (54) to derive equation (11) from equation
(9) in the main text. Streamlining notation by defining S  BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ , we




                                              A-6
have:
                   H
                                dE     dQ      dE
  FOCµ0 :               BE (        -     )-       v ( )d = 0                           (55)
               ^                dµ0   dµ0      dµ0
             1 H                 -(BQE + BEE  )BQ ( -  ^)S
                                                           - (BQE  + BQQ ) v ( )d = 0
                                                                            (56)
             S  ^                           S
             -1 H
                     ((BQE + BEE  )BQ ( - ^) + (BQE  + BQQ )) v ( )d = 0    (57)
              S   ^
                                      H
                -(BQE  + BQQ )          BQE + BEE 
                                                   BQ ( -  ^) +  v ( )d = 0.
             BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ   ^   BQE  + BQQ
                                                                            (58)

   Equation (58) matches equation (11) in the main text.
   Now work with the FOC for  , given by equation (10) in the main text. Applying
equations (25), (32), (33), and (54), we obtain:
               H
                        dE     dQ     dE
 FOC :                 BE (-      )-       v ( )d = 0                         (59)
           ^            d      d      d
         H
 1                 -(BQE + BEE  )BQ ( - ^)SQ
                                              - (-BE  + BQE Q + BQQ Q) v ( )d = 0
 S  ^                          S
 -1 H
  2     (((BQE + BEE  )BQ ( - ^) + (BQE  + BQQ ))QS
 S    ^
         +  (BQE + BEE  )BQ ( - ^))v ( )d = 0                                           (60)

    Now use FOCµ0 (equation (57)) to simplify further. In particular, use the fact that
 ^  H
Q   ^
      ((BQE + BEE  )BQ ( -  ^) + (BQE  + BQQ )) v ( )d = 0 to transform equation (60)
to:

                             H
                   -1                                                          ^ )S
                                 (((BQE + BEE  )BQ ( - ^) + (BQE  + BQQ ))(Q - Q
                   S2    ^
                         - 2  (BQE  + BQQ ))v ( )d = 0                                  (61)

                                                                       ^ term:
   Then apply the derivative dQ/d (equation (26)) to eliminate the Q - Q
                            H
             1
             2                  (((BQE + BEE  )BQ ( - ^) + (BQE  + BQQ ))BQ ( - ^)
            S           ^
                        + 2  (BQE  + BQQ ))v ( )d = 0                                   (62)




                                                   A-7
    Applying FOCµ0 (equation (57)) again yields:
                                   H
                      1                               2                   2 (BQE  + BQQ )2
                                       ((BQE + BEE  )BQ ( - ^)2 -
                      S2       ^                                            BQE + BEE 
                               + 2  (BQE  + BQQ ))v ( )d = 0                                     (63)
                   1        H      
   Define     (1-V   (^
                       )) ^
                              v ( )d (i.e.,  is the expected value of  conditional on the
                                               2
standard binding). We can then simplify the BQ   ( -  ^)2 term inside the integral in equation
(63) as follows:
                      H                                      H
             2
            BQ            ( - ^)2 v ( )d = BQ
                                            2
                                                                 ( -  + -^)2 v ( )d
                  ^                                      ^
                                                               2  2
                                                 = (1 - V (^
                                                            ))BQ (c + ( -^)2 )
                                                                    2 2      2 (BQE   + BQQ )2
                                                 = (1 - V (^
                                                            ))     BQ c   +                      (64)
                                                                              (BQE   + BEE  )2

    where the last line makes use of equation (57) and the definition of .
    Finally, substitute equation (64) into equation (63) and combine terms to obtain:
                                                                 2
            1 - V (^
                   )                    2   2    2 (BQE  + BQQ )      2 (BQE  + BQQ )2
    FOC :             [(B QE + BEE  ) B Q c    +                    -
               S2                                  (BQE + BEE  )2       BQE + BEE 
               2
            +   (BQE  + BQQ )] = 0                                                   (65)
               1 - V (^)                 2   2
                    2
                         [(BQE + BEE  )BQ  c   + 2  (BQE  + BQQ )] = 0               (66)
                  S
                                                            2  2
               (1 - V (^ ))(BQE  + BQQ )2 BQE + BEE  BQ       c
                                                         ·         +  = 0,           (67)
                (BEE  2 + 2BQE  + BQQ )2 BQE  + BQQ          2

    which matches equation (12) in the main text.


E     Welfare-maximizing standard under uncertainty in
       and F
This appendix derives equation (13) in the main text. Under uncertainty in both  and F ,
we can write the regulator's FOCs for µ0 and  as:
                            H           ^
                                        F
                                                 dQ       dE    dE
             FOCµ0 :                        BQ       + BE     -           w(F | )v ( )dF d = 0   (68)
                           L           FL        dµ0      dµ0   dµ0
                            H           ^
                                        F
                                                 dQ      dE   dE
              FOC :                         BQ      + BE    -            w(F | )v ( )dF d = 0,   (69)
                           L           FL        d       d    d

   where F ^ is shorthand for F^ (µ0 , ,  ), the fuel price F at which the standard just binds,
given a regulation (µ0 ,  ) and a demand shock  .


                                                         A-8
    Because deriving an analytic expression for   is algebraically intractable, I instead eval-
uate the FOCs (68) and (69) at  = 0, where the sign of FOC informs the sign of   (and
is equivalent to the sign of   assuming that the uniqueness property discussed in footnote
15 holds when F is stochastic).
    Using expressions (30), (31), (32), and (33), FOCs (68) and (69) reduce to the following
at  = 0:
                                       H        ^
                                                F
                    FOCµ0 | =0 :                    (BE - )w(F | )v ( )dF d = 0                    (70)
                                    L          FL
                                       H        ^
                                                F
                    FOC | =0 :                      (BE Q - Q)w(F | )v ( )dF d = 0.                (71)
                                    L          FL


   Let                    ¯ E
       ¯  Ec [ ] and let (Q, ¯ ) denote agents' choices given realizations       ^ (µ0 , , 
                                                                           ¯ and F         ¯).
                                         H F ^
Use the fact from equation (70) that L FL (BE - )Qw      ¯ (F | )v ( )dF d = 0 to rewrite
equation (71) as:
                                   H       ^
                                           F
                  FOC | =0 :                               ¯ )w(F | )v ( )dF d = 0.
                                               (BE - )(Q - Q                                       (72)
                                L       FL


   Because: (1) E - E¯ = 0 for  = 0 (since emissions are fixed at E
                                                                  ¯ when the regulation
                                ¯
binds); (2) BE = 0; and (3) Q - Q = -BQ ( -   ¯)/BQQ when  = 0, we have:

                                                -BQE BQ ( - ¯)            ^ ).
                     BE (Q, E, , F ) =                         + BEF (F - F                        (73)
                                                     BQQ

   Substituting into equation (72) yields:
              H      ^
                     F
                          -BQE BQ ( - ¯)            ^) -     -BQ
FOC | =0 :                               + BEF (F - F              ( - ¯) w(F | )v ( )dF d = 0.
           L    FL             BQQ                            BQQ
                                                                                  (74)
   The term involving  is zero because Ec [ - ¯] = 0. Thus, we have:
              H      ^
                     F
                          1       2                                 ^ ) w(F | )v ( )dF d = 0,
FOC | =0 :                2
                             BQE BQ ( - ¯)2 - BQQ BEF BQ ( - ¯)(F - F
             L      FL   BQQ
                                                                                   (75)
   which implies:

                                                        BQQ BEF          ^ (Ec [ ]))( - Ec [ ])]
  sign FOC | =0 = sign Ec [( - Ec [ ])2 ] -                     Ec [(F - F                         (76)
                                                        BQE BQ

   The right-hand side of equation (76) matches the right-hand side of equation (13) in the
main text. Also note that if F is non-stochastic, equation (75) reduces to equation (67)
(same as equation (12)) for  = 0.



                                                        A-9
