                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




SELECTION INTO IDENTIFICATION IN FIXED EFFECTS MODELS, WITH APPLICATION
                            TO HEAD START

                                          Douglas L. Miller
                                          Na'ama Shenhav
                                          Michel Z. Grosz

                                        Working Paper 26174
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26174


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2019




We would like to thank Colin Cameron, Liz Cascio, Janet Currie, Hilary Hoynes, Pat Kline, Erzo F.P.
Luttmer, Jordan Matsudaira, Zhuan Pei, Maya Rossin-Slater, Doug Staiger, Dmitry Taubinsky, Chris
Walters, and participants at the AEA Meetings, Cornell, Dartmouth, CSWEP CEMENT Workshop,
Hebrew University, Mcgill University, NBER Labor/Children's Summer Institute, Northwestern, SEA
Meetings, SOLE, Syracuse/Cornell Summer Workshop in Education and Social Policy, UC Merced,
and the War on Poverty Conference at the University of Michigan. We are also grateful to Alex Magnuson,
Wenran Li, and Wenrui Huang for excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this article
are not necessarily those of the Federal Trade Commission, its commissioners, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Douglas L. Miller, Na'ama Shenhav, and Michel Z. Grosz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Selection into Identification in Fixed Effects Models, with Application to Head Start
Douglas L. Miller, Na'ama Shenhav, and Michel Z. Grosz
NBER Working Paper No. 26174
August 2019
JEL No. C33,I28,I38,J13

                                           ABSTRACT

Many papers use fixed effects (FE) to identify causal impacts of an intervention. In this paper we
show that when the treatment status only varies within some groups, this design can induce non-
random selection of groups into the identifying sample, which we term selection into
identification (SI). We begin by illustrating SI in the context of several family fixed effects (FFE)
applications with a binary treatment variable. We document that the FFE identifying sample
differs from the overall sample along many dimensions, including having larger families. Further,
when treatment effects are heterogeneous, the FFE estimate is biased relative to the average
treatment effect (ATE). For the general FE model, we then develop a reweighting-on-observables
estimator to recover the unbiased ATE from the FE estimate for policy-relevant populations. We
apply these insights to examine the long-term effects of Head Start in the PSID and the CNLSY.
Using our reweighting methods, we estimate that Head Start leads to a 2.6 percentage point (p.p.)
increase (s.e. = 6.2 p.p.) in the likelihood of attending some college for white Head Start
participants in the PSID. This ATE is 78% smaller than the traditional FFE estimate (12 p.p).
Reweighting the CNLSY FE estimates to obtain the ATE produces similar attenuation in the
estimated impacts of Head Start.


Douglas L. Miller                                 Michel Z. Grosz
Department of Policy Analysis                     Bureau of Economics Federal
and Management                                    Trade Commission 600
MVR Hall                                          Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Cornell University                                Washington, DC 20580
Ithaca, NY 14853                                  mgrosz@ftc.gov
and NBER
dlm336@cornell.edu

Na'ama Shenhav
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
naama.shenhav@dartmouth.edu




Supplementary results and tables are available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26174
1        Introduction
        Fixed Effects (FE) are frequently used to obtain identification of the causal impact of an at-
tribute, intervention, or policy ­ the "treatment" of interest. This class of models has been used to
identify the impact of academic peers (school-grade FE; Hoxby, 2000; Carrell and Hoekstra, 2010);
criminal peers (facility-offense FE; Bayer, Hjalmarsson and Pozen, 2009); the local health care envi-
ronment (individual FE; Finkelstein, Gentzkow and Williams, 2016); participation in means-tested
programs (family FE; Currie and Thomas, 1995; Garces, Thomas and Currie, 2002; Deming, 2009;
Rossin-Slater, 2013); neighborhood quality (family FE; Chetty and Hendren, 2018a); and minimum
wage laws (county-pair-year FE; Dube, Lester and Reich, 2010), to give a few examples. Many of
the estimates in these studies are naturally read as the average effect for a policy-relevant popu-
lation (e.g. participants or those eligible for treatment). However, in contrast with other common
estimators, there is not yet a comprehensive framework for considering the external validity of FE
estimates.
        In this paper, we show that FE can induce a special type of (non-random) selection in estimation,
which we term "selection into identification" (SI). Broadly speaking, SI results from the fact that FE
estimates are identified from FE groups (e.g. families, in the case of family FE) that have variation
in treatment ("switchers"), which may exclude some groups.1 In the contexts we examine, switchers
are (i) a subset of the sample and (ii) systematically different than the overall population. This
is a distinct problem from whether within-group comparisons are internally valid, which has been
the typical subject of debate for FE estimators,2 and which is not the focus of this paper. It is
also different from the issue of conditional variance weighting of switcher treatment effects, which
can also create external validity concerns (Gibbons, Suarez and Urbancic, 2018). We show that in
the presence of heterogeneous treatment effects, SI causes FE to deviate from the ATE, and we
develop reweighting-on-observables methods that can be used to recover the ATE for the overall
population or for target populations (such as program participants). We apply these methods to
revisit prior FE estimates of the long-run impact of Head Start.
        We begin by presenting four facts that illustrate the empirical relevance of SI, in the context
of a family fixed effects (FFE) model with a binary treatment. In particular, we examine patterns
of within-family variation in participation Head Start, a federally-funded preschool program, using
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), as in Garces, Thomas and Currie (2002) (hereafter
GTC).3 First, relative to an estimation model without fixed effects, FFE uses substantially fewer
identifying groups, more so than is commonly noted in work on this topic. Among the 5,355 children
    1
      In the presence of control variables that vary within a group, then there may be variation among non-switchers
"net of controls." We focus on cases where this phenomenon is small in magnitude, and formalize this extension in
Section 5.2.
   2
     See Bound and Solon (1999).
   3
     Similar FFE models have been used to evaluate many other treatments; for public housing, see Andersson et al.
(2016); for WIC, see Chorniy, Currie and Sonchak (2018); Currie and Rajani (2015); for health, see Almond, Chay
and Lee (2005); Figlio et al. (2014); Abrevaya (2006); Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2007); Xie, Chou and Liu (2016),
among others. We summarize the prevalence of this design in Section 2.


                                                         2
in the sample with siblings, only 1,098 children reside in switcher households. Second, the loss of
sample variation is systematically related to observables. The likelihood of being a switcher ­ and
thus being included in the FFE estimation ­ increases as the probability of treatment approaches
0.5, and with the number of units per group (children in a family). Third, since these factors vary
across subgroups, SI does as well. The FFE identifying sample misses 93% of the sibling sample
for white children, but only 62% of the sample for black children. Fourth, as a result, switchers
are not representative of the overall sample along many dimensions. The most striking imbalance
is along family size, but differences in income and parental education are also apparent.
       Next, we show that under heterogeneous treatment effects, SI can meaningfully change the esti-
mated treatment effect. The consequence of this is that the FFE estimate is no longer representative
of the sample Average Treatment Effect (ATE), let alone the treatment effect for a policy-relevant
population, such as program participants. This also implies that the difference between the OLS
estimate and FE estimate can no longer be interpreted as solely reflecting OLS bias, even after
accounting for conditional variance weighting among switchers. We show that this is a quantita-
tively more imporant source of bias in our applications than the bias from conditional variance
weighting.4 Because FE groups are less likely to be switchers when they are defined over a smaller
groupings, the impact of SI may be stronger in those cases. Hence, in some settings standard FE
methods may lead to a tradeoff between external and internal validity.
       To address this, in Section 4 we take advantage of the insight that switching is a form of
selection to develop a novel reweighting approach that can recover the ATE of policy-relevant
"target" populations. Building on extrapolation methods designed to address non-representative
experimental participants and IV compliers,5 we show that the appropriate group-level weight for
FE is proportional to the ratio of two propensity scores: (i) the propensity to be in the target
population (e.g. program participants) and (ii) the propensity to be in the switcher population.
Under the additional assumptions that these propensity scores can be estimated using observable
covariates, and that unobservable determinants of switching are not correlated with treatment
effects, we can then obtain the desired ATE.6
       We demonstrate the performance of our reweighting using Monte Carlo simulations in a set-
ting with naturally-occurring SI, which allows us to test the feasibility of our baseline modeling
assumptions. We find that reweighting reduces or eliminates bias relative to FE in the presence
of covariate-based treatment heterogeneity. In Section 5, we discuss several extensions of our ba-
sic setup, such as how the inclusion of covariates that vary within a group can create additional
"residual switchers," and show how reweighting can be applied to a non-linear model.
       Based on these findings we propose new standards for practice when presenting results using FE
   4
     This is consistent with Gibbons, Suarez and Urbancic (2018), whose findings suggest that the bias from conditional
variance weighting is less than 5% for 75% of estimates.
   5
     See Angrist and Fernandez-Val (2013) for extrapolation from IV, and Stuart et al. (2011) and Andrews and Oster
(2019) for extrapolation from experiments.
   6
     In some settings, this assumption can be tested by comparing treatment effects across target and non-target
populations within the switching sample, as we discuss in Section 4.


                                                          3
research designs: (i) clearly show the sample size when limited to switcher families and quantify
the contribution of "residual switchers"; (ii) show the balance of covariates across switcher and
non-switcher families (e.g. Table 2); (iii) reweight FFE estimates for a representative population
(e.g. Table 6). Reweighted estimates can be presented either as an additional diagnostic tool or as
an alternative measure of treatment effects. We are not the first to use the more rigorous reporting
standards in (i) and (ii), but in our survey of the FFE literature the vast majority do not discuss
either of these issues (e.g. one paper out of 35 included (ii).)7
       In Section 6, we apply these methods to quantify the importance of selection into identification
for FFE estimates of the long-run impact of Head Start. Head Start has a budget of $8.6 billion
dollars and annually enrolls roughly 60% of the number of 3 and 4 year old children in poverty,
which makes it a quantitatively important intervention for this population (Carneiro and Ginja,
2014).8 FFE have been used to identify the long term impacts of Head Start in many of the
foundational studies of this program (Currie and Thomas, 1995; Deming, 2009, GTC), which find
positive impacts on economic and non-cognitive outcomes of participants measured in adulthood.
We provide new evidence of these effects, and also for the first time estimate the average long term
effects for the Head-Start-eligible and Head-Start-participant populations.
       Using data from the PSID and the Children of the National Longitudinal Study of Youth
(CNLSY) (as in GTC and Deming (2009)), we newly document that, across multiple human capital
measures, there are patterns consistent with greater returns to Head Start in larger families. This
might result from the fact that parental time investment in children's human capital is spread more
thinly in larger families, which in turn could lead to greater returns to alternative investments,
such as Head Start.9 Since these families are upweighted in FFE models, it is intuitive that the
FFE estimate is likely to be upward-biased.
       We illustrate the impact of reweighting first using the PSID and the largest sample of siblings ­
three times as large as the analysis in GTC ­ used to investigate this question. The FFE estimate in
the PSID suggests that Head Start leads to a statistically significant 12 p.p. increase in attendance
of some college. Using our reweighting methods, however, we find more modest and less-precisely-
estimated benefits of the program.
       Reweighting the estimates, we find that Head Start leads to a 2.6 percentage point (p.p.)
increase in the likelihood of attending some college for Head Start participants (s.e. = 6.2 p.p.),
and a 6.8 p.p. (se = 6.0 p.p.) increase for the Head Start eligible population. The ATE for Head
Start participants estimate is 78% smaller than the FFE estimate, a difference which is significant
   7
     Important exceptions include Finkelstein, Gentzkow and Williams (2016) and Wiswall (2013), who include a
substantive discussion and examination of external validity concerns, as well as Currie and Rossin-Slater (2013). GTC
report the number of identifying observations used to identify Head Start for the entire sample (not for subsamples),
and Deming (2009) reports the aggregate number of identifying observations used to identify the pre-school, Head
Start, and no-formal-care coefficients, but not for each coefficient.
   8
     See Gibbs, Ludwig and Miller (2013) for an overview of the Head Start program.
   9
     In Section 6, we show that this heterogeneity by family size is not explained by other covariates or by larger
families having longer sibling cohort spans. Instead it appears that there is something important about family size
per se.


                                                         4
at the 5 percent level. It is also 91% smaller than the estimated effects on college-going in GTC
for this population; 45% to 91% smaller than unadjusted estimates for all participants from other
FFE studies (Bauer and Schanzenbach, 2016; Deming, 2009); and 51% smaller than estimates from
the county roll-out of Head Start (Bailey, Sun and Timpe, 2018), although the lower end of the
confidence intervals for the latter estimates include our ATE.
   Reweighting similarly attenuates the FFE estimate of the impact of Head Start in the CNLSY
(Deming, 2009). While the FFE estimate suggests that Head Start leads to an 8.5 p.p.increase in
high school completion, the reweighted estimate for Head Start participants is 44% smaller and not
statistically significant. The FFE and reweighted estimates are statistically different at the 10%
level. Reweighting also attenuates the previously-estimated impact of Head Start on idleness and
having a learning disability and, to a lesser degree, the impact on poor health, relative to the FFE
estimates.
   We present our results primarily in the context of FFE and Head Start, but they apply to any
panel fixed effects model, with special relevance for those with short panels and "lumpy" treatment
variables (e.g. binary treatments). For instance, we use data from Collins and Wanamaker (2014) to
demonstrate similar patterns of selection into identification in the estimation of returns to migration
with FFE.
   In Section 7, we discuss three additional potential applications of our methods to FE estimation
of peer effects (school-grade FE; Carrell, Hoekstra and Kuka, 2018; Carrell and Hoekstra, 2010),
the minimum wage elasticity (county-pair-year FE; Dube, Lester and Reich, 2010), and responses
to environmental shocks (district FE; Shah and Steinberg, 2017). We identify features within each
of these settings that make the estimates potentially subject to selection into identification. As a
result, we recommend careful investigation of these issues in future research using FE strategies.
   The core contributions of this paper are first to provide guidelines that can be used to charac-
terize the likelihood of being a non-switcher (based on the probability of treatment or the number
of units in a group); and second to show the importance of heterogeneity in treatment effects across
switching and non-switching groups. While it is well-known that the FE estimator is only identified
from switchers, we document in a review of the literature that the number of switchers and their
characteristics is not commonly discussed in applied work. We show in our applications that non-
switching is common, and that switching groups are not randomly distributed in the population.
This has a meaningful impact on the external validity of estimates.
   Further, the prevalence of non-switching stands in contrast to a commonly-held assumption of
positive within-group variance of treatment used for theoretical findings; such as in the translation
from FE to IV (Loken, Mogstad and Wiswall, 2012), and in the reweighting of OLS (Angrist, 1998),
IV (Angrist and Fernandez-Val, 2013; Aronow and Carnegie, 2013) and FE (Gibbons, Suarez and
Urbancic, 2018) for external validity.
   Third, we provide a reweighting estimator that allows for the recovery of ATE for policy-relevant
populations. This is different from strategies that employ reweighting for internal validity, such as


                                                  5
traditional propensity score estimation methods, and from recent works on the validity of difference-
in-difference and other two-way FE strategies, where the empirical specification ensures that SI is
unlikely to be a concern.10
         Our reweighting solution is broadly related to a growing literature that identify and correct
for the discrepancy between "what you want" and "what you get" from common estimators, such
as Lochner and Moretti (2015), who reweight OLS with IV weights for greater comparability;
Sloczynski (2018), who reweights OLS to obtain the ATE; and Stuart et al. (2011) and Andrews
and Oster (2019) who propose reweighting experiments to account for selection into participation.
         Closest to the current work are reweighting strategies for quasi-experimental estimates, includ-
ing Angrist and Fernandez-Val (2013), who reweight IV using discrete covariates, and Gibbons,
Suarez and Urbancic (2018), who reweight FE using inverse-conditional-variance weights to obtain
the switcher ATE. Unlike Angrist and Fernandez-Val (2013), we focus on the external validity
of FE and reweight using a propensity score, which allows for greater flexibility in conditioning
variables. Further, our reweighting method relaxes the assumption of positive-conditional-variance
in Gibbons, Suarez and Urbancic (2018), and provides a means for extrapolating from switchers
to a policy-relevant target population. This should be informative for treatment estimates, since
switchers are not typically a population of interest.
         Finally, we contribute to a growing body of work investigating the long term effects of Head Start
using quasi-experimental methods (Ludwig and Miller, 2007; Carneiro and Ginja, 2014; Thompson,
2017; Bauer and Schanzenbach, 2016; Johnson and Jackson, 2017; Bailey, Sun and Timpe, 2018;
Pages et al., 2019; Barr and Gibbs, 2018, in addition to the FFE papers above). These studies
typically present LATE or ITT estimates, and find improvements in childhood health, reductions
in adolescent behavioral problems and obesity, and increases in adult educational attainment and
earnings.11 Relative to most of these studies, we evaluate the effect of Head Start on longer-
run outcomes; show that these effects vary significantly by family size; and also adjust estimates
using covariate re-weighting to get closer to the ATE for Head Start participants. We show that
incorporating this adjustment lowers the estimated long term effect of Head Start.


2         A Survey of FFE Applications
         Since our application focuses on a FFE model, we focus on applications of this particular method
in the literature. This focus will lead us to undercount the prevalence of FE more broadly, but
provides an unambiguous example of a short-panel setting which is susceptible to SI concerns.
We surveyed publications from January 2000 to May 2017 in 11 leading journals that publish
applied microeconomics articles. We include all studies that use family fixed effects as a primary
    10
     See, e.g. Goodman-Bacon (2018); Borusyak and Jaravel (2017); Callaway and Sant'Anna (2018); Chaisemartin
and D'Haultfoeille (2019). We discuss SI in two-way FE designs in Section 5.2.
  11
      One exception to this is Pages et al. (2019), who suggest that the effect of Head Start may be negative for recent
cohorts, although the identifying sample is not discussed.



                                                           6
or secondary strategy.12
    Our literature review yields 55 papers published from 2002 to 2017. We provide descriptive
statistics of these articles in Table 1, including statistics by journal. Overall, these articles account
for less than 1 percent of the papers published in our sample of journals, but this varies from 0
to 3 percent of each journal. The first panel tabulates the frequency of binary treatments and
binary outcomes across the sample of papers, the focus of our methodological insights. Nearly
two-thirds (35) of the papers have a binary treatment of interest and 23 have a binary outcome.
The second and third panels show the varied topics that appear in the sample, spanning health,
public, education, and labor fields.
    The final panel of the table summarizes the distribution of sample sizes used with FFE. The
samples are frequently not limited to families with variation in the treatment variable; therefore,
the sample size in the table is an upper bound on the number of observations used for identification.
The median number of sibling observations is 6,315, or roughly 85% of the sample in our analysis.
We note that there is a high variance in sample size across samples, indicating that there is not a
threshold for FFE analyses. The bottom 25% of papers have fewer than 1,200 observations, while
the top 25% have over 160,000 sibling observations.
    Appendix Figure B.1 illustrates the popularity of this estimation strategy over time. It shows
a steady stream of FFE papers over the past 15 years; and that these papers have an impact on
the literature, with a mean 233 citations per article (Google Scholar citations as of May 2019).
Moreover, since the survey was completed, additional FFE studies have been published (see e.g.
Chetty and Hendren (2018a,b)).


3     Fixed Effects and Selection into Identification
    We employ the FE research design to address the concern that Head Start treatment may be
correlated with some fixed characteristics of a family that also determine outcomes. For example,
the decision to participate in Head Start of siblings is influenced by low parental income -- a
requirement for eligibility -- and availability of an alternative source of care, which may indepen-
dently influence long-term outcomes. As a result, in our setting ­ as well as in many other settings
­ the cross-sectional estimate of the effect of treatment is likely to be biased.
    To formalize our setting, let Di  {0, 1} indicate whether an individual i participates in treat-
ment (e.g. Head Start) and g (i) be the relevant group (e.g. family) for i of the set of groups G in the
sample, and let potential outcomes in the untreated and treated states be Yi (0), Yi (1), respectively.
  12
     We surveyed: AEJ: Applied Economics, AEJ: Economic Policy, AER, AER P&P, Journal of Health Economics,
Journal of Human Resources, Journal of Labor Economics, Journal of Political Economy, Journal of Public Economics,
QJE, Review of Economics and Statistics. To identify these articles, we used the search terms "family," "within-
family," "sibling," "twin," "mother," "father," "brother," "sister," "fixed effect," "fixed-effect," and "birthweight"
using queries on journal websites. We then searched within articles to see whether FFE was used in the analysis.
Finally, we added some additional papers to the list that we are aware of and did not satisfy these search terms. The
resulting list is fairly comprehensive, but still likely to be a slight undercount of FFE articles in these journals.



                                                          7
We observe for each i one outcome, Yi = Yi (Di ), treatment, Di , and group membership, g (i). For
brevity, we will frequently write this simply as g . We refer to groups for whom V ar(Di |i  g (i)) > 0
as "switchers," and denote switching status with a binary variable Sg = 1, and the set of switchers
as GS  G.
    We assume that treatment may be correlated with group characteristics, e.g. mean family
income, but is randomly assigned within groups:

Assumption 1 (Group ID Conditional Independence):

                                          Yi (0), Yi (1)  Di |g (i) = g                                       (1)

    Assumption 1 encompasses the standard FE specification assumpton in linear models. It rules
out Roy (1951)-type selection into treatment within groups, in which the probability of receiving
treatment is correlated with treatment effects, Yi (1) - Yi (0)).13 In the context of Head Start,
treatment has been shown to be uncorrelated with most observable characteristics of children
(Deming, 2009, GTC, 2002), suggesting the assumption is reasonable.
    Under this assumption, estimated treament effects      ^g are an unbiased estimate of group-level
treatment effects, g  E[Yi (1) - Yi (0)|g (i) = g ]. The FE estimate averages ^g for the g GS , using
weights that are proportional to the within-group variance of Di and the number of observations
in g (Angrist, 1998; Angrist and Pischke, 2009, eqn. 3.3.7), as follows:


                                          F E =           g,F E · g,F E                                       (2)
                                                   g GS

    where

                                        V ar(Di |g (i) = g ) · P r(g (i) = g |Sg = 1)
                        g,F E =
                                      g GS V ar (Di |g (i) = g ) · P r (g (i) = g |Sg = 1)

    We examine two methodological issues that arise from the FE research design: (i) reduction in
identifying variation moving from G to GS ; and (ii) a change in the composition of the identifying
sample. Issue (i) is well understood in principle, but the degree to which GS is smaller than
G is often underappreciated, not reported in empirical practice, and implicitly assumed to be
negligible in theoretical results. Issue (ii) is more novel, and should cause researchers to update the
interpretation of the population for which these estimates are relevant.

3.1    Empirical Relevance

    To illustrate ideas, we provide an empirical example - for more detail, see Section 6. The
sample consists of 2986 white children born in the years 1954-1987. The regression of interest
  13
     Some recent FE strategies explore relaxation of this assumption. For example, in a two-period person-level FE
design, Lemieux (1998) estimates union wage returns to both observed and unobserved skills. This approach is
extended (with application to farmer adoption of HYV seeds) in Suri (2011) and Verdier and Castro (2019).



                                                          8
estimates the effect of ever having attended Head Start on a dummy for ever having attended
college. The coefficient on Head Start in a cross-section regression is 0.049 (s.e. = 0.044). When
mother fixed effects are added, the coefficient becomes 0.120 (s.e. = 0.053). This result indicates
that the impact of Head Start participation on college attendance is meaningful in magnitude, and
statistically significantly different from zero.
    We illustrate the identifying variation for the FFE regression of some college on Head Start
attendance in Panel (a) of Figure 1, which shows a scatterplot of the deviation in Head Start
attendance for each individual i from the mean attendance in his or her family, g (i), HeadStarti -
HeadStartg(i) , against the within-family deviation in attainment of some college for the sample,
AnyCollegei -AnyCollegeg(i) .14 Strikingly, the largest mass of observations is at (0,0): the majority
of families have no variation in Head Start participation and no variation in the college attendance
of their children. Individuals in families with no variation in Head Start account for 96% of the
sample ­ removing these leaves us with 213 individuals in switching families.
    This reduction in identifying observations could result in a selected sample if switching is corre-
lated with family characteristics. To gain intuition about which variables might determine switching
we build a simple model of the Head Start participation decision within families. If the probability
of attending Head Start is a constant,  , and independent across siblings in a family, then the
probability of switching, P (Sg = 1) is simply a function of  and family size, ng :


                                      P r(Sg = 1) = 1 - (1 -  )ng -  ng

    According to this formula, the probability of switching has an inverse-U-shaped relationship
with  , peaking at  = 0.5. Further, for a given level of  , the likelihood of being in a switching
family is increasing with family size. We illustrate these features in Appendix Figure B.2.
    The markers in Figure 2 show the actual probability of attending Head Start and of being in a
switching family for each family size by black/white race and by whether the mom has some college
or not. As in the stylized model, the likelihood of switching is increasing with family size for each
of these subgroups.15 This could reflect the fact that over time, across children, parents are more
likely to be exposed to the program, or are more likely to experience a change in family income,
which alters eligibility for the program.
    We also observe that switching increases with  , following the inverse-U. The probability of
Head Start attendance among black families and families with low-educated moms is much higher
and closer to 0.5, compared to white families and families with high-educated moms; and the
switching probability is correspondingly larger for black and low-educated families. As a result, the
  14
     The size of each symbol is weighted by the number of individuals. A value of 0.5 along the horizontal axis, for
example, means that a person went to Head Start in a family where half the children attended Head Start. Values
other than 0.5 and -0.5 indicate that the share of children that attended Head Start was different than 0.5; e.g. a
value of -0.75 means that a person did not go to Head Start in a family where three quarters of the children did.
  15
     Appendix Table B.1 shows that this pattern is driven by a much larger incidence of no Head Start participation
among smaller families. For example, 78% of 2-child families have no Head Start participants, compared with 48%
of families with 5 or more children.


                                                         9
sample used for FFE identification is comprised of 7% of the sibling sample for whites, and 38%
of the sibling sample for blacks. Note that while we are focusing on race and maternal education,
this notion can be generalized to any other family characteristic, such as SES, that determine  .
       This pattern is not unique to the PSID or to Head Start. Panels (b) and (c) of Figure 2 show this
relationship using data from two other FFE papers, Collins and Wanamaker (2014) and Deming
(2009). In both papers, the treatment variable of interest is binary; migration to the North and
Head Start participation, respectively. In each of these samples, the probability of being a switcher
is increasing in family size.

3.1.1      Selection into Identification Driven by Many Variables

       Since SI is likely to affect the balance of characteristics other than family size, we now examine
a large number of observable characteristics of switcher families and non-switcher families. Panel A
of Table 2 indicates that in addition to having a larger family size, children in switcher families tend
to have parents with significantly less education than children in non-switcher families (column 3).
These differences in parental education are significant even in a regression framework where we
control for differences in family size and the other covariates in the table, though only at the 10
percent level (columns 4 and 5). Family income during preschool of children in switcher families
is significantly lower than non-switcher families overall (some of which may have incomes too high
to ever qualify for Head Start).16 These patterns are consistent with switching increasing with the
probability of Head Start participation.
       Next, we examine a one-dimensional summary of how much overlap there is in the character-
istics of switchers and non-switchers. We do so by constructing a propensity-score-type summary
              P r(Sg(i) =1|Xig )
measure, P r HeadStart               , which gives a measure of how aligned the characteristics (vector Xig )
             (            i =1|Xig )
of switchers are with the characteristics of Head Start participants, the population of interest. An
average value of 1 implies perfect alignment, while a higher value implies that the characteristics
of switchers are over-represented relative to the characteristics of Head Start participants. We
estimate the elements of this ratio using a multinomial logit.
       Panel B of Table 2 shows that this measure is between 1.9 and 2.9 for the switchers sample,
which is 0.3 SD larger than for non-switchers. This indicates that the observables of switchers are
not aligned with our population of interest, and that this misalignment is worse for switchers than
non-switchers.17
  16
     If we limit ourselves to families with Head Start participants, we obtain qualitatively similar results, but the
differences are somewhat smaller and sometimes less precisely estimated.
  17
     As a benchmark, Stuart et al. (2011) suggest that a 0.1 to 0.25 SD difference in propensity scores between the
experimental and non-experimental population may be too large to rely on extrapolation without further adjustments.




                                                         10
3.2        Consequences for Estimation: Effective Number of Identifying Observa-
           tions

       A convenient way to summarize the amount of variation used in FE is by the number of individ-
uals in switching families. However, since not all switchers provide the same amount of identifying
variation, this can be a misleading measure. For example, a 4-sibling family with 1 treated and 3
untreated individuals has an g,F E that is 25% smaller than the g,F E of a family with 2 treated
and 2 untreated (0.25 · 0.75 = 0.1875 < 0.25 = 0.5 · 0.5).
       We develop a formula for the "effective number of observations," which captures this idea by
(i) quantifying the total amount of identifying variation and (ii) converting this into standardized
units (person-equivalents).

                                                          g GS   V ar(Di |g (i) = g ) · (ng - 1)
                                              Nef f =                                                                   (3)
                                                                  V ar(Di,ref erence )
       The numerator quantifies the "total amount of variation" identifying F E . Different from the
FE formula, family size is adjusted for the fact that group-level fixed effects remove one degree
of information from each family, (ng - 1). The denominator provides a translation from "total
variation" to "person-equivalents" of variation by normalizing by the variation contributed by an
individual observation in a fixed, researcher-determined group, V ar(Di,ref erence ).
       In our application, we report effective observations using as reference (i) the variation in a cross
section regression after controlling for reasonable g-level covariates, V ar(Di,ref erence ) =V ar (Di |Wg );
and (ii) the variation from individuals in groups in two-child families.18

3.3        Consequences for Estimation: Bias

       Under homogeneous treatment effects (g =  ), SI has no effect on expected bias in estimation
of Equation 2, and the FE estimate trivially is unbiased for the ATE for the sample and the
population. There is only a loss of precision that accompanies the overall reduction in sample size.
       The more interesting case is when treatment effects are heterogeneous. In that case, SI will lead
the FE estimate to provide a biased estimate of the ATE, even if one corrects for the conditional
variance weighting of FE among switchers. To be concrete, let Z be a discrete covariate that varies
at the group level, such as family size, that determines the magnitude of the effect of treatment.
We allow for a different treatment effect for eachvalue of Z : g = f (zg ) = z , and define Z as the
set of values of zg present in the samples of siblings and switchers. The treatment effect estimated
without FE using a sample of groups with ng  2, e.g. siblings, is:


                                                        OLS =          z,OLS · z,OLS                                    (4)
                                                                 z Z
  18
       V ar(Di |g (i)   =      g ) is calculated using the population formula for variance, V ar(Di |g (i)     =   g)    =
                             1(Di =1)   2
 1                      ig
ng      ig    Di -           ng
                                            , rather than the sample formula (which would divide by ng - 1).


                                                                       11
       where

                                        (V ar(Di |ng  2, zg = z ) · P r(zg = z |ng  2)
                      z,OLS =
                                      z Z (V ar (Di |ng  2, zg = z ) · P r (zg = z |ng  2)

       and z,OLS is the OLS estimate without FE of the treatment effect for groups with zg = z , and
V ar(Di |ng  2, zg = z ) is the conditional variance of treatment among the sample with ng  2 and
zg = z .
       The FE estimator for the same sample is:


                                              F E =         z,F E · z,F E                                     (5)
                                                      z Z

       where

                                         (V ar(Di |F E, zg = z ) · P r(zg = z |Sg = 1)
                        z,F E =
                                       z Z (V ar (Di |F E, zg = z ) · P r (zg = z |Sg = 1)

       and z,F E is the FE estimate of the treatment effect for groups with zg = z , V ar(Di |F E, zg = z )
is the conditional variance of treatment among the sample for groups with zg = z , net of family
fixed effects.
       Moving from OLS to FE, the  's change and also the  's change. The change in the  's is how
we usually interpret the move from OLS to FE: the change is from "between" (bad) variation to
"within" (good) variation. But the full change also incorporates the different weightings of different
values of zg . If the OLS sample and the FE sample overlap in the covariates, we can decompose
the difference between OLS and FE to identify how much is caused by the change in weights, z ,
and how much is driven by the change in identification, z , as:



                    F E - OLS =             (z,F E - z,OLS ) · ( · z,F E + (1 - ) · z,OLS )                   (6)
                                      z Z
                                                             Impact of  weighting

                                  +         (z,F E - z,OLS ) · ( · z,OLS + (1 - ) · z,F E )
                                      z Z
                                                                  OLS Bias


       with   [0, 1] a researcher-determined weight. The impact of SI is captured in the first
summation of Equation 6, which is a function of the disparity in regression weights z between
OLS and FE, multiplied by an -weighted average of the z,OLS and z,F E . Setting  = 0 in this
term uses cross-section coefficients to assess the importance of changing the regression weights from
OLS to FE. Setting  = 1 uses the FE coefficients to assess this. If there is important heterogeneity
among both wz and z , these two extremes can provide useful benchmarks to compare against the
OLS and FE estimates, as we do in Section 4.3.19
  19
   This decomposition is similar in form to Equation 13 in Loken, Mogstad and Wiswall (2012), which uses  = 1/2.
However, we sum over a group-level covariate that is distinct from the treatment of interest, while Loken, Mogstad


                                                            12
    Since SI impacts the probability of each family size appearing in FE and OLS and possibly
the conditional variance as well, existing methods to reweight FE estimates (Gibbons, Suarez and
Urbancic, 2018) can at best recover the ATE for switchers. Since switchers are typically not a
population of interest, this raises concerns for the external validity of the FE estimator.

Illustration of Consequences: Greater Returns to Head Start in Larger Families

    We use data from our empirical example to illustrate the change in the components of z across
OLS and FE. Panel A of Table 3 shows that the proportion of 5+-child families in the switching
sample is roughly twice the proportion in the overall sample, while the share of 3 and 4-child families
is roughly similar. The variance in Head Start, shown in Panel B, is higher, roughly double, in
the switching sample relative to the sibling sample, however this is relatively similar across family
sizes. This suggests that the change in the conditional variance across OLS and FE plays a minor
role in our setting.20 We then calculate z,OLS and z,F E . Going from the sibling sample to the
switchers sample, 2-child declines by over 25% and 3-child declines by 15%. Conversely, 5-child
nearly doubles from 0.134 to 0.243, and 4-child families increases by over 25%.
    The effect of Head Start also varies by family size in our applications. The first two columns of
Panel A of Table 4 shows the estimated effects of Head Start on the likelihood of completing some
college by the number of children in a family for our illustrative sample. We show the results with
and without family fixed effects. In both specifications, the effect of Head Start is significantly
higher among white children in families with 5 or more children and, once fixed effects are added,
the effect of Head Start is monotonically increasing with the number of children in a family.
    One possible explanation for this heterogeneity is that children with higher initial endowments
receive greater parental investments in larger families, and also benefit more from Head Start (Aizer
and Cunha, 2012). Another possibility is that Head Start substitutes for parental time, which is
more scarce in larger families. Another interpretation is that this heterogeneity reflects the fact that
other covariates correlated with family size, such as income, mediate the impacts of Head Start.
This final explanation seems less likely, as we find that the heterogeneity in family size survives the
inclusion of other interactions, as we discuss in Section 6.
    The bottom of Panel A shows the number of Head Start switcher observations and effective
observations in terms of cross-sectional and two-sibling switcher individuals.21 It shows that a total
of 213 individuals are used to identify these coefficients, less than one tenth of the total sample,
and that the variation is equivalent to 236 individuals in 2-person switching families. Hence, by
including families with three or more children, on average, each observation is providing more
and Wiswall (2012) sum over values of an individual covariate (that varies within families), which is also the treatment
of interest.
  20
     We provide additional evidence that "undoing" the conditional variance weighting makes little difference in this
application in Section 6.
  21
     For effective cross-sectional individuals, the denominator of Equation 3 is the variance of Head Start, residualized
by the family mean of the covariates in the analysis For the effective number of two-person switcher individuals, the
denominator is [V (Di |g ) · (ng - 1)] /ng = [0.52 · (2 - 1)]/2 = 0.125.


                                                           13
variation than in a similar-sized sample of 2-child families. Further, the variation is equivalent to
731 individuals in a cross-sectional regression. This is because there is relatively little variation in
Head Start in the full sample.
    Like with SI, the larger Head Start effects we document for big families is not specific to the
PSID. Columns (3) to (5) of Table 4 show the CNLSY FFE estimated effects of Head Start by
family size for idleness, having a learning disability, and being in poor health.22 For each of these
outcomes, the impact of Head Start for 5+ child families is at least twice as large as the impact
for 2 or 3 child families. For high school graduation, we also see a large impact for 4-child families,
roughly double the impact for 2 and 3 child families. This implies that we should expect an
increase in the coefficient going from OLS to fixed effects due to the change in weighting across the
identifying samples, even without a change in the source of identification.
    The number of switchers in the CNLSY sample is 581, less than half of the total number
of observations. As in the PSID, the variation in this sample is equivalent to a larger sample
of 2-person families (648 individuals.) However, the corresponding cross-sectional observations is
smaller (438.7). These two examples illustrate that there are multiple forces driving the effective
number of observations calculation: lost information from the group FEs drives down variation; but
moving toward larger conditional variance of treatment increases variation. In the PSID example
the second effect dominates; in the CNLSY case the first effect dominates.


4     Extrapolating from Identifying to Target Population
    The difference between OLS and FE in implicit weighting of heterogeneous treatment effects
leads us to consider translating the FE estimates into an ATE for a (researcher-determined) popu-
lation of interest. We propose a method to flexibly obtain the ATE for such populations of interest,
which we refer to as "target" populations, and denote by an indicator Tg . Commonly, the target
population in applied work is the ATE for a nationally representative sample, which may be a
reasonable starting place for most researchers. For some treatments, like means-tested programs,
one might be interested in the ATE for eligible families, or families with a participating member.

4.1    Assumptions and Proposition

    The methods rely on four key assumptions. which are variants of those used for extrapolation
from IV (Angrist and Fernandez-Val (2013); Aronow and Carnegie (2013)). First, we assume that
Group ID conditional independence (Assumption 1, Equation 1) holds.

Assumption 2 (Conditional Fixed Effect Ignorability (CFEI)):
  22
     We focus on these outcomes because individuals that attended Head Start were found to fair significantly better
on each of these outcomes in Deming (2009).




                                                        14
                           E[Yi (1) - Yi (0)|Sg , Px , Qx ] = E[Yi (1) - Yi (0)|Px , Qx ]                  (7)
                           E[Yi (1) - Yi (0)|Tg , Px , Qx ] = E[Yi (1) - Yi (0)|Px , Qx ]                  (8)

       Second, we assume that conditional on observables, the true treatment effect is independent
of a group's switching or target status, which we refer to as conditional fixed effect ignorability
(CFEI).23 We use two propensity scores constructed from the vector of group characteristics, Xg ,
as the conditioning variables: Px := P r [Sg = 1|Xg = x] is the propensity to be a switching group,
and Qx := [Tg = 1|Xg = x] is the propensity to be in the (researcher-determined) target group.
CFEI eliminates, for example, a second type of Roy (1951)-type selection, whereby switchers have
an unobserved quality that increases the effectiveness of treatment.
       In the Head Start application, the key determinants of P r[Sg = 1] are family size and the under-
lying probability of Head Start participation. Family size is observable, and observable covariates,
such as family income, can take us a long way in predicting program participation. Likewise, the
family-level determinants of P r[Tg = 1] for a target such as Head Start participants will be largely
tied to observable eligibility requirements for the program, such as income and household size,
which together determine the income-to-poverty ratio.

Assumption 3 (Correct Propensity Score Specification):


                                        P r(Sg = 1|Xg ) = F (g ; Xg )                                      (9)
                                        P r(Tg = 1|Xg ) = G (g ; Xg )                                     (10)

       Third, we assume that the propensity scores that we estimate have the correct functional form,
with F (·) and G (·) known, and g and g parameters to be estimated. In our application, we
model F (·) and G (·) as a multinomial logit.

Assumption 4 (Overlap in Px ):

                                         If Qx > 0, then Px > 0,Xg                                        (11)

       Fourth, we require a positive probability of being a switcher for each value of Xg in the target
group, which ensures that we can use the switcher sample to recover the distribution of treatment
effects in the target sample. Since some covariate values may not be observed in the switcher
sample, this assumption implicitly places some restrictions on the relationship between treatment
effects and these covariates. For example, since we do not observe 1-unit groups ("singletons") in
the switcher sample ­ they are "never-switchers" ­ but they are present in some of our application
target populations,24 we cannot allow treatment effects for singletons to be outside the support of
  23
     We considered using CoFEfe as the acronym for this assumption. This would provide a novel candidate inter-
pretation of US President Donald Trump's enigmatic tweet of May 31, 2017.
  24
     Singletons comprise 6% of Head Start participants in the CNLSY, and 18% of Head Start participants in the
PSID.


                                                        15
the treatment effects of switchers. This also precludes us from including an indicator for singletons
in Xg .
    In our application we preserve overlap by assuming that treatment effects are the same for all
groups with 2 or fewer units, which allows us to extrapolate treatment effects for singletons from
2-unit groups.25 An alternative approach is to extrapolate treatment effects for never-switchers
using functional form assumptions, which we discuss under extensions below.

Proposition 1. Define the re-weighted FE estimator for target population t as

                                                   1                          t       ^
                                   t :=                                      wg (i) · g,F E ,                    (12)
                                            i 1 ( Sg (i) = 1)
                                                                i|Sg(i) =1


      t
with wg                      t
        (i) our estimate of wg (i) ,
                                             t          Qx · P r [Sg = 1]
                                            wg (i) :=                                                            (13)
                                                        Px · P r [Tg = 1]

Under Assumptions 1 through 4,  t is consistent for the ATE of the target population,
E [Y (1) - Y (0)|Tg = 1].

    The proof is in Appendix A. Intuitively, the weights are increasing in Qx and decreasing in Px ,
such that we upweight observations that are more similar to the target, and downweight observations
that are overrepresented in the switching population. The treatment estimate for each switcher
group g is weighted proportionately to match the share of the target population with observable
characteristics matching g , which gives the ATE under the assumptions above.26

Testable Implication

    CFEI requires that treatment effects should be balanced across Tg , conditional on Px and Qx .
This is potentially testable if some switchers are not in the target population ­ for instance, if
the target population is families that participate in a safety net program, groups that live in rural
areas, or firms that are in a particular industry. We implement this in Section 6.2.1. This test can
not be used, however, if the target is "everyone," "multi-unit groups," or otherwise contains the
set of switchers GS .

4.2    Reweighting Methodology

    In order to implement this reweighting strategy, we first need to obtain estimates of Px and Qx .
When the identifying sample is a subset of the target population, Qx = 1, and Px can be estimated
by a logit or probit model. Otherwise, these elements can be calculated by using a multinomial logit
  25
     We implement this by including an indicator for "1 or 2 child families" in Xg together with indicators for other
family sizes. Alternatively, the target group can be defined to only include families that are ever switchers, such as
"siblings" or "multi-child Head Start families."
  26
     See Appendix A for a simple derivation of the weights.


                                                           16
model to estimate the probability of each of the four possible combinations of having Sg = 1/Sg = 0
and Tg = 1/Tg = 0. Qx is then constructed as the sum of the predicted P r(Tg = 1, Sg = 0) and
the predicted P r(Tg = 1, Sg = 1) for each unit; and Px is constructed as the sum of the predicted
P r(Tg = 1, Sg = 1) and the predicted P r(Tg = 0, Sg = 1) for each unit.                 27

   With these weights in place, the ATE for the target population can be estimated in one of
two ways. The first is a two-step "post-regression weighting" of ^          ^
                                                                  g , where g is estimated from a
regression of the outcome on interactions between Di and group-specific dummies. Then aggregate
wt to the group-level and perform a normalization to obtain the final estimation weights, s^t =
 g (i)                                                                                                          g
        t                    Qx
       wg    ·n
          (i) g              Px
                                ·ng
                       =         Qx       . The 2-step ATE combines these using:
                           g GS Px ·n g
           t
          wg     ·ng
  g Gs       (i)


                                                  t
                                                  2                 ^t ·^
                                                    step =          sg   g                                      (14)
                                                             g GS

       Under the standard cluster-robust assumption that model errors are independent across groups,
t
2        is a weighted average of independent variables, and we can obtain a cluster-robust variance
  step
estimate as:

                                                                                     2
                                          t
                                     V ar(2                    ^ t )2 · ^    t
                                                                         g - 2step
                                            step ) =          (s g                                              (15)
                                                       g GS

       A second approach is to obtain the ATE in a single step using "in-regression weights." For this,
we need to adjust for the fact that the FE estimator uses weights F E rather than population shares.
We address this by incorporating inverse conditional variance weights, as vg = (V ar(Di |g (i) = g )-1
(Gibbons, Suarez and Urbancic, 2018).28 Then, the ATE can be estimated by 1
                                                                          t
                                                                            step from a one-step
                  t
regression using wg (i) · vg as regression weights, and computation of cluster-robust standard errors
is straightforward.29

4.3      Special Case: Univariate Heterogeneity

       If the source of heterogeneity in estimates is a single, discrete covariate, we can obtain further
insight from performing the decomposition captured in Equation 6. Taking the OLS family-size-
specific coefficients from column (1) of Table 4 and reweighting by the fixed-effects regression
weights ( = 0 in Eq. 6), we obtain a weighted coefficient of 0.069, shown in the bottom row
                                                                                       -0.049
of Table 4. This implies that approximately 1/3 of the change from OLS to FE ( 00..069
                                                                                   12-0.049 ) is
driven by the change in family size weights; with the other 2/3 driven by change in identifying
  27  t
     wg (i) can also be multiplied by survey weights, as we do in our PSID example.
  28
     This variance is computed using the population formula, (dividing by ng ), rather than the sample formula
(dividing by ng - 1). As with the two-step estimator, these weights can also be multiplied by sample weights.
  29
     As Gibbons, Suarez and Urbancic (2018) note, we cannot estimate cluster-robust standard errors in the estimation
step of the two-step equation: there are fewer clusters than the sum of the count of fixed effects and covariates.
However the standard cluster-robust assumptions imply that the g are independent of one another. This enables
Equation 15.



                                                             17
variation. Further, reweighting the FE estimates using the OLS weights ( = 1 in Eq. 6) produces
a coefficient is 0.083. This implies that the imbalance in family size alone causes the FFE estimate
to be 50% higher than the estimates without FE.

4.4      Monte Carlo Experiments

       We perform a Monte Carlo analysis to examine the properties of our proposed reweighting
estimators. We use naturally occuring selection into identification from our PSID application and
model treatment effects for three settings, allowing the true ATE to be known. Each setting has a
different model of heterogeneity in treatment, which determines the covariates that the researcher
uses to generate the propensity score.
       We generate the data for the Monte Carlo as follows: To construct baseline outcomes (i.e.
without treatment), we run a linear probability model predicting attainment of "some college or
more" with demographic variables, income during childhood, and parental education. From this
model we construct a one-dimensional covariate, Xig , which is a continuous probability that an
individual completes some college.30 All simulations start with this constructed variable Xig and
the variable HeadStartig from the original data. We then construct latent outcomes inclusive of
                = X +  HeadStart , where  is the treatment effect of Head Start. We scale
treatment as Yig   ig ig        ig       ig
   to ensure that these probabilities lie within the range [0, 1]. We then randomly generate the
Yig
                                             .
binary outcome variable as P r (Yig = 1) = Yig
       We consider three models of heterogeneity in treatment effects. First, ig = 0.08. We use
the variable Xig to generate propensity scores. Second, ig = 0.192 for large families (with 4 or
more siblings) and ig = 0 for small families (3 or fewer children). We use a dummy variable for
"large family" to generate propensity scores. Third, we allow the treatment effect heterogeneity
                                     X -X ¯
to vary smoothly: ig = 0.08 · 1 - ig ig · 1 , with X    ¯ig and s.d. (Xig ) the sample mean and
                                             s.d.(Xig )    3
standard deviation of Xig . This produces a treatment effect that is larger for lower-baseline-
probability individuals and ranges from 0.01 to 0.15 for most of the population. For this more
complex treatment effect, we generate propensity scores in two ways: using Xig and, more flexibly,
using a spline in Xig , with knots at the 5th , 20th , 50th , 80th , and 95th percentiles of Xig . The latter
model presumes that the researcher has some intuition that the treatment effect or selection into
identification may vary non-linearly with baseline outcomes.
       We run 3,000 replications of our Monte Carlo simulation. In each replication, we keep track of
the true ATE for each target population of interest, the FE estimate of the treatment effect, and
the reweighted regression estimate of the treatment effect for each target population.31 The FE
estimate is the same for all target populations. We consider four target populations: (i) individuals
in Head Start switching families;32 (ii) all siblings; (iii) all individuals in the sample (including
  30
     For simplicity, we restrict the sample to those with Xig  [0, 1] at baseline.
  31
     Both post-regression and in-regression reweighting produce the same results.
  32
     This will not necessarily be the same as the FE estimate because of differences in the conditional variance across
families.


                                                          18
singletons); and (iv) all Head Start participants. We multiply all estimates by 1,000 for easier
readability.
         Panel A of Table 5 presents results for the model with constant treatment effects. In this setting,
the average treatment effect is the same for all target populations, all estimators are unbiased, and
the FE model is the minimum variance estimator. The reweighting estimators have mean squared
errors 3 to 20% larger than for OLS.
         Panel B of Table 5 presents results for the model with zero treatment effect for small families, and
large treatment effects for large (4+ children) families. It shows that for every target population,
FE is biased, while the reweighting estimator is always unbiased. This improvement in bias over
FE leads to much better mean squared error results for the reweighting estimator.33
         Panels C and D of Table 5 examine the third model with heterogeneous treatment effect that
varies with Xig . Here the FE model has relatively little bias for the switcher and Head Start
participant targets (-0.2 p.p, and -0.08 p.p. on a base of 9 p.p.), but has much larger bias for the
remaining targets. Panel C shows that the regression reweighting estimator which uses Xig in the
propensity score estimation has less bias than FE for all target populations, with no detectable
bias for the switcher, or Head Start populations. The small bias for the reweighting estimator
for the other target populations results from an imperfect balance in the Xig variable, even after
reweighting.34
         Panel D shows that when we re-estimate the model including a spline in Xig in the propensity
score estimation, the reweighting estimator has no detectable bias for any of the target groups. This
suggests that allowing for greater flexibility in the functional form relationship between covariates
and the propensity score can achieve greater reductions in bias.
         Overall, the results of this exercise show that that the reweighted estimator has significantly less
bias than FE for the types of treatment effect heterogeneity we consider, and can be successfully
targeted toward different target populations. Consistent with the conditioning on observables
requirements of this estimator, its performance is best when it is given the appropriate covariates
for the particular type of heterogeneity, and when the model for the probability of switching is
correctly specified.


5         Extensions

5.1         Projecting Treatment Effects for "Never-Switchers"

         As noted above, the reweighting estimator in Proposition 1 only recovers the ATE for the target
population if (i) the target does not include never-switchers or (ii) if the treatment effects for never-
    33
     In results not reported, we have examined adding Xig as a covariate to the propensity score estimation stage in
this model. This introduces a small amount of bias in the reweighting estimator (-0.1 p.p., relative to the 2 to 3 p.p.
bias in FE) for the "siblings" and "all" target groups.
  34
     This is because P r(Sg = 1) is misspecified as a linear function of Xig , which causes us to misassign the weight
for each treatment effect.


                                                          19
switchers in the target can be assumed to be the same as some other target groups with Px > 0.
Otherwise, the reweighting estimator only obtains the ATE for the subset of the target with Px > 0,
for whom treatment effects are identified.
       A slight variant of (ii) above which could also enables recovery of the full target ATE is to
extrapolate treatment effects for never-switchers. This requires a stronger form of CFEI: that
treatment effects are not only a function of observable characteristics, but that the researcher can
correctly specify the functional form of this relationship.35 This assumption may not be warranted
if heterogeneity is primarily driven by unobservable characteristics; in cases where there is support
in the data for such a relationship with observed covariates (e.g. increasing effects with group size),
this may be a reasonable way to proceed. The weighted average of estimated treatment effects for
Px > 0 and extrapolated effects for Px = 0 gives the ATE for the target group.

5.2      Unit i Covariates

       We now consider FE models that include covariates Ci that vary across i units within a group.
Researchers may want to include Ci in their models in order to (i) make Assumption 1 more
reasonable; (ii) improve precision of estimates (iii) allow extrapolation to target groups defined at
the unit level.
       Once these covariates are included, the typical intuition that "groups with variation in treat-
ment" provide identification breaks down. This is because for some groups, who we refer to as
"residual switchers," there can be variation in the treatment residualized of Ci , even if there is no
within-group variation in Di .36 Thus, treatment effects can also be estimated for residual switchers;
however, identifying variation comes from from within-family variation in Ci , not Di .
       How much do residual switchers matter for estimates? We can quantify this by calculating the
share of variation in Di coming from residual switchers, using a formula similar to the calculation
of the effective number of observations.37 In our PSID application, residual switchers provide 3% of
the variation used for identification of the Head Start FFE coefficient. Therefore, this contributes
minimally to the FE estimate.
       We can also consider incorporating residual switchers into the reweighting methods. For a
general discussion of how our key assumptions and proposition can be extended to accomodate Ci ,
see Appendix A.3. The decision to include residual switchers can vary across contexts, and should
depend on the extent to which variation from residual switchers is valid for identifying treatment
effects. For example, in our application, residual switchers are primarily families where no children
attended Head Start. As a result, we believe that variation from these families is not aligned with
our desired thought experiment, which leads us to ignore these families in reweighting. In contrast,
  35
     See Appendix A.1.1 for a formalization of this assumption and an extension of Proposition 1 using exrapolation.
  36
     See Appendix A.3 for a formalization of this.
  37                                                                                      V ar (Di |Ci ,g (i)=g )·(ng -1)·1(Sg =1)
     In particular, the share of identification from residual switchers is equal to 1 - g                                          .
                                                                                             g V ar (Di |Ci ,g (i)=g )·(ng -1)
Alternatively, calculating the effective number of observations using Equation 3 (altering the variance to condition
on Ci ) would produce similar results


                                                                20
in a setting like difference-in-difference, untreated "residual switchers" can provide equal identifying
variation as the switchers, which makes it is appropriate to include variation from all groups.

5.3     Nonlinear Functional Form

    Next, we relax the linear functional form assumption used to demonstrate SI in our Monte
Carlo simulations. One reason this may make a difference is that conditional or fixed effect logit
and probit models use only "double switchers," families with variation in both the outcome variable
and the treatment variable, rather than "switchers". In Appendix E, we show that the biases from
SI are similar in the linear probability model and conditional logit, and that the reweighting we
propose is equally effective at reducing bias in both cases.

5.4     Continuous Di

    Finally, while we have focused on the case where Di is binary, it is worth noting that SI can
also be present when Di is continuous (since ^g,F E is still only estimated for switching families.) It
is not clear how frequently this will manifest in practice, however, since groups are more likely to
have variation in a continuous covariate. Even so, it may still be worthwhile to verify the number
of switchers, since there may be persistent bunching at one value of Di , such as at zero maternal
income or at zero instances of an uncommon event.


6     Effects of Head Start

6.1     Data and Replication of GTC and Deming (2009)

    We now turn to examining the impact of Head Start on long run outcomes using the PSID and
CNLSY, which were used to analyze this question in GTC and Deming (2009).

6.1.1    PSID

    The PSID sample includes the sample of individuals surveyed in the PSID by 2011. The PSID
began in 1968 as a survey of roughly 5,000 households and has followed the members of these
founding households and their children longitudinally. The longitudinal nature of the study allows
sibling comparisons during early adulthood as well as later in life.
    We begin our analysis with a replication of GTC. The sample includes all black or white
individuals born between 1966 and 1977, and excludes Hispanic individuals.We provide a detailed
description of our replication of GTC in Appendix D. Despite some minor differences, the two PSID
samples are qualitatively similar. The summary statistics are often within a third of a standard
deviation of each other. Moreover, the estimated effects of Head Start in this sample are similar
to those estimated in GTC. We find large (23 p.p.) and significant effects of Head Start on the
probability that whites attain some college, and large point estimates (9.3 p.p.) for high school

                                                  21
graduation, though in our case these are not statistically significant. We do not find that Head
Start meaningfully reduces the probability of committing a crime.38
       For the remaining analyses from here, we use a sample that substantially expands and modifies
the GTC sample. First, we expand the sample to include individuals born between 1978 and
1987. The individuals in these cohorts were too young when the analysis in GTC was performed
to observe their education and early career outcomes. Second, we include older siblings of all
individuals, including those born prior to 1966. These early cohorts were typically too old to
benefit from the introduction of Head Start, and serve as a plausible control group for the early
cohorts.
       In addition to modifications of the sample, we also expand the number of outcomes under
analysis in order to gain a more extensive understanding of the channels by which Head Start affects
children's lives. We follow the established practice of distilling the measures to summary indices
to lessen problems with multiple hypothesis testing (see, e.g., Anderson, 2008; Kling, Liebman and
Katz, 2007; Hoynes, Schanzenbach and Almond, 2016). We create four indices to capture economic
and health outcomes observed for individuals at age 30 and 40. The "economic sufficiency index"
includes measures of educational attainment, receipt of AFDC/TANF, food stamps, mean earnings,
mean family income relative to the poverty threshold, the fraction of years with positive earnings,
the fraction of years that the individual did not report an unemployment spell, and homeownership.
The "good health index" summarizes the following component measures: non-smoking, report of
good health, and negative of mean BMI.39
       The process of creating each index follows the procedure described in Kling, Liebman and
Katz (2007). In particular, we standardize each component of the index by subtracting the mean
outcome for non-treated children, defined as children that did not attend any form of preschool,
and then dividing the result by the standard deviation of the outcome for non-treated children. The
summary index takes a mean of these standardized measures.40 We also extract the first principal
component of the standardized variables for "economic sufficiency" and for "good health". Later
we use these as alternative outcome variables.
       Appendix Table B.2 reports sample descriptive statistics for the expanded sample we construct.
For ease of comparison with our earlier replication, we include means for the entire sample, the
subsamples of Head Start participants/non-participants, and for the sample of individuals with
siblings. We present the means of the analyzed outcomes in Appendix Table B.3.41
  38
      In some subsamples, we even find an effect in the opposite direction. We believe these cases are driven by
situations where there are rather few observations identifying the coefficients, and that the lack of correspondence
may be driven by very minor (and un-diagnosable) differences in specification and/or dataset construction.
   39
       See Appendix Table B.4 for descriptive statistics of the inputs to the indices.
   40
      Consistent with Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007), we generate a summary index for any individual for whom we
observe a response for one component of the index. Missing components of the index are imputed as the mean of the
outcome conditional on treatment status. For example, if a former Head Start participant is missing an outcome,
it is imputed as the mean outcome of other Head Start participants. Likewise for other preschool, or non-preschool
participants.
   41
      Appendix Table B.4 includes summary statistics for the inputs to the summary indices. Appendix Tables B.5,



                                                        22
6.1.2    CNLSY

    We obtain the CNLSY sample from the Deming (2009) replication files, which ensures that the
samples are identical. The CNLSY is a longitudinal survey that follows the children born to the
roughly 6,000 women that took part in the NLSY79 survey. The sample we use includes all children
who were at least 4 years old by 1990.

6.2     Head Start Estimation

    The empirical strategy takes advantage of within-family variation in participation in Head Start
to identify the long term impact of the program. Following GTC and Deming (2009), we estimate:


                  Yig =  + 1 HeadStartig + 2 OtherP reSchoolig + Xig  + g + ig                                    (16)

    where Yig represents a long-term outcome for individual i with mother g . HeadStartig indicates
whether a child reports participation in the program, and OtherP reSchoolig indicates participa-
tion in other preschool (and no participation in Head Start). These two variables are in this way
defined so as to be mutually exclusive, with "neither Head Start nor other preschool" as the omit-
ted category.42 g is a mother fixed effect which enables comparisons across siblings with a shared
mother. The vector Xig includes a large number of controls for individual and family characteris-
tics to absorb differences in personal and household characteristics which may be correlated with
one's participation in Head Start and long term outcomes. These controls vary due to data avail-
ability across sources and specification used in earlier work, but fall into three broad categories:
demographics, family background, and family economic circumstances during early childhood.43
    Missing control variables are imputed at the mean, and we include an indicator variable for these
imputed observations. We cluster standard errors on mother id, and use population-representative
weights where appropriate.44 When Yig is binary, we estimate linear probability models as a main
specification and check the sensitivity of our results to alternative models.
    The coefficient of interest is 1 , the impact of Head Start on long term outcomes compared to
no preschool. We generate propensity score weights to obtain the ATE for three target populations:
(1) Head-Start-eligible individuals, based on family income between ages 2 and 5;45 (2) all Head
B.6, and B.7 contain the number of observations for each outcome and control variable in the analysis .
   42
      Since Head Start only became available in 1965, we recode Head Start attendance to be "other preschool" for
the 1961 and older cohorts.
   43
      For the PSID, these include: individual's year of birth, sex, race, and an indicator for being low birth weight,
mother and father's years of education, an indicator for having a single mother at age 4, 4-knot splines in annual
family income for each age 0, 1, and 2, a fourth spline based on average family income between ages 3 and 6, indicators
for mother's employment status at ages 0, 1, and 2, and household size at age 4. For the CNLSY, these include:
health conditions before age 5, PPVT test score at age 3, measures of birth weight, measures of mother's health and
health behaviors, mother's working behavior and income prior to age 4, indicator for being first born, participation
in Medicaid, relative care, and indicators for early care types.
   44
      We follow our predecessors' weighting practices: for the PSID, we generate representative population weights
from the 1995 March CPS, and for the CNLSY do not use weights.
   45
      An individual is considered Head-Start-eligible if at any point between the ages of 2 and 5 her family income was



                                                          23
Start participants; and (3) all siblings.46 For parsimony, we use a subset of the variables in Table 2
to generate the propensity score for each race: year of birth, gender, mother's years of education,
income at age 3, and income at age 4, and indicators for family size (grouping together 1 and 2 child
families).47 We include results for the post-regression weighting method; results are qualitatively
similar when we use in-regression weighting.

6.2.1    Evidence on Model Assumptions: Identifying and Conditional Ignorability

    The standard test of the identifying assumption (Assumption 1) is to look for balance in observ-
ables across siblings within families. Deming (2009) finds little evidence that Head Start attendance
is correlated with observable differences across siblings, which suggests that the magnitude of selec-
tion may be small. In Appendix Table B.8, we examine the plausibility of the identifying assumption
in the PSID by testing the correlation between participation in Head Start and observable pre-Head
Start individual and family characteristics. For the white sample which forms our focus, there are
few statistically significant correlations, which suggest that the assumption may be reasonable.48
    As a test of CFEI, Appendix Table B.9 examines whether treatment effects vary by the share of
siblings in the target group. Specifically, we regress estimated family-specific treatment effects on
an indicator for whether an individual is a member of the target population, employing traditional
inverse propensity score weights to balance observables between target and non-target switchers.49
This test passes with no sign of systematic differences across target and non-target individuals
across all outcomes.50
    Our reweighting procedure also relies on adequate overlap of Px across switchers and individuals
in the target population in the non-switching sample. In Appendix Figure B.3 we show the density
of the estimated probabilities of being a Head Start participant for the switching sample and
the non-switching Head Start participant sample. This figure shows that there is a good deal of
overlap across the two groups, but also that there are a few Head Start participants whose p-scores
lie outside the range of the switchers. These observations represent 4 individuals, 5% of the Head
Start non-switcher observations, and 2% of all Head Start participants. We interpret this magnitude
below 150% of the poverty level, to account for our imperfect ability to observe reportable income.
  46
     Propensity score weights are estimated using information on year of birth, maternal education, sex, and maternal
income at ages 3 and 4.
  47
     Results are similar when we substitute family size indicators with linear and quadratic terms in family size.
  48
     For the black sample, participation in Head Start is correlated with a greater likelihood of having higher income
at age 1, and lower income at age 2, which may raise concerns that black families may tend to send their children
to Head Start after a rupture in the family or after an income shock. However, given the many hypotheses being
tested in this table, these significant findings might be spurious; and these results are somewhat sensitive, becoming
insignificant when we drop observations with imputed controls.
  49
     For target individuals the weights are 1/P r [Ti = 1, Sg = 1|Xig ], and for non-target individuals the weights are
1/Pr[Ti = 0, Sg = 1|Xig ].
  50
     When the target population is Head Start participants, this requirement forces a degree of balance across the
target and non-target groups. Another way of viewing this test is: do switching families with a greater share of
participants have different coefficients on Head Start than those with a smaller share of participants? We have run
analogous models at the family level, which give qualitatively similar results.




                                                          24
of violation of the overlap assumption as mild enough to disregard in our subsequent analysis.51

6.3      Head Start Results

6.3.1      Reweighted Estimates

       We begin by presenting results for our illustrative outcome, attainment of some college for whites
in the PSID, in Panel A of Table 6. Column (1) of the table presents the estimated impact of Head
Start on some college in GTC, column (2) presents the results using our expanded sample, and
columns (3) to (5) present reweighted estimates for the three target populations. As reported earlier,
we estimate that Head Start increases the likelihood of attaining some college by a statistically
significant 12 p.p. (se: 0.053) using the baseline FFE model. This estimate is 57% smaller than the
estimate reported in GTC, 0.281 (se: 0.108).52 The standard errors are also roughly 50% smaller,
corresponding to the roughly tripling of sample size (2,986 compared with 1,036).
       As we foreshadowed earlier, these estimates are unlikely to represent the ATE for policy relevant
populations, such as the Head Start eligible population and Head Start participants. Figure 3 shows
a scatter of the FFE weights and the Head-Start-representative weights for each family in the white
sample, divided by 2 to 3 child families (Panel A) and 4 or more child families (Panel B). The larger
(smaller) markers signify that the estimated effect of Head Start on some college for the family is
above (below) median. We also include a 45 degree line for reference. The figure shows that, in
general, the Head-Start-representative weights are higher than the FFE weights for small families
that experience smaller impacts of Head Start. Conversely, the representative weights are lower
relative to the FFE weights for large families that experience larger impacts of Head Start. Hence,
we should expect the reweighted estimates to show a reduced impact of Head Start relative to FFE.
       The reweighted estimate of the impact of Head Start for the eligible, participant, and sibling
populations is between 0.068, 0.026, and 0.079, respectively, and are all statistically insignificant.
Setting aside the lack of precision in the estimates, these represent moderately large impacts relative
to the 43.7% average rate of college going among Head Start eligible children. But comparing to the
FFE coefficient, these effects imply a 34% to 78% smaller impact on college attendance. Putting
these estimates in broader perspective, they are 45 to 91% smaller than the unadjusted estimates
for all participants from other FFE studies (Bauer and Schanzenbach, 2016; Deming, 2009) and
51% smaller than the estimate from the county roll-out of Head Start (Bailey, Sun and Timpe,
2018), although the lower end of the confidence intervals for these estimates include our ATE.
       Panel B of Table 6 presents results for the Economic Sufficiency Index in the PSID. Our FFE
estimate shows a statistically insignificant 0.023 SD decline in this index associated with Head Start.
When we reweight the effects, we find slightly larger negative effects for Head Start eligible children
  51
     We provide the equivalent figure for the "Head-Start-eligible" target population in Appendix Figure B.4. For this
target group, the range of switching sample estimated p-scores encompasses that for non-switching target observations.
  52
     We show in the appendix that this discrepancy is not due to faulty replication of the GTC estimates in a smaller
sample. We estimate a coefficient of 0.232 (se: 0.094) for this sample and outcome in our replication.



                                                         25
and Head Start participants, and a positive effect (0.03 SD) for siblings. It bears emphasizing,
though, that the results are not precisely estimated, such that the 95% confidence intervals allow
for a sizeable positive impact of Head Start in spite of the small or negative point estimate. For
example, the confidence interval for the economic index for whites allows for a Head-Start-induced
improvement of 0.16 SD or a reduction of 0.22 SD for Head Start participants. This limits our
ability to make firm conclusions about Head Start's impact on this outcome.
       The following four panels of Table 6 show the CNLSY FFE estimates, those reported in Deming
(2009) and our replication, and our reweighted estimates. The panels report effects for high school
graduation, idleness (not in school or at work), diagnosis of a learning disability, and poor health
(based on self-reported health status). The FFE estimates indicate that Head Start leads to an
8.5 p.p. increase in high school graduation (p < 0.01), a 7.2 p.p. decline in idleness (p < 0.10), a
5.9 p.p. decline in having a learning disability (p < 0.01), and a 6.9 p.p. decline in reporting poor
health (p < 0.01). The reweighted estimate for participants for high school is 44% smaller, and not
statistically significant. We also see substantial 24% and 28% declines in the estimated impact on
idleness and having a learning disability, respectively, when we consider the impact on participants.
The poor health estimates are relatively more stable; the reweighted impacts on participants are
just 3% smaller than the FFE estimate.
       In the final column of the table, we test whether the difference between the reweighted estimate
for participants and the FFE estimate is statistically significant. We bootstrap the standard errors
for this difference by taking draws with replacement from the sample and performing the FFE
estimation and reweighting again. We do this 1,000 times and obtain the standard error of our
difference as the standard deviation of the 1,000 estimated FFE-reweighted differences. We find
that the reweighted estimates for some college (PSID) and high school graduation (CNLSY) are
statistically different from the FFE estimate at the 5% and 10% levels, respectively. The remainder
of the outcomes are more imprecisely estimated, and therefore we can not reject that the reweighted
estimate is the same as the FFE estimate.
       Returning to the PSID, Appendix Tables B.10 and B.11 show the PSID FFE estimates and
reweighted results for high school and the good health index for whites, and the corresponding
results for blacks. Overall, the results suggest little support for a positive long term effect of Head
Start. This is true for the FFE estimates and the reweighted estimates. Nonetheless, the magnitude
of the estimates can vary importantly with reweighting, particularly for whites. This makes sense
since the identifying sample is a much smaller share of the overall sample for whites relative to
blacks. For example, the FFE estimate for the good health index for whites is -0.265 SD, but
reweighting for the Head Start participant population changes this estimate to -0.439. In contrast,
the coefficients are relatively stable for blacks.53
       We explore other reweighting strategies in Appendix Tables B.12 and B.13. Reweighting using
  53
     For the black sample, most estimates are also statistically insignificant. However, for the age 30 Economic
Sufficiency Index, the reweighted estimates indicate statistically significant negative impacts of Head Start. For
example, for a target population of participants the reweighted coefficient on Head Start is -0.211 (s.e. = 0.073).


                                                        26
linear extrapolation of treatment effects to singletons in Table B.12 produces qualitatively similar
results to the baseline reweighting, although the point estimates for Head Start participants are
often smaller.54 Table B.13 presents the results when we reweight the FFE estimates using sample
shares instead of propensity score weights. Across all outcomes, these estimates are quite similar
to the FFE estimates, underscoring that the conditional-variance-weighting plays a minor role in
this setting.

6.3.2    More Evidence on the Role of Family Size

    One key pattern in our findings is that larger families appear to have larger returns to Head
Start than smaller families. We believe this to be a new finding in the Head Start literature. We
note that this was not a pattern we initially set out to test in this study, so there is some chance
of this finding being inadvertently driven by chance and our limited sample sizes. However we
think that this may provide an interesting hypothesis for future studies. Also, we first observed
this pattern in the PSID data, and so our CNLSY results (see e.g. Columns 3, 4, and 5 of Table 4)
are to some degree an out of sample confirmation of this pattern.
    We have examined whether the larger coefficients for larger family sizes in Table 4 are driven
by family size standing in for other covariates. In Appendix Table B.14 we perform a "horse race"
analysis, comparing whether heterogeneous coefficients load on to family size, or other covariates.
This table shows that the heterogeneity with family size is robust to also allowing for heterogeity
along other covariates. We have also experimented with specifications that test for whether larger
family size is merely proxying for "longer sibling cohort span," and do not find evidence that this
is the case.

6.3.3    Additional FFE Estimates

    Continuing our analysis of the PSID, we also investigate effects of Head Start on a variety of
additional short-term outcomes, outcomes at age 40, as well as heterogeneity by race, gender by
cohort in Appendix C. We do not find any systematic evidence of effects on any of these outcomes,
or important heterogeneity along these dimensions.


7     Other Applications
    We have shown empirical evidence for selection into identification for three FFE applications
relating to the returns to human capital investment and returns to domestic migration. In each
of these contexts, there appears to be a mechanical relationship between P r(Sg = 1) and group
size. In the Head Start setting, heterogeneity along these lines creates an upward-bias in the FE
   54
      We have also explored excluding singletons altogether from the target. The estimates for non-singleton Head
Start participants and non-singleton Head-Start-eligible children typically lie between the reweighted estimates for
siblings and Head Start participants.



                                                        27
estimate. Since returns to migration may also be heterogeneous by family characteristics, it may
be useful to also reweight the estimates from Collins and Wanamaker (2014) to obtain the ATE for
a representative set of migrants.
   We now discuss three additional FE designs present in the education, labor, and environmental
literatures that illustrate settings where the tools that we have developed may apply. First, a
number of studies examine the effect of peers in the classroom within a school-grade (or school)
using school-grade FE (or school FE). For example, Carrell and Hoekstra (2010) and Carrell,
Hoekstra and Kuka (2018) examine the effect of having a peer exposed to domestic violence (DV)
using this strategy, finding large negative impacts on contemporaneous achievement that persist to
reduce long-term earnings. While the DV measure in these studies is continuous, it is reasonable
to think that this may be a "lumpy" variable in the sense that some schools (or school-grades),
which have a low probability of DV, will never have a student exposed to DV during the 8 year
window of observation, and some school-grades, which have a high probability of DV, may always
have a student exposed to DV. Given the likely correlation between P r(DVg = 1) and P r(Sg = 1),
non-switcher schools probably also have a different set of school resources (e.g. share of highly
experienced teachers) and student composition (e.g. mean family income) than switchers, which
could either exacerbate or mitigate the effects of DV. As a result, the effects estimated from
switching schools may not generalize to low-probability-DV non-switchers or high-probability-DV
non-switchers.
   Second, a set of influential papers by Dube, Lester and Reich (2010, 2015) identify the impact
of minimum wage laws within border-county pairs (using border-pair-by-year FE). This strategy
produces bounds on minimum wage elasticities which are less negative than those estimated with
other strategies. The authors report that 91% of the county pairs in the data have variation in
the minimum wage at some point during the analysis, however states with more border counties
and who have more frequent changes to the minimum wage relative to neighboring states will
contribute more variation to the design. Hence, in practice, identification may be concentrated
among a subset of the 91%. At the same time, the characteristics of switching border counties
are likely to be different from interior counties, in terms of the education distribution, population
density, or industry composition, which could influence the response to minimum wage increases
(Cengiz et al., 2019). Thus, reweighting the estimates of switching border pairs to account for these
characteristics could yield a different estimate for the impact of the minimum wage.
   Third, it has become common to estimate the effect of environmental shocks on health and
human capital using variation in temperature or rainfall within a local area (e.g. district FE). For
example, Shah and Steinberg (2017) employ this strategy and find that a positive rain shock (top
20% rainfall) reduces the likelihood that students attend school, and vice versa for droughts. Since
shocks are by definition infrequent events, it is likely that some districts that have more moderate
climates will have no shocks over the 4 years of analysis. These non-switching districts may be
located in a different geography, have distinct industrial composition, or population characteristics,


                                                 28
which could in turn affect the elasticity of school attendance. Hence, extrapolating from switcher
to non-switcher districts may require reweighting strategies such as those we propose.
    These applications highlight the fact that selection into identification is likely to be relevant
across the numerous domains where FE are applied. We leave it to future researchers to quantify
the role of this selection and apply reweighting techniques to test the sensitivity of the conclusions.


8    Conclusion
    Fixed effects can provide a useful approach for treatment effect estimation. The internal validity
of this strategy, which has been the subject of much debate, relies on the assumption that treatment
is randomly assigned to units in a group. In this article, we show that an additional assumption is
needed for the external validity of results: that groups with variation (switchers) have comparable
treatment effects to groups without variation (non-switchers). In other words, fixed effects estimates
are generalizable only if there is no selection into identification.
    We show that this assumption is not trivial in the context of family fixed effects. We document
across multiple settings that switching families are systematically larger and show that this can
induce bias in estimation. We develop a novel approach to recover ATE's for representative popu-
lations, which upweights observations that are under-represented in the identifying sample relative
to the population of interest. We demonstrate that this reweighting approach performs well using
Monte Carlo simulations.
    We apply these lessons to an analysis of the long term effects of Head Start in the PSID and
CNLSY using family fixed effects. Relative to prior evaluations of Head Start using FFE in the
PSID, we use a sample three times as large in size, include longer run (up to age 40) outcomes, and
expand the set of outcomes under consideration. Echoing prior findings, we find using FFE that
Head Start significantly increases the likelihood of completing some college and graduating from
high school, and decreases the likelihood of being idle, having a disability, or reporting poor health.
    Using our reweighting methods, we estimate that Head Start leads to a 2.6 p.p. increase in the
likelihood of attending some college for Head Start participants, and a 6.8 p.p. increase for Head
Start eligible. The ATE estimate for participants is 78% smaller than the FFE estimate, a difference
which is statistically significant at the 5% level. We examine several other outcomes and find few
statistically significant results. In sum, the FFE results in the PSID indicate that Head Start has
little effect on many long term outcomes on average, with the exception of completing some college,
and perhaps even detrimental effects for men. In the CNLSY, for high school graduation we find
that the reweighted estimate for participants (4.8 p.p.) is 44% smaller than the FFE estimate, a
difference which is statistically different at the 10% level. We find relatively less change associated
with reweighting for other outcomes.
    Overall, we interpret our findings as pointing primarily toward "increased uncertainty" and to
a limited degree toward "zero effects" of the Head Start program. This suggests that there is some


                                                   29
discordance between the long-term results from the FFE design, and new estimates using other
designs, which generally produce larger and more robust effects of this intervention. Reconciling
these findings is beyond the scope of this paper, but would be a productive avenue for future work.
   Based on our findings, we propose new standards for practice when using FE or similar research
designs to diagnose, and potentially correct for, the role of changes in sample composition in
explaining the gap between OLS and FE estimates.

  1. First, analyses should report the switching sample size in addition to the total sample size,
     including for relevant subsamples of the data (e.g. whites and blacks). It may also be useful
     to calculate the effective number of observations and share of identifying variation from true
     switchers to increase transparency into the variation among switchers.

  2. Second, we suggest that researchers show a balance of observables across switching status
     to complement evidence of within-sample balance across treatment status. These covariates
     should include the number of units in a group (if there is imbalance) and correlates of treat-
     ment. For example, in the case of movers, one might consider testing for balance of urbanicity,
     age, and occupations. If there are differences in these covariates, researchers should examine
     heterogeneity along these dimensions. These tests are likely to have limited power to detect
     issues if there are interactions between covariates, but are a useful bellweather for important
     external validity concerns.

  3. As a subsequent step, we recommend using propensity-score reweighting of the FE estimates
     to obtain estimates for a representative population or a policy-relevant population, such as
     program participants. Since these methods can perform unevenly under some models of
     heterogeneity, we suggest testing for sensitivity of results and reporting a range of estimates
     where applicable.




                                                30
References
Abrevaya, Jason. 2006. "Estimating the effect of smoking on birth outcomes using a matched
  panel data approach." Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21(4): 489­519.

Aizer, Anna, and Flavio Cunha. 2012. "The Production of Human Capital: Endowments,
  Investments and Fertility." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18429. DOI:
  10.3386/w18429.

Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay, and David S. Lee. 2005. "The Costs of Low Birth
  Weight." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3): 1031­1083.

Anderson, Michael L. 2008. "Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
  Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects."
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103.

Andersson, Fredrik, John C. Haltiwanger, Mark J. Kutzbach, Giordano E. Palloni,
  Henry O. Pollakowski, and Daniel H. Weinberg. 2016. "Childhood Housing and Adult
  Earnings: A Between-Siblings Analysis of Housing Vouchers and Public Housing." National
  Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 22721.

Andrews, Isaiah, and Emily Oster. 2019. "A Simple Approximation for Evaluating External
  Validity Bias." Economics Letters, 178: 58­62. Working Paper.

Angrist, Joshua, and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics. Princeton
  University Press.

Angrist, Joshua D. 1998. "Estimating the Labor Market Impact of Voluntary Military Service
  Using Social Security Data on Military Applicants." Econometrica, 66(2): 249­288.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Ivan Fernandez-Val. 2013. "ExtrapoLATE-ing: External Valid-
  ity and Overidentification in the LATE Framework." Advances in Economics and Econometrics:
  Tenth World Congress, , ed. Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Arellano and Eddie Dekel Vol. 3 of Econo-
  metric Society Monographs, 401 ­ 434. Cambridge University Press.

Aronow, Peter M., and Allison Carnegie. 2013. "Beyond LATE: Estimation of the Average
  Treatment Effect with an Instrumental Variable." Political Analysis, 21(4): 492­506.

Bailey, Martha J., Shuqiao Sun, and Brenden Timpe. 2018. "Prep School for Poor Kids:
  The Long-Run Impacts of Head Start on Human Capital and Economic Self-Sufficiency." Working
  Paper.

Barr, Andrew, and Chloe R. Gibbs. 2018. "Breaking the Cycle? Intergenerational Effects of
  an Anti-Poverty Program in Early Childhood." mimeo.

                                               31
Bauer, Lauren, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2016. "The Long-Term Impact of the
  Head Start Program." The Hamilton Project.

Bayer, Patrick, Randi Hjalmarsson, and David Pozen. 2009. "Building Criminal Capi-
  tal behind Bars: Peer Effects in Juvenile Corrections*." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  124(1): 105­147.

Beck, Nathaniel. 2015. "Estimating Grouped Data Models with a Binary Dependent Variable
  and Fixed Effects: What are the Issues? Comments Prepared for Delivery at the Annual Meeting
  of the Society for Political Methodology." mimeo.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2007. "From the Cradle to
  the Labor Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes*." The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 122(1): 409­439.

Borusyak, Kirill, and Xavier Jaravel. 2017. "Revisiting Event Study Designs, with an Appli-
  cation to the Estimation of the Marginal Propensity to Consume." Working Paper.

Bound, John, and Gary Solon. 1999. "Double Trouble: On the Value of Twins-based Estimation
  of the Return to Schooling." Economics of Education Review, 18(2): 169­182.

Callaway, Brantly, and Pedro H. C. Sant'Anna. 2018. "Difference-in-Differences with Multi-
  ple Time Periods and an Application on the Minimum Wage and Employment." Working Paper.

Cameron, A. Colin, and Pravin K. Trivedi. 2005. Microeconometrics: Methods and Applica-
  tions. Cambridge University Press.

Carneiro, Pedro, and Rita Ginja. 2014. "Long-Term Impacts of Compensatory Preschool
  on Health and Behavior: Evidence from Head Start." American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, 6(4): 135­173.

Carrell, Scott E., and Mark L. Hoekstra. 2010. "Externalities in the Classroom: How Children
  Exposed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone's Kids." American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 2(1): 211­228.

Carrell, Scott E., Mark Hoekstra, and Elira Kuka. 2018. "The Long-Run Effects of Disrup-
  tive Peers." American Economic Review, 108(11): 3377­3415.

Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer. 2019. "The Effect of
  Minimum Wages on Low-Wage Jobs*." The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Chaisemartin, Clement, and Xavier D'Haultfoeille. 2019. "Two-way Fixed Effects Estima-
  tors with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects." mimeo.



                                               32
Chamberlain, Gary. 1980. "Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data." The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 47(1): 225­238.

Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2018a. "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Inter-
  generational Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects*." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  133(3): 1107­1162.

Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2018b. "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenera-
  tional Mobility II: County-Level Estimates." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3): 1163­
  1228.

Chorniy, Anna V, Janet Currie, and Lyudmyla Sonchak. 2018. "Does Prenatal WIC Par-
  ticipation Improve Child Outcomes?" National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  24691.

Collins, William J., and Marianne H. Wanamaker. 2014. "Selection and Economic Gains in
  the Great Migration of African Americans: New Evidence from Linked Census Data." American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(1): 220­252.

Currie, Janet, and Duncan Thomas. 1995. "Does Head Start Make a Difference?" American
  Economic Review, 85(3): 341­364.

Currie, Janet, and Ishita Rajani. 2015. "Within-Mother Estimates of the Effects of WIC on
  Birth Outcomes in New York City." Economic Inquiry, 53(4): 1691­1701.

Currie, Janet, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2013. "Weathering the storm: Hurricanes and birth
  outcomes." Journal of Health Economics, 32(3): 487 ­ 503.

Deming, David. 2009. "Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development: Evidence
  from Head Start." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(3): 111­134.

Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. "Minimum Wage Effects
  Across State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties." The Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 92(4): 945­964.

Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2015. "Minimum Wage Shocks,
  Employment Flows, and Labor Market Frictions." Journal of Labor Economics, 34(3): 663­704.

Fernandez-Val, Ivan. 2009. "Fixed Effects Estimation of Structural Parameters and Marginal
  Effects in Panel Probit Models." Journal of Econometrics, 150(1): 71 ­ 85.

Figlio, David, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth. 2014. "The
  Effects of Poor Neonatal Health on Children's Cognitive Development." American Economic
  Review, 104(12): 3921­3955.


                                               33
Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2016. "Sources of Geographic
  Variation in Health Care: Evidence From Patient Migration*." The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 131(4): 1681­1726.

Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie. 2002. "Longer-Term Effects of Head
  Start." American Economic Review, 92(4): 999­1012.

Gibbons, Charles E., Serrato Juan Carlos Suarez, and Michael B. Urbancic. 2018.
  "Broken or Fixed Effects?" Journal of Econometric Methods, 0(0).

Gibbs, Chloe, Jens Ludwig, and Douglas L Miller. 2013. "Does Head Start Do Any Lasting
  Good?" Legacies of the War on Poverty, , ed. Martha J. Bailey and Sheldon Danziger. Russell
  Sage Foundation.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018. "Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment Tim-
  ing." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25018.

Hoxby, Caroline M. 2000. "The Effects of Class Size on Student Achievement: New Evidence
  from Population Variation." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(4): 1239­1285.

Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond. 2016. "Long-Run
  Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net." American Economic Review, 106(4): 903­934.

Imbens, Guido W., and Donald B. Rubin. 2015. Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and
  Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press.

Johnson, Rucker C., and C. Kirabo Jackson. 2017. "Reducing Inequality Through Dynamic
  Complementarity: Evidence from Head Start and Public School Spending." National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper 23489. DOI: 10.3386/w23489.

Kling, Jeffrey R, Jeffrey B Liebman, and Lawrence F Katz. 2007. "Experimental Analysis
  of Neighborhood Effects." Econometrica, 75(1): 83­119.

Lemieux, Thomas. 1998. "Estimating the Effects of Unions on Wage Inequality in a Panel Data
  Model with Comparative Advantage and Nonrandom Selection." Journal of Labor Economics,
  16(2): 261­291.

Lochner, Lance, and Enrico Moretti. 2015. "Estimating and Testing Models with Many Treat-
  ment Levels and Limited Instruments." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(2): 387­397.

Loken, Katrine V., Magne Mogstad, and Matthew Wiswall. 2012. "What Linear Esti-
  mators Miss: The Effects of Family Income on Child Outcomes." American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 4(2): 1­35.



                                              34
Ludwig, Jens, and Douglas L. Miller. 2007. "Does Head Start Improve Children's Life
  Chances? Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design." The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 122(1): 159­208.

Mundlak, Yair. 1978. "On the Pooling of Time Series and Cross Section Data." Econometrica,
  46(1): 69­85.

Pages, Remy J.-C., Dylan J. Lukes, Drew H. Bailey, and Greg J. Duncan. 2019. "Elusive
  Longer-Run Impacts of Head Start: Replications Within and Across Cohorts." arXiv:1903.01954
  [econ, q-fin]. arXiv: 1903.01954.

Robins, James M., Andrea Rotnitzky, and Lue Ping Zhao. 1995. "Analysis of Semipara-
  metric Regression Models for Repeated Outcomes in the Presence of Missing Data." Journal of
  the American Statistical Association, 90(429): 106­121.

Rossin-Slater, Maya. 2013. "WIC in your neighborhood: New evidence on the impacts of geo-
  graphic access to clinics." Journal of Public Economics, 102: 51­69.

Roy, A. D. 1951. "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings." Oxford Economic Papers,
  3(2): 135­146.

Shah, Manisha, and Bryce Millett Steinberg. 2017. "Drought of Opportunities: Contem-
  poraneous and Long-Term Impacts of Rainfall Shocks on Human Capital." Journal of Political
  Economy, 125(2): 527­561.

Sloczynski, Tymon. 2018. "A General Weighted Average Representation of the Ordinary and
  Two-Stage Least Squares Estimands." Working Paper.

Stuart, Elizabeth A., Stephen R. Cole, Catherine P. Bradshaw, and Philip J. Leaf.
  2011. "The Use of Propensity Scores to Assess the Generalizability of Results from Randomized
  Trials." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 174(2): 369­386.

Suri, Tavneet. 2011. "Selection and Comparative Advantage in Technology Adoption." Econo-
  metrica, 79(1): 159­209.

Thompson, Owen. 2017. "Head Start's Long-Run Impact: Evidence from the Program's Intro-
  duction." Journal of Human Resources.

Verdier, Valentin, and Andrew Castro. 2019. "Average Treatment Effects for Stayers with
  Correlated Random Coefficient Models of Panel Data." mimeo.

Wiswall, Matthew. 2013. "The dynamics of teacher quality." Journal of Public Economics,
  100: 61­78.



                                                  35
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2010. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT
  Press.

Xie, Zong-Xian, Shin-Yi Chou, and Jin-Tan Liu. 2016. "The Short-Run and Long-Run
  Effects of Birth Weight: Evidence from Large Samples of Siblings and Twins in Taiwan." Health
  Economics, 26(7): 910­921.




                                              36
9    Figures

    Figure 1: Within-Family Variation in Head Start and Attendance of Some College (PSID)

                             1


                                                                                             1
                                                                                             6
                                                                            1                11                   1        1
            Completed Some College Deviation




                                                                       1            1        56         1              2           1
                                                                                             12
                                     .5




                                                                  6         2                250    2             2        2
                                                                                2        5   6                                 1       1
                                                                                             7
                                                        1              3                     134        3              3
                                                                            2                48                            1
                                                                                             20
                                                                       3                     10                        2
                          0




                                                    1   7         26   14   9 4              1674   3   14        26   7   3 1

                                                                                             6
                                                                                             24
                                                                  2         5                33                   1        1
                                                        1              5            4        112        1              1
                                                                                             18
              -.5




                                                    1             2         4                250    1             6
                                                                                2        4   4
                                                                                             4
                                                        1              3                     67         1
                                                                            1                16
                                                                                             5
                                                                       1                     2
                             -1




                                               -1           -.5                0                             .5                            1
                                                                       Head Start Deviation


       Notes: This figure depicts the identifying variation used in a FFE regression of some college on an
       indicator for participation in Head Start. Each marker represents the number of individuals that
       exhibit a particular deviation from the mean Head Start attendance of their family and from the
       mean attendance of some college of their family. Deviations are defined as the difference between
       individual attendance of Head Start/some college (1 or 0) and mean of Head Start/some college of
       one's family. The marker size represents the unweighted number of individuals. We also include a
       best-fit line, weighted by the number of individuals in each marker. Source: Panel Study of Income
       Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves.




                                                                                    37
   Figure 2: Likelihood of Being a Switcher Family Increases with Family Size and P(treatment)

                                                                                      (a) Head Start in PSID



                                   1

                                                                                             black
                                   .8
                         P(Switching Family)




                                                                       momHS
                                      .6




                                                                                           5 kids

                                                    white, or
                                                    mom>HS
                            .4




                                                                        5 kids                4 kids 3 kids

                                                                                 4 kids         2 kids    (>HS) 5 kids
                                                                                    3 kids
                                   .2




                                                                             2 kids
                                                        4 kids
                                                     54kids  3 kids
                                                         3 kids
                                                        kids
                                                       22kids
                                                          kids
                                   0




                                                0                           .2                  .4             .6                                .8                       1
                                                                                                  P(Head Start)

                       (b) Head Start in CNLSY                                                                                              (c) Migration in Census
     1




                                                                                                                   1
     .8




                                                                                                                   .8




                                                    5 kids
         .6




                                                                                                                       .6
 P(Switch)




                                                                                                               P(Switch)




                                                                                                                                4 kids
                                                4 kids                                                                             3 kids
.4




                                                                                                              .4




                                                                                                                                     2 kids
                                               3 kids
     .2




                                                                                                                   .2




                                         2 kids
     0




                                                                                                                   0




              0               .2                        .4             .6             .8             1                      0      .2            .4                  .6       .8   1
                                                          P(Head Start)                                                                               P(Migration)



                  Notes: This figure shows the probability of being in a switching family and the probability of "treat-
                  ment" by family size using three datasets and varying treatments. Panel (a) plots the probability of
                  being in a switching family and of attending Head Start by family size for the following groups in the
                  PSID: Whites, Blacks, children of mothers with at most a high school degree, and children of mothers
                  with at least some college. Figure (b) is a simplified version of (a) using data on Head Start participa-
                  tion and family size from the CNLSY. Figure (c) shows the probability of being in a switching family
                  and the probability of migrating to the northern US, using a linking of the 1910 to 1930 censuses used
                  in Collins and Wanamaker (2014).




                                                                                                         38
Figure 3: FFE Weights and Head-Start-Participant-Representative Weights by Family Size and
Some College  (PSID White Sample)


                                      (a) Families with 2-3 Children


                      .04


                                                                                 45 degree
                      .03
                 FFE Weight
                    .02
                      .01
                      0




                              0        .01               .02               .03               .04
                                     Head-Start-Participant-representative weight

                                      2 or 3 kids, high beta   2 or 3 kids, low beta


                                      (b) Families with 4+ Children
                      .04




                                                                                 45 degree
                      .03
                 FFE Weight
                    .02
                      .01
                      0




                              0        .01               .02               .03               .04
                                     Head-Start-Participant-representative weight

                                      4 or 5 kids, high beta   4 or 5 kids, low beta



      Notes: Each marker in this figure indicates the FFE weights and Head-Start-participant-
      representative (post-regression) weight for one white switching family. The color of the marker
      indicates whether the family has 2-3 children or 4 or more children. The size of the marker indicates
      the estimated family-specific beta from a regression of attainment of some college on interactions
      between Head Start and family id fixed effects. A larger marker indicates an above median beta,
      while a smaller marker indicates a below-median beta. The 45 degree line is included for reference.
      Observations above (below) the line are overweighted (underweighted) in the FFE sample relative
      to a representative Head Start sample. Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves.
                                                        39
40
10   Tables

             Table 1: Family FE Articles in Top Applied Journals, 2002 to 2017

                                                    Binary Indep.    Binary Dep.    Both Binary    Total

      AEJ: Applied                                        6               4              3           8
      AEJ: Economic Policy                                1               1              1           1
      AER                                                 3               1              1           5
      AER Papers and Proceedings                           2               2              1           3
      Journal of Health Economics                         5               3              2           7
      Journal of Human Resources                           7               2             2           12
      Journal of Labor Economics                           2               1              1           5
      Journal of Political Economy                         2               1              1           2
      Journal of Public Economics                          4               4              4           5
      QJE                                                 1               4              1           4
      Review of Economics and Statistics                   2               0             0            3
      Total                                               35              23             17          55

      Common Dependent Variables
      Schooling/Attainment                                23
      Test Score                                          17
      Employment/Earnings                                 15
      Birth Weight                                        6
      Health                                              6
      Behavioral Issues/Crime                             5

      Common Independent Variables
      Schooling                                            8
      Birth Weight                                         5
      Health                                               5
      Parental Traits                                      4
      Employment                                           3
      Birth order                                          3
      Means-Tested Public Program                          2
      Death of Family Member                               2
      Bombing/Radiation                                    2

      Observations by Sample
                                                      Siblings N       Total N
      p10                                                469            1,212
      p25                                               1,167           2,142
      p50                                               6,315           17,501
      p75                                              160,122         551,630
      p90                                              750,697        1,582,142

      Year Publication Min/Max                           2002            2017

      Articles with Balance Table if Binary Ind.           1

     Notes: This table presents a summary of FFE articles published between January 2000 and May
     2017 in 11 top applied journals, which are listed in the first panel of the table. For reference, be-
     tween 2002 and 2017 the number of articles published in AEJ: Applied was 310; AEJ: Policy was
     313; AER was 1722; AER P&P was 1676; JoLE was 434; Journal of Political Economy was 548;
     QJE was 639; JHR was 543; JPubE was 1688; REStat was 1033; JHE was 1017. Articles were
     initially idenitified using the search terms "family," "within family," "sibling," "twin," "mother,"
     "father," "brother," "sister," fixed effect," "fixed-effect," and "birthweight" using queries on jour-
                                                        41
     nal websites. Siblings N is the number of observations      reported for the sample of siblings, while
     Total N represents the number of total observations reported. See text for details.
      Table 2: Switchers and Non-Switchers Vary Along Dimensions Other Than Family Size


                                                   (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)
                                                  Switch     Non-Switch   T-Stat. (1)=(2)    Beta Switch    T-Stat (4)
  A. Individual Covariates
  Fraction female                                  0.562         0.495          4.067           0.024         0.719

  Fraction African-American                        0.516         0.111         25.877           0.249         5.640

  Mother's yrs education                           9.283         11.230        -21.590          -0.140        -0.751

  Father's yrs education                           9.190         11.371        -19.594          -0.389        -1.784

  Had a single mother at age 4                     0.252         0.099         10.049           0.055         2.543

  Family income (age 3-6) (CPI adjusted)           31809         52574         -24.735          -4759         -5.719

  Mother employed, age 0                           0.508         0.570         -3.099           0.055         2.339

  Mother employed, age 1                           0.517         0.543         -1.342           0.058         2.359

  Mother employed, age 2                           0.536         0.554         -0.951           0.118         3.565

  Household size at age 4                          5.487         4.451         12.343           0.755         4.936

  Fraction low birth weight                        0.077         0.058          1.971           0.010         0.702

  Observations                                     1103          5500           6603             7372          7372
  B. Inverse Selection into Identification Wts.
  Pr(switch)/Pr(Head Start), Whites                2.976         2.318
                                                   (1.99)        (1.98)
  Pr(switch)/Pr(Head Start), Blacks                1.987         1.148
                                                   (1.21)        (1.10)

Notes: Panel A of this table presents comparisons of the characteristics of individuals in switching families and non-
switching families. Columns 1, 2, and 3, respectively, show the mean characteristics of individuals in families that
are switchers; individuals in families that are not switchers; and individuals that attended Head Start (HS) in non-
switcher families. Column 3 presents the t-statistic for the test that columns 1 and 2 are equal. Column 4 shows the
estimates from a regression of each row heading on an indicator for being in a switcher family, with the corresponding
t-statistic shown in Column 5, with standard errors clustered on id1968. All controls from the main specification
are included excluding the variable shown in the row heading. All estimates are weighted to be representative of
1995 population; see text for details. Panel B shows the mean and standard deviation (in parenthesis) of the inverse
of the post-regression propensity score weights when the target is Head Start participants. This gives a measure of
how aligned the characteristics of switchers are with the characteristics of Head Start participants, the population
of interest. An average value of 1 implies perfect alignment, while a higher value implies that the characteristics
of switchers are over-represented relative to the characteristics of Head Start participants. Pr(switch) and Pr(Head
Start) are estimated from a multinomial logit model of these outcomes on family size and other covariates described
in the text. Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves.




                                                            42
Table 3: Change in Weighting of Regression Estimates Across Sibling and Switcher Samples (PSID)


                                                      Number of Children in Family:

                                                      1        2        3         4       5+

                A. Share of Sample
                All Sample                         0.123    0.273     0.238    0.147     0.134
                Siblings Sample                    0.000    0.345     0.300    0.186     0.169
                Switchers Sample                   0.000    0.210     0.271    0.197     0.322

                B. Variance in Head Start
                All Sample                         0.089    0.104     0.121    0.127     0.132
                Siblings Sample                    0.000    0.024     0.050    0.059     0.068
                Switchers Sample                   0.000    0.045     0.098    0.131     0.174

                C. Regression weights
                All Sample                         0.171    0.257     0.284    0.117     0.101
                Siblings Sample                    0.000    0.338     0.374    0.154     0.134
                Switchers Sample                   0.000    0.256     0.307    0.190     0.248

          Notes: This table shows the change in the composition of the PSID sample moving from
          all individuals ("All Sample") to individuals that have at least one other sibling in the
          sample ("Siblings Sample") to individuals in families that have variation in Head Start
          attendance ("Switchers sample.") Panel A shows the share of individuals in each sample
          that come from a family with 1 child (zero siblings), 2 children, etc. Panel B shows the
          variance in Head Start for each family size and sample. For switchers, this is calculated
          net of family fixed effects. Panel C shows the "regression weight" given to each family size
          in a given sample, denoted as z and defined formally in Section 3. Source: Panel Study
          of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves.




                                                      43
                           Table 4: Returns to Head Start by Family Size,
                               and Implications for Regression Estimates

                                                           PSID                          CNLSY
                                                     Some College         HS Grad         Idle     Lrn. Disab.
                                                     CX           FE          FE          FE            FE
                                                     (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)
 A. Effects by Family Size
 Head Start x 1 child family                       0.169
                                                   (0.091)

 Head Start x 2 child family                        0.038       -0.126      0.033        -0.067        -0.028
                                                   (0.079)     (0.099)     (0.042)      (0.052)       (0.025)

 Head Start x 3 child family                        -0.030     0.152        0.061        -0.038        -0.070
                                                   (0.087)     (0.075)     (0.060)      (0.068)       (0.043)

 Head Start x 4 child family                        -0.053    0.251        0.156         -0.002        -0.064
                                                   (0.100)    (0.091)      (0.086)      (0.111)       (0.049)

 Head Start x 5+ child family                     0.572       0.348        0.277       -0.306         -0.157
                                                  (0.119)     (0.126)      (0.097)      (0.139)       (0.081)

 Head Start x Unknown child family                  -0.099
                                                   (0.108)
 Observations                                        4258       2986        1251         1251          1247
 Head Start Switchers                                            213         581          581           581
 Effective Obs. (Indivs. 2-Person Fams)                         235.9       647.9        647.9         647.9
 Effective Obs. (CX Indivs.)                                    731.8       438.7        438.7         438.7
 B. Simulated Estimates across Samples
 using Family-Size Regression Weights
 All                                                0.046
 Siblings                                           0.037       0.083       0.074        -0.068        -0.053
 Switchers                                          0.069       0.123       0.088        -0.073        -0.060

Notes: Panel A of this table shows the coefficients from a regression of some college on a series of indicators
for whether an individual attended Head Start interacted with an indicator for the number of children in one's
family. The sample is composed of white individuals. Columns 1 include controls, but not mother f.e., and
standard errors are clustered at 1968 family id. Column 2 includes mother fixed effects, and standard errors
clustered by mother id. The number of Head Start switchers is equal to the number of individuals in families
that have variation in Head Start. "Effective Obs. (CX Indivs.)" is the equivalent number of cross-sectional
units that provide the same amount of variation as switchers. "Effective Obs. (Indivs. 2-Person Fams)" is
the equivalent number of individuals in 2-person switching families that provide the same amount of variation
as switchers. Both of these are calculated using Equation 3, where the denominator is the variance of Head
Start, residualized by the family mean of the covariates in the analysis, or 0.125, respectively.Panel B shows the
weighted average of the coefficients when using regression weights, z (defined in Section 3), determined by the
overall distribution of families ("All"), the distribution of 2+ child families ("Siblings"), and the distribution
of 2+ child families that have variation in Head Start attendance ("Switchers"). * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p
< .01. Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves and Children of the National Longitudinal
Study of Youth.



                                                       44
  Table 5: Monte Carlo Experiments: Bias of Reweighting and FFE Relative to True ATE,
                          and Efficiency of Reweighting Relative to FFE


                                                                          Bias:          MSE of Reweight
                                                  True ATE         FE       Reweight         MSE of FE
A. Constant TE; p-score: Xig
Switchers                                              80          -0.3       -0.2               1.03
Siblings                                               80          -0.3       -0.5               1.19
All                                                    80          -0.3       -0.5               1.20
HS Participants                                        80          -0.3       -0.3               1.04
B. Large family TE; p-score: large family
Switchers                                             83.0       -11.1        -0.6               0.92
Siblings                                              49.6       22.2         -0.1               0.70
All                                                   40.3       31.6          0.1               0.54
HS Participants                                       41.1       30.7          0.1               0.55
C. TE linear in Xig ; p-score: Xig
Switchers                                             94.2        -2.0        -0.6               1.03
Siblings                                              80.1        12.2        1.6                0.99
All                                                   80.0        12.2        1.7                1.00
HS Participants                                       91.5         0.8        -0.2               1.03
D. TE linear in Xig ; p-score: Xig spline
Switchers                                             94.2        -1.5        -0.3               1.04
Siblings                                              80.1        12.7        -0.4               1.08
All                                                   80.0        12.8        -0.4               1.09
HS Participants                                       91.5         1.3        -0.2               1.09

 Notes: This table shows the results from 3,000 Monte Carlo simulations. Each panel of the table shows
 results from a different DGP and/or different covariates used in the p-score, and each row within panel is
 for a different target population. The true DGP is linear, and is discussed in Section 4.4. The first panel
 shows results where Head Start has a constant treatment effect (TE) for all individuals; the second shows
 results where Head Start (HS) has no effect on individuals from small families (3 or fewer children) and
 a large effect for families with many children (4 or more children); and the third and fourth panels show
 results where treatment effects that are linear in Xig . Column 1, "True Beta," presents the true average
 increase in the probability of completing some college for participants in Head Start in the sample, which
 is a function of the DGP and sample composition. Columns 2 and 3 present the bias of various estimation
 strategies, defined as the difference between the estimated effects of Head Start and the true beta. The
 estimated effects come from a LPM, propensity-score weighted LPM, respectively. Column 4 presents the
 ratio of the mean squared error (MSE) of the reweighting estimators relative to LPM. Reweighted estimates
 are obtained using in-regression weighting, with weights adjusting for the representativeness of switchers
 (using the variable(s) indicated in each of the panel headings as predictors in the multinomial logit step)
 and the conditional variance of Head Start within families. All betas are multiplied by 1,000. * p < .01.




                                                     45
                 Table 6: Head Start Impact for Representative Eligible Children, Participants, and Siblings
                                                              Using Reweighting

                                                                  FFE                     Reweighted ATE, Target =               Diff. b/w
                                                    GTC/Deming     Expand Sample/     HS Eligible   Participants   Siblings      FFE and
                                                                      Replicate                                               Participant ATE
     A. Some College (PSID)
     Head Start                                        0.281            0.120            0.068         0.026        0.079         0.094
                                                       (0.108)          (0.053)         (0.060)       (0.062)      (0.056)        (0.042)
     Y Mean in Target                                     ­              0.556           0.387         0.437        0.556
     B. Economic Sufficiency Index, Age 30 (PSID)
     Head Start                                           ­              -0.023          -0.038        -0.032       0.021          0.009
                                                          ­             (0.102)         (0.086)       (0.098)      (0.088)        (0.090)
     Y Mean in Target                                     ­              0.213           -0.198        -0.485       0.213
     C. High School Graduation (CNLSY)
     Head Start                                        0.086            0.085            0.033         0.048        0.020         0.037
                                                       (0.031)          (0.030)         (0.034)       (0.031)      (0.036)        (0.023)
     Y Mean in Target                                     ­              0.776           0.734         0.766        0.776
46




     D. Idle (CNLSY)
     Head Start                                        -0.071           -0.072           -0.061        -0.055       -0.067         -0.017
                                                       (0.038)          (0.037)         (0.040)       (0.037)      (0.043)        (0.026)
     Y Mean in Target                                     ­              0.197           0.221          0.201        0.197
     E. Learning Disability (CNLSY)
     Head Start                                       -0.059            -0.059           -0.031       -0.042       -0.040          0.017
                                                       (0.020)           (0.021)        (0.021)        (0.018)      (0.020)       (0.015)
     Y Mean in Target                                     ­               0.051          0.055          0.041        0.051
     F. Poor Health (CNLSY)
     Head Start                                       -0.070            -0.069         -0.063         -0.067       -0.050          -0.003
                                                       (0.026)           (0.026)        (0.030)        (0.028)     (0.030)        (0.020)
     Y Mean in Target                                     ­               0.103          0.098          0.074       0.103

     Notes: Column 1 of this table shows the FFE estimated impacts of Head Start for whites from GTC or for the whole sample from
     Deming (2009). Column 2 shows the FFE estimate using our expanded sample for PSID outcomes and using our replication sample
     for CNLSY outcomes. The outcomes in Panels A and B are taken from the PSID white sample, and the outcomes in Panels C to F are
     taken from the CNLSY sample. Columns 3 to 5 present reweighted estimates of the effect of Head Start for three target populations
     (shown in the column header) using the post-regression reweighting procedure, in which we multiply group-level estimates of the impact
     of Head Start by the representative weight for the target population of interest. Column 6 presents the difference in the estimate in
     column 2 (FFE) and column 4 (reweighted for participants), with the standard error obtained from a bootstrap procedure described
     in the text. "­" is used to indicate that the information is not available. Sample size is N=2,986 for the expanded sample, and 1,036
     for GTC. Standard errors are clustered on mother id. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
Appendices for Selection into Identification in Fixed Effects Models, with
Application to head Start
Douglas L Miller, Na'ama Shenhav, and Michel Z. Grosz




INCLUDED WITH MAIN NBER WORKING PAPER

Appendix A: Derivations and Proofs

Appendix B: Supplementary Figures and tables




INCLUDED IN ONLINE APPENDIX FOR NBER WORKING PAPER

Appendix C: Supplementary PSID FFE Results

Appendix D: Replication of GTC (2002)

Appendix E: Functional form choices with Binary Treatment and Binary Outcome
A     Derivations and Proofs
A.1    Proof of Proposition 1
   The proof of Proposition 1 closely follows the proofs of Theorem 2 in Angrist and Fernandez-Val
(2013) and Theorem 1 in Aronow and Carnegie (2013). There are two key differences. First, we rely
on Group ID Conditional Independence (Assumption 1), instead of the IV exclusion restriction.
Second, we condition on two propensity scores, unlike Aronow and Carnegie (2013), who condition
on P r(Di = 1), and Angrist and Fernandez-Val (2013), who condition on discrete covariates.
    Recall that we define ^t :=              1               ^
                                                             t       ·^g and wt :=    Qx P r(S =1)
                                     i   1(g (i)GS )      i wg (i)            g (i)   Px P r(T =1) .

    By Assumptions 1 and 3,

                                           ^t p E wt · 
                                                         ^g |Sg = 1                                              (17)
                                                   g (i)

    By Assumption 1 and the law of iterated expectations,


                            t       ^            t
                         E wg (i) ·  |Sg = 1 =E wg (i) (Yi (1) - Yi (0)) |Sg = 1                                 (18)

    By the law of iterated expectations,


              t                                       t
           E[wg (i) · (Yi (1) - Yi (0))|S = 1] = E[E[wg (i) (Y (1) - Y (0))|S = 1, Px , Qx ]|S = 1]              (19)
                                                              t
                                                 =     E[E[wg   (i) (Y (1) - Y (0))|Px , Qx ]|S   = 1]           (20)
                                                          t
                                                 =     E[wg (i) E[(Y (1) - Y (0))|Px , Qx ])|S    = 1]           (21)
                                                          t
                                                 =     E[wg(i) (Px , Qx )|S = 1]

Line (20) follows from (19) from the CFEI assumption that E[Y (1) - Y (0)|S, Px , Qx ] = E[Y (1) -
Y (0)|Px , Qx ]. Line (21) follows from line (20) because wg   t
                                                                 (i) is a function of Px and Qx only, by
definition.
    Now let F be the distribution of (Px , Qx ), and let F (·|S = 1) be the distribution conditional on
S = 1. By Bayes rule,

       ^                                             ^
            t                                             t                  P r(S = 1|Px , Qx )
           wg (Px , Qx )dF (Px , Qx |S    = 1) =         wg (i) · (Px , Qx )                     dF (Px , Qx )
                                                                                 P r(S = 1)
                                                     ^
                                                          t                      Px
                                                =        wg (i) · (Px , Qx )             dF (Px , Qx )
                                                                             P r(S = 1)
                                                     ^
                                                         Qx P (S = 1)                    Px
                                                =                       (Px , Qx )               dF (Px , Qx )
                                                         Px P (T = 1)                P r(S = 1)
                                                     ^
                                                                         Qx
                                                =        (Px , Qx )               dF (Px , Qx )
                                                                    P r(T = 1)
                                                     ^
                                                                    P r(T = 1|Px , Qx )
                                                =        (Px , Qx )                       dF (Px , Qx )
                                                                         P r(T = 1)
                                                     ^
                                                =        (Px , Qx )dF (Px , Qx |T = 1)


                                                            47
           ´                            ´
By CFEI, (Px , Qx )dF (Px , Qx |T = 1) = E[Y (1) - Y (0) |T = 1, Px , Qx ]dF (Px , Qx |T = 1) =
E[Y (1) - Y (0) |T = 1].

A.1.1   Extrapolating treatment effects to never-switchers
    Note that the ATE for the target population can be written as a weighted average of the ATE
for switchers,  t,Px >0 , and the ATE for never-switchers,  t,Px =0 :

               t := P r (Px > 0|Tg = 1) ·  t,Px >0 + (1 - P r (Px > 0|Tg = 1)) ·  t,Px =0       (22)
   where  t,Px >0 = E[Y (1) - Y (0)|T = 1, Px > 0] and  t,Px =0 = E[Y (1) - Y (0)|T = 1, Px = 0].

   Since we can not identify treatment effects for Px = 0 from the FFE design, we must impose
an additional assumption that allows extrapolation of treatment effects for this group.

   Assumption 5 (Treatment Effect Functional Form):

                                 E[Y (1) - Y (0)|Xg ] = H (; Xg )
   with H (·) known, and  parameters that can be consistently estimated. Under Assumption 5,
^ can be estimated using e.g. the regression 
                                             ^g =  Xg +ug .


Proposition 2. Under Assumptions 1, 2, 3, and 5, and assuming P r (Px > 0|Tg = 1) can be
consistently estimated, the ATE for the target t can be consistently estimated by

              ^t = P r (Px > 0|Tg = 1) ·  t,Px >0 + (1 - P r (Px > 0|Tg = 1)) ·  t,Px =0
              
   where  t,Px >0 comes from Equation 12 and  t,Px =0 is estimated from a projection of ^g on Xg .



   Proof:
                           1
   Define  t,Px =0 := 1(Tg =1                       ^
                              ,Px =0) Tg =1,Px =0 H ; Xg .
   Assumptions 1, 3, and 5 imply that

                           plim  t,Px =0 = E[Y (1) - Y (0)|T = 1, Px = 0]                       (23)
   From the proof of Proposition 1, we have that

                           plim  t,Px >0 = E[Y (1) - Y (0)|T = 1, Px > 0]                       (24)
   Then,


                plim  t = P r (Px > 0|Tg = 1) · E[Y (1) - Y (0)|T = 1, Px > 0]                  (25)
                        + (1 - P r (Px > 0|Tg = 1)) · E[Y (1) - Y (0)|T = 1, Px = 0]
                        = E[Y (1) - Y (0)|T = 1]                                                (26)

    A speculative alternative approach would be to take a "double robust" estimation approach.
This is modeled after the double robust approach for estimating causal effects, as in Robins, Rot-
nitzky and Zhao (1995). The discussion in Chapter 17 of Imbens and Rubin (2015, pp. 399-400)


                                                  48
notes that in the traditional setting, consistency of the estimated treatment effect requires either
correct specification of the propensity score, or of the regression model. In our setting, instead of
trying to model potential outcomes, we are estimating average treatment effects. Implementation
would proceed by (i) defining weights wgt                                          ^     ^
                                          (i) as in equation (13); (ii) estimating g = H ; Xg using

these weights, and then predicting             1                       ^ ; Xg over the full target population.
                                             1(Tg =1)        Tg =1 H   


A.2     Intuition for Propensity Score Weighting
    In this section, we provide a simple derivation of the weighting scheme that we propose to obtain
the ATE from the switchers sample by introducing a concrete example in which the treatment effect
is determined by one discrete covariate, x, and in which there are only few groups in the switcher
sample. For ease of exposition, we refer to groups as families and units within groups as kids.

A.2.1    Thought Experiment
    Suppose that the target population is comprised of 75% black individuals and 25% white indi-
viduals. The switchers sample has 1 white family with 3 kids and 2 black families with 3 and 5 kids,
respectively. Thus, to be representative of the target population, the white family should be given
a weight of 25%. The share for each black family is proportional to the number of individuals in
the family, normalized so that the total share across the two families is 75%. Thus, the first family
                                   3
should be given a weight of 0.75 · 8 , and the second family should be given a weight of 0.75 · 58.


A.2.2    Notation
   Under the setup above, the weight that should be given to a switcher family g where all indi-
viduals have race xi = x, can be written as:


                                         (1(xi = x)|Tg(i) = 1)             1(g (i) = g )
                             sgx =                             ·                                              (27)
                                                 Tg(i)                    (Sg(i) |xi = x)

                       (1(xi =x)|Tg(i) =1)
   The first term,            Tg(i)           , gives the share of individuals in       the target population with
                                  1(g (i)=g )
race x. The second    term, (S                    gives the size of family g as a       proportion of the switcher
                                    g (i) |xi =x)
sample with race x.
   Equivalently,


                                                                        1(g (i) = g )
                      sgx = P r(xi = x|Tg(i) = 1) ·                                                           (28)
                                                              P r(xi = x|Sg(i) = 1) ·       Sg(i)
                               P r(xi = x|Tg(i) = 1)
                           =                         · P r(g (i) = g |Sg(i) = 1)                              (29)
                               P r(xi = x|Sg(i) = 1)

A.2.3    Estimation
                              ^ x = P r(Tg(i) = 1|xi = x) as fitted values from a regression of T
  1. We obtain an estimate of Q
     on X .
                         P r(xi =x|Tg(i) =1)·P r(Tg(i) =1)
      This is equal to              P r(xi =x)               by Bayes rule.


                                                             49
                              ^x = P r(Sg(i) = 1|xi = x) as fitted values from a regression of S
  2. We obtain an estimate of P
     on X .
                         P r(xi =x|Sg =1)·P r(Sg(i) =1)                                                P r(xi =x|Tg(i) =1)
      This is equal to             P r(xi =x)             by Bayes rule. The ratio of (1) and (2) is   P r(xi =x|Sg(i) =1) ·
      P r(Tg(i) =1)
      P r(Sg(i) =1) .

                                                                                                           P r(Tg(i) =1)
  3. To get sgx , we need to multiply this ratio by P r(g (i) = g |Sg(i) = 1) and divide by                P r(Sg(i) =1) .
                                                                          Qx
                                                                          Px
                                                                             ·ng
      We then normalize the weights, which gives sgx =                        Qx
                                                                        g GS Px ·ng



A.3     Extension to Unit i Covariates
A.3.1    Modified Assumptions
    We begin with a simplification of the model, in which outcomes are a linear function of treat-
ment, individual covariates, and additively separable individual error terms: Yig = g · Di +  ·
Ci + g + (uig · Di + ig ). We assume constant coefficients on Ci , and require the systematic
part of the treatment effect to be constant within a group. There can also be an idiosyncratic
component of the treatment effect, denoted by uig . We also now allow for individual covari-
ates to enter into the propensity to be in the switching or target populations, respectively, as:
PX,C = P r Sg(i) = 1|Xg , Ci and QX,C = P r [Ti = 1|Xg , Ci ]. The IPW weights therefore vary at
                               Q
                       t = X,C · P r(S =1) .
the individual level: wi    PX,C P r(T =1)
    The assumptions from earlier now must now be modified slightly to recover the ATE. Assump-
tion 1, the conditional fixed effects assumption now requires ig , uig  Di |Ci , g . This gives that
    ^
E  g = g .
    Assumptions 2--4 and Proposition 1 will carry forward with these redefined terms.
    This model can be adapted to allow treatment effects to vary with individually-varying covari-
ates, such as gender of the treated individual. One approach is to re-write the treatment effects as
a function of a group-level measure of these covariates (e.g. the share of Head Start participants
in the group that are female). Then our main estimaton framework applies. These group-level
measures are included in the prediction of Px and Qx which should be sufficient to recover the
ATE.
    An alternative approach is to add a C · (Ci Di ) term to the estimating equation. Our principal
re-weighting method can be used to estimate the average of the g for the target population; and this
average could then be added to    ^C times the average covariate Ci value for the target population
to arrive at an estimate for the ATE for this group.

A.3.2    Defining residual switchers

   Consider the "deviations from group means" projection matrix, M = I - H (H H )-1 H , with
H a matrix of dummy variables for group membership: H [i, j ] = 1 if unit i is a member of
group j , and 0 otherwise. Let D = M · D be deviations in treatment from group means. Basic
switcher groups ("true switchers") are defined by having within-group variation in treatment: Vg :=
V ar Di |g (i) = g > 0. Next consider the residual-maker matrix projecting on covariates C after
taking deviations from group means, L = I - (M · C ) (C · M · C ) (C · M ), and let D  ¨ = L·M ·
D. With unit-varying covariates Ci , the variation that identifies the treatment effects is Vg,C :=



                                                             50
V ar D¨ |g (i) = g . For some groups g , it could be the case that Vg = 0, and also Vg,C > 0. We call
these groups residual switchers.




                                                 51
B   Supplementary Figures and Tables

              Figure B.1: Popularity of Family Fixed Effects Articles
                                                (a) Publications by Year



                      6
                      5
                      4
              Count
                      3
                      2
                      1
                      0




                               2000           2004            2008             2012   2016
                                                           Year of Publication


                                      (b) Average Citations by Year of Publication
                      1000




                                              GTC (2002)
              Mean Citations
                500   0




                               2000           2004            2008             2012   2016
                                                           Year of Publication



            Notes: These figures display the data from our survey of FFE papers
            published from January 2000 to May 2017 in 11 leading journals that
            publish applied microeconomics articles. Figure (a) plots the number of
            FFE articles published in each year, and Figure (b) plots the average
            number of Google Scholar citations, as of May 2019, among the articles
            published in a given year.




                                                               52
             Figure B.2: Illustrative Model of the Role of Family Size in Switching

                               P r(Sg = 1) = 1 - (1 -  )ng -  ng


               1
                                                 5-child
                                                 4-child
               .8


                                                 3-child
     P(Switching Family)
                  .6




                                                 2-child
        .4     .2




                                                 1-child
               0




                           0   .2          .4              .6             .8              1
                                      Probability of Head Start ()


Notes: This figure plots the theoretical function: P (HSSwitchingF amily ) = 1 - (1 -  )ng -  ng ,
where ng is the number of children in a family and  is the probability of attending Head Start,
for 2-, 3-, 4-, and 5 (plus)- child families.




                                               53
Figure B.3: Examining P-Score Overlap: Predicted Probability of Being in Head Start (PSID
White Sample)


           10
           8
           6
           4
           2
           0




                0                 .1                  .2                 .3                 .4
                                           Probability of Head Start

                                   Switcher              Non-Switcher, Head Start =1



      Notes: This figure shows kernel density plots (bandwidth = 0.01) of the predicted probability of
      being a Head Start participant for switchers and non-switchers that are Head Start participants.
      The sample consists of white individuals in the PSID. The are 4 non-switchers (5%) who have a
      probability of being in Head Start that is outside of the support of the switcher sample.




                                                    54
Figure B.4: Examining P-Score Overlap: Predicted Probability of Being Head-Start-Eligible (PSID
White Sample)


            4
            3
            2
            1
            0




                 0                .2              .4               .6                .8               1
                                            Probability of Head Start Eligible

                                 Switcher                Non-Switcher, Head Start Eligible =1



       Notes: This figure shows kernel density plots (bandwidth = 0.01) of the predicted probability of
       being Head Start eligible for switchers and non-switchers that are Head-Start-eligible. The sample
       consists of white individuals in the PSID.


Table B.1: Head Start Attendance and Within-Family Variation in Attendance by Family Size
(PSID)


                                                              Number of Children in Family:
                                                             2        3        4           5+     Total
             Share of Family in Head Start ( )             0.157    0.222    0.195        0.206   0.182

             Share with Switching                          0.121    0.202    0.242        0.471   0.174

             All Participants in HS in Family              0.096    0.125    0.093        0.049   0.102

             No Participants in HS in Family               0.783    0.672    0.665        0.480   0.724


       Notes: This table shows the sources of switching by family size. The first two rows show the
       likelihood of attending Head Start by family size and the likelihood of having variation in Head
       Start within a family (switching). The final two rows examines whether differences in rates of
       switching across family sizes are attributable to variation across family sizes in having all children
       attend Head Start (row 3) or variation in having no children attend Head Start (row 4).


                                                         55
              Table B.2: Demographic Characteristics of Head Start Sample (PSID)

                                                  All       Head Start     No Head Start      Sibling Sample
Head Start                                       0.076        1.000            0.000               0.073

Other preschool                                  0.282          0.000            0.305              0.259

Fraction African-American                        0.150          0.618            0.111              0.154

Fraction female                                  0.504          0.548            0.501              0.501

Fraction low birth weight                        0.060          0.114            0.056              0.061

Had a single mother at age 4                     0.112          0.296            0.091              0.103

Fraction whose mother completed hs               0.717          0.632            0.724              0.689

Fraction whose father completed hs               0.683          0.557            0.692              0.654

Fraction eldest child in family                  0.368          0.341            0.371              0.339

Age in 1995                                     23.830         18.605           24.262             25.063
                                                (9.84)         (7.76)           (9.87)             (10.06)
Mother's yrs education                          11.116         10.208           11.190             10.942
                                                (2.76)         (2.32)           (2.78)              (2.81)
Father's yrs education                          11.238         10.159           11.314             11.076
                                                (3.23)         (2.70)           (3.25)              (3.35)
Family income (age 3-6) (CPI adjusted)          50339          28553            52719               50973
                                              (35814.01)     (17212.32)       (36509.36)         (37315.99)
Household size at age 4                          4.535          4.814            4.504              4.778
                                                (1.68)         (2.06)           (1.63)              (1.64)
Observations                                     7363           1345             6018                5355

 Notes: This table shows the mean demographic characteristics of the sample, weighted to be representative
 of 1995 population; see text for details. Standard deviations, shown in parentheses, are omitted for binary
 variables. CPI-adjusted income reported in 1999 dollars. Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011
 waves.




                                                     56
                 Table B.3: Outcomes of Interest for Head Start Sample (PSID)

                                                All     Head Start     No Head Start     Sibling Sample
Fraction completed hs                          0.913      0.878            0.916              0.912

Fraction attended some college                 0.531       0.428            0.539             0.532

Fraction not booked/charged with crime         0.899       0.889            0.900             0.898

Avg. Earnings age 23-25 (CPI adjusted)        20410        14391           20818              20633
                                             (24927)      (12000)         (25517)            (26547)
Economic Sufficiency Index at 30              0.094        -0.601          0.151              0.096
                                              (1.03)       (1.05)          (1.01)             (1.03)
Economic Sufficiency Index at 40              0.020        -0.532          0.053              0.025
                                              (1.01)       (0.95)          (1.01)             (1.04)
Good Health Index at 30                       0.004        -0.558          0.050              0.017
                                              (1.03)       (1.26)          (0.99)             (0.99)
Good Health Index at 40                       0.011        -0.486          0.033              0.015
                                              (1.01)       (1.25)          (1.00)             (0.96)
Observations                                   7363         1345            6018               5355

 Notes: This table shows the means for the main outcomes of interest, weighted to be representative of
 1995 population; see text for details. Note that the fraction not booked/charged with a crime restricted
 to individuals that responded to the PSID in 1995 who were between the ages of 16 and 50 in that year.
 CPI-adjusted income reported in 1999 dollars. Standard deviations, shown in parentheses, are omitted for
 binary variables. Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves.




                                                   57
               Table B.4: Summary Statistics for Inputs to Summary Indices (PSID)


                                                                    All      Head Start   No Head Start   Sibling Sample
Inputs to Economic Sufficiency Index, 30
Ever on AFDC/TANF by age 30                                        0.062       0.220          0.049           0.060

Fraction of last 5 yrs on Food Stamps/SNAP, age 30                  0.064       0.151         0.056            0.071
                                                                   (0.20)      (0.30)        (0.19)           (0.22)
ln(mean earnings in last 5 years), age 30                           9.661       9.415        9.676             9.659
                                                                   (1.06)      (0.91)        (1.07)           (1.07)
Fraction of last 5 yrs with positive earnings, age 30               0.895       0.887        0.896             0.898
                                                                   (0.25)      (0.26)        (0.25)           (0.25)
Fraction of last 5 yrs ever unemployed, age 30                     0.146       0.173         0.144            0.150
                                                                   (0.24)      (0.27)        (0.23)           (0.24)
Mean Inc. Rel. Pov. in last 5 years, age 30                       385.831     233.796       396.729          385.933
                                                                  (305.98)    (155.44)      (311.18)         (291.36)
Fraction completed college                                         0.209       0.073         0.220            0.220

Inputs to Economic Sufficiency Index, 40
Ever on AFDC/TANF by age 40                                        0.068       0.163          0.062           0.067

Fraction of last 5 yrs on Food Stamps/SNAP, age 40                  0.043       0.098         0.040            0.043
                                                                   (0.16)      (0.25)        (0.16)           (0.16)
ln(mean earnings in last 5 years), age 40                           9.962       9.779        9.968             9.957
                                                                   (1.15)      (0.90)        (1.16)           (1.15)
Fraction of last 5 yrs with positive earnings, age 40               0.850       0.867        0.849             0.849
                                                                   (0.31)      (0.29)        (0.31)           (0.31)
Fraction of last 5 yrs ever unemployed, age 40                     0.094       0.122         0.093            0.098
                                                                   (0.20)      (0.24)        (0.19)           (0.20)
Mean Inc. Rel. Pov. in last 5 years, age 40                       436.769     281.489       443.338          434.280
                                                                  (366.03)    (183.89)      (370.36)         (361.58)
Fraction of last 5 yrs owned home, age 40                           0.500       0.287        0.510             0.522
                                                                   (0.44)      (0.42)        (0.44)           (0.44)
Inputs to Good Health Index, 30
Fraction of last 5 yrs smoked less than 1 cigarette/day, age 30    0.745        0.668         0.753            0.755
                                                                  (0.41)       (0.45)        (0.41)           (0.40)
Fraction of last 5 yrs reported good or better health, age 30      0.948        0.903         0.951            0.950
                                                                  (0.17)       (0.24)        (0.17)           (0.17)
Mean BMI in last 5 years, age 30                                  26.569       28.766        26.333           26.615
                                                                  (6.68)       (6.74)        (6.63)           (6.85)
Inputs to Good Health Index, 40
Fraction of last 5 yrs smoked less than 1 cigarette/day, age 40    0.738        0.714         0.739            0.728
                                                                  (0.42)       (0.44)        (0.42)           (0.42)
Fraction of last 5 yrs reported good or better health, age 40      0.919        0.871         0.921            0.922
                                                                  (0.22)       (0.29)        (0.22)           (0.22)
Mean BMI in last 5 years, age 40                                  27.504       30.191        27.327           27.433
                                                                  (5.92)       (7.42)        (5.77)           (5.85)
Observations                                                       7363         1345          6018             5355

    Notes: Weighted to be representative of 1995 population; see text for details. SD, in parentheses, are
    omitted for binary variables. Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves.




                                                        58
                          Table B.5: N's for Control Covariates (PSID)


                                            All      Head Start   No Head Start   Sibling Sample
Head Start                                 7372        1354           6018              5361

Other preschool                            7372        1354           6018            5361

Fraction African-American                  7372        1354           6018            5361

Fraction female                            7372        1354           6018            5361

Fraction low birth weight                  5366         970           4396            4555

Had a single mother at age 4               6678        1285           5393            4672

Fraction whose mother completed hs         7231        1332           5899            5360

Fraction whose father completed hs         6596        1034           5562            4875

Fraction eldest child in family            7372        1354           6018            5361

Age in 1995                                7372        1354           6018            5361

Mother's yrs education                     7223        1331           5892            5356

Father's yrs education                     6596        1034           5562            4875

Family income (age 3-6) (CPI adjusted)     6086        1145           4941            4338

Household size at age 4                    6251        1187           5064            4420

Observations                               7372        1354           6018            5361

 Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves.




                                                59
                          Table B.6: N's for Main Outcomes (PSID)


                                             All      Head Start   No Head Start   Sibling Sample
Fraction completed hs                       7372        1354           6018              5361

Fraction attended some college              7372        1354           6018            5361

Fraction not booked/charged with crime      5005         802           4203            3591

Avg. Earnings age 23-25 (CPI adjusted)      4866         783           4083            3675

Economic Sufficiency Index at 30            7372        1354           6018            5361

Economic Sufficiency Index at 40            4085         613           3472            2845

Good Health Index at 30                     4749         791           3958            3600

Good Health Index at 40                     2228         312           1916            1673

Observations                                7372        1354           6018            5361

  Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves.




                                                 60
                             Table B.7: N's for Auxiliary Outcomes (PSID)


                                                                  All    Head Start   No Head Start   Sibling Sample
Inputs to Economic Sufficiency Index, 30
Ever on AFDC/TANF by age 30                                       7372     1354           6018            5361

Fraction of last 5 yrs on Food Stamps/SNAP, age 30                4186      713           3473            2805

ln(mean earnings in last 5 years), age 30                         4202      620           3582            3159

Fraction of last 5 yrs with positive earnings, age 30             4378      656           3722            3295

Fraction of last 5 yrs ever unemployed, age 30                    4259      634           3625            3184

Mean Inc. Rel. Pov. in last 5 years, age 30                       5293      891           4402            4068

Fraction completed college                                        7372     1354           6018            5361

Inputs to Economic Sufficiency Index, 40
Ever on AFDC/TANF by age 40                                       4085      613           3472            2845

Fraction of last 5 yrs on Food Stamps/SNAP, age 40                1972      250           1722            1423

ln(mean earnings in last 5 years), age 40                         1695      221           1474            1266

Fraction of last 5 yrs with positive earnings, age 40             1829      236           1593            1369

Fraction of last 5 yrs ever unemployed, age 40                    1825      236           1589            1365

Mean Inc. Rel. Pov. in last 5 years, age 40                       2152      296           1856            1613

Fraction of last 5 yrs owned home, age 40                         2292      290           2002            1625

Inputs to Good Health Index, 30
Fraction of last 5 yrs smoked less than 1 cigarette/day, age 30   2267      385           1882            1742

Fraction of last 5 yrs reported good or better health, age 30     3763      579           3184            2806

Mean BMI in last 5 years, age 30                                  3248      587           2661            2528

Inputs to Good Health Index, 40
Fraction of last 5 yrs smoked less than 1 cigarette/day, age 40   1280      182           1098             930

Fraction of last 5 yrs reported good or better health, age 40     1463      182           1281            1116

Mean BMI in last 5 years, age 40                                  2037      307           1730            1486

Observations                                                      7372     1354           6018            5361

    Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves.




                                                        61
         Table B.8: Effect of Head Start on Pre-Head-Start Outcomes (PSID)


                                             All         Sibs     Mom FE      Blk, FE    Wht, FE
Low birth weight
Head Start                                 0.040       0.045        -0.016      -0.018    -0.029
                                           (0.021)     (0.023)     (0.026)     (0.033)   (0.042)
Other preschool                             0.003       0.003       -0.012    -0.056      -0.003
                                           (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.023)     (0.027)   (0.027)
Observations                                5366        4555         4500        1872      2622
Disabled
Head Start                                  -0.006      -0.017      -0.010     -0.016     -0.006
                                           (0.027)     (0.030)     (0.030)    (0.036)    (0.051)
Other preschool                              0.018       0.018       0.021      0.032      0.017
                                           (0.019)     (0.022)     (0.028)    (0.049)    (0.032)
Observations                                 3516        2955        2661       1102       1555
Single mom at age 4
Head Start                                  0.020       0.025       0.027      -0.007     0.051
                                           (0.015)     (0.020)     (0.024)    (0.022)    (0.040)
Other preschool                            0.022       0.020        0.008       0.006     0.011
                                           (0.009)     (0.011)     (0.017)    (0.031)    (0.018)
Observations                                6678        4672        4467        1939      2522
Family income (age 1) (CPI adjusted)
Head Start                                 0.000      -0.000         0.000     -0.000     -0.000
                                           (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
Other preschool                           -0.000      -0.000        -0.000     0.000      -0.000
                                           (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
Observations                                6219        4313         4023       1719       2298
Family income (age 2) (CPI adjusted)
Head Start                                  0.000       -0.000      -0.000     0.000      -0.000
                                           (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
Other preschool                             -0.000      -0.000      -0.000     -0.000     -0.000
                                           (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
Observations                                 6274        4391        4151       1757       2388
Mom working at age 1
Head Start                                  0.001       0.011       0.049      0.002      0.080
                                           (0.018)     (0.022)     (0.039)    (0.033)    (0.073)
Other preschool                             -0.001      -0.002      -0.017    -0.078      -0.014
                                           (0.013)     (0.016)     (0.030)    (0.043)    (0.034)
Observations                                 6219        4313        4023      1719        2298
Mom working at age 2
Head Start                                  0.025       0.028       -0.041     -0.008     -0.077
                                           (0.021)     (0.023)     (0.040)    (0.036)    (0.073)
Other preschool                            0.026       0.032         0.015     -0.013      0.017
                                           (0.015)     (0.018)     (0.031)    (0.044)    (0.036)
Observations                                6274        4391         4151       1757       2388

Notes: Weighted to be representative of 1995 population; see text for details. SE clustered at 1968
family id in columns 1 and 2 and at mother id level otherwise. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves.


                                                62
            Table B.9: Test of Conditional Ignorability Assumption:
Do Individuals in the Target Population Have Differential Treatment Effects?

                                                            Target=       Target=
                                                            Eligible     Participants
    Some College (Whites, PSID)
    In Target                                                   ­            -0.084
                                                                ­           (0.124)
    Observations                                                ­             213
    Economic Sufficiency Index (Whites, PSID)
    In Target                                                   ­            0.145
                                                                ­           (0.199)
    Observations                                                ­             213
    High School Graduation (NLSY)
    In Target                                                 0.014          -0.101
                                                             (0.069)        (0.062)
    Observations                                               467            581
    Idle (NLSY)
    In Target                                                 0.036          0.033
                                                             (0.085)        (0.097)
    Observations                                               467            581
    Learning Disability (NLSY)
    In Target                                                 -0.025         -0.095
                                                             (0.046)        (0.063)
    Observations                                               467            581
    Poor Health (NLSY)
    In Target                                                 0.015          -0.026
                                                             (0.068)        (0.058)
    Observations                                               467            581

 Notes: Each cell of this table shows an estimate from a regression of the family-specific
 impact of Head Start on an indicator for whether an individual is in the target population.
 Regressions are weighted for balance on observables: target individuals are assigned a
 weight of P r(Tg = 1, Sg = 1|Xig ) and non-target individuals are assigned a weight of
 P r(Tg = 0, Sg = 1|Xig ). The first two panels use data from the PSID white sample, and
 the final four panels use data from the CNLSY. There are no individuals in the PSID
 white switcher sample that are ineligible for Head Start, which causes us to have missing
 estimates ("­").




                                             63
          Table B.10: Additional Estimates for Representative White Populations (PSID)
                               Using Post-Regression Reweighting Method

                                                   FFE                       Reweighted, Target =
                                          GTC      Expand Sample     HS Eligible    Participants   Siblings
       A. High School Graduation
       Head Start                        0.203          -0.015           -0.034        -0.030       -0.029
                                         (0.098)       (0.045)          (0.043)       (0.049)      (0.050)
       Y Mean in Target                     ­           0.921            0.852         0.848        0.921
       B. Good Health Index, Age 30
       Head Start                           ­           -0.265           -0.253        -0.439       -0.162
                                            ­          (0.249)          (0.263)       (0.313)      (0.316)
       Y Mean in Target                     ­           0.074            -0.061        -0.583        0.074

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 of this table show the FFE estimated impacts of Head Start from GTC (2002) and using
our expanded sample for completion of high school (panel A) and the Good Health Index at age 30 (panel B). The
remaining columns present reweighted estimates of the effect of Head Start for three target populations (shown in
the column header) using the post-regression reweighting procedure described in the text. "­" is used to indicate
that the information is not available. Sample size is N=2,986 for the expanded sample in panel A, and 1,959 for the
expanded sample in panel B, and 1,036 for GTC. Standard errors are clustered on mother id. * p < .10, ** p < .05,
*** p < .01. Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves.




                                                        64
Table B.11: Head Start Impact for Representative Black Eligible, Participants, and Siblings (PSID)
                              Using Post-Regression Reweighting Method


                                                        FFE                      Reweighted, Target =
                                              GTC      Expand Sample     HS Eligible   Participants   Siblings
   A. High School Graduation
   Head Start                                 -0.025         -0.024          -0.017        -0.014       -0.015
                                             (0.065)        (0.031)         (0.025)       (0.026)      (0.024)
   Y Mean in Target                              ­            0.862          0.854         0.896        0.862
   B. Some College
   Head Start                                 0.023          -0.016          -0.031        -0.028       -0.032
                                             (0.066)        (0.036)         (0.032)       (0.034)      (0.032)
   Y Mean in Target                             ­             0.396          0.376          0.423       0.396
   C. Economic Sufficiency Index, Age 30
   Head Start                                   ­            -0.023        -0.190        -0.211       -0.167
                                                ­           (0.102)         (0.072)       (0.073)      (0.071)
   Y Mean in Target                             ­            -0.552          -0.626        -0.674       -0.552
   D. Good Health Index, Age 30
   Head Start                                   ­            -0.265          0.052         0.062        0.033
                                                ­           (0.249)         (0.146)       (0.161)      (0.133)
   Y Mean in Target                             ­            -0.357          -0.381        -0.539       -0.357

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 of this table show the FFE estimated impacts of Head Start from GTC (2002) and using
our expanded sample for completion of high school (panel A) and the Good Health Index at age 30 (panel B). The
remaining columns present reweighted estimates of the effect of Head Start for three target populations (shown in
the column header) using the post-regression reweighting procedure described in the text. "­" is used to indicate
that the information is not available. Sample size is N=2,369 for the expanded sample in panels A, B, and C, and
1,150 for the expanded sample in Panel D, and 762 for GTC. Standard errors are clustered on mother id. * p < .10,
** p < .05, *** p < .01. Source: Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2011 waves.




                                                       65
Table B.12: Head Start Impact for Representative Eligible Children, Participants, and Siblings
               Using Reweighting with Regression Extrapolation to Singletons

                                                                Reweighted ATE, Target =
                                                                HS Eligible   Participants
                 A. Some College (PSID)
                 Head Start                                        0.083         0.009
                                                                  (0.102)       (0.109)
                 Y Mean in Target                                  0.387         0.437
                 B. Economic Sufficiency Index, Age 30 (PSID)
                 Head Start                                        -0.056        0.003
                                                                  (0.139)       (0.229)
                 Y Mean in Target                                  -0.198        -0.485
                 C. High School Graduation (CNLSY)
                 Head Start                                        0.041         0.047
                                                                  (0.032)       (0.030)
                 Y Mean in Target                                  0.734         0.766
                 D. Idle (CNLSY)
                 Head Start                                        -0.059        -0.057
                                                                  (0.038)       (0.037)
                 Y Mean in Target                                   0.221        0.201
                 E. Learning Disability (CNLSY)
                 Head Start                                       -0.034        -0.041
                                                                  (0.020)        (0.017)
                 Y Mean in Target                                  0.055          0.041
                 F. Poor Health (CNLSY)
                 Head Start                                       -0.059        -0.065
                                                                  (0.028)        (0.030)
                 Y Mean in Target                                  0.098          0.074

         Notes: Columns 1 and 2 present reweighted estimates of the effect of Head Start for the
         Head-Start-eligible and Head-Start-participant target populations, where the treatment
         effects for singletons are extrapolated from switchers using OLS. Sample size is N=2,986
         for the expanded sample, and 1,036 for GTC. Standard errors obtained using bootstrap.
         * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.




                                                   66
     Table B.13: FFE Estimates Reweighted using Gibbons, Suarez, Urbancic (2018) Method


                                                                   FFE       GSU (2018) Reweight
                                                                 Baseline          Switchers
              A. Some College (PSID)
              Head Start                                          0.120             0.134
                                                                  (0.053)           (0.053)
              B. Economic Sufficiency Index, Age 30 (PSID)
              Head Start                                           -0.023            -0.081
                                                                  (0.102)           (0.094)
              C. High School Graduation (CNLSY)
              Head Start                                         0.085              0.084
                                                                 (0.030)            (0.027)
              D. Idle (CNLSY)
              Head Start                                          -0.072            -0.068
                                                                  (0.037)            (0.034
              E. Learning Disability (CNLSY)
              Head Start                                         -0.059            -0.053
                                                                  (0.020)           (0.019)
              F. Poor Health (CNLSY)
              Head Start                                         -0.069             -0.059
                                                                  (0.026)            (0.025)

Notes: Column 1 reprints the FFE estimate using our expanded sample for PSID outcomes and using our replication
sample for CNLSY outcomes. Column 2 presents the estimate weighting family-level estimates by the sample share,
as suggested in Gibbons, Urbancic, Suarez Serrato (2018). This "undoes" the conditional variance weighting of FFE,
and produces an estimate that is interpretable as the ATE for switchers. Sample size is N=2,986 for the expanded
sample. Standard errors are clustered on mother id. * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.




                                                       67
Table B.14: Horse Race between Family Size and Index of Non-Family-Size Covariates (PSID White
Sample)


                                                                  x Fam Size    x Index    Horse Race
             Index = Predicted Head Start
             Head Start                                              0.025       0.073        0.008
                                                                    (0.063)     (0.069)      (0.072)
             Head Start x 4plus child family                        0.281                    0.250
                                                                    (0.112)                  (0.105)
             Head Start x Tercile 1 Predicted Head Start                         -0.049       -0.116
                                                                                (0.094)      (0.101)
             Head Start x Tercile 2 Predicted Head Start                        0.212         0.125
                                                                                (0.113)      (0.111)
             Observations                                            2986         2986         2986
             Index = Predicted Finish College
             Head Start                                              0.025       -0.088       -0.130
                                                                    (0.063)     (0.083)      (0.100)
             Head Start x 4plus child family                        0.281                    0.266
                                                                    (0.112)                  (0.112)
             Head Start x Tercile 1 Predicted Finish College                    0.237          0.155
                                                                                (0.112)      (0.121)
             Head Start x Tercile 2 Predicted Finish College                    0.260          0.207
                                                                                (0.131)      (0.142)
             Observations                                            2986        2986          2986

This table shows estimates from a FFE regression of attainment of some college on an indicator for attendance of
Head Start, and an indicator for having a family with 4 or more children (Column 1), dummies for terciles of an
index of predicted Head Start attendance (Column 2, Panel A), dummies for terciles of an index of the predicted
likelihood of finishing college (Column 2, Panel B), and the combination of family size indicator and terciles of the
index (Column 3). The predicted Head Start (finish college) index is created by regressing Head Start attendance
(finish college) on all of the control variables in the PSID analysis, except for the household size variable.




                                                         68
