                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         DOES CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT LEAD TO GENTRIFICATION?

                                       Leah Platt Boustan
                                        Robert A. Margo
                                       Matthew M. Miller
                                        James M. Reeves
                                          Justin P. Steil

                                      Working Paper 26170
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26170


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2019




We are grateful to the Ziman Center for Real Estate at UCLA for research support, and to
seminar participants at Columbia University, George Washington University, NYU, Syracuse
University and UCLA for helpful comments on earlier versions. Matthew M. Miller is a Senior
Economist at Audible, which is a subsidiary of Amazon. The research was completed before
Miller joined Amazon. All views contained in this research are the author's own and do not
represent the views of Amazon, its affiliates, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Leah Platt Boustan, Robert A. Margo, Matthew M. Miller, James M. Reeves, and
Justin P. Steil. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Does Condominium Development Lead to Gentrification?
Leah Platt Boustan, Robert A. Margo, Matthew M. Miller, James M. Reeves, and Justin P.
Steil
NBER Working Paper No. 26170
August 2019
JEL No. N92,R28,R31

                                         ABSTRACT

The condominium structure, which facilitates ownership of units in multi-family buildings, was
only introduced to the US during the 1960s. We ask whether the subsequent development of
condominiums encouraged high-income households to move to central cities. Although we
document a strong positive correlation between condominium density and resident income, this
association is entirely driven by endogenous development of condos in areas otherwise attractive
to high-income households. When we instrument for condo density using the passage of
municipal regulations limiting condo conversions, we find little association between condo
development and resident income, education or race.

Leah Platt Boustan                             James M. Reeves
Princeton University                           Department of Economics
Industrial Relations Section                   University of Michigan
Louis A. Simpson International Bldg.           238 Lorch Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544                            Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER                                       jmreeves@umich.edu
lboustan@princeton.edu
                                               Justin P. Steil
Robert A. Margo                                MIT
Department of Economics                        Department of Urban Studies and Planning
Boston University                              77 Massachusetts Avenue, Room 9-515
270 Bay State Road                             Cambridge, MA 02139
Boston, MA 02215                               steil@mit.edu
and NBER
margora@bu.edu

Matthew M. Miller
Audible
1 Washington St.
Newark, NJ 07102
mattmmiller@g.ucla.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26170
I. Introduction

       The metropolitan population of the United States has been shifting away from central cities
toward the suburbs since at least the early twentieth century. In recent decades, this exodus from
central cities has slowed down and, in some cities even changed direction, with an influx of new
and often high socio-economic status residents into the urban core ­ a phenomenon known
colloquially as "gentrification."
       The majority of economic research on gentrification has focused on changes in demand for
urban living due to shifts in the location of employment and the expansion of downtown amenities
(Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2006; Guerrieri, Hartley, and Hurst, 2013; Edlund, Machado, and Sviatschi
2015; Diamond, 2016; Couture and Handbury, 2017). This paper considers a neglected, but
potentially complementary, supply-side explanation for gentrification: the introduction of the
condominium as a legal form, which permitted households to pair home ownership with residence
in dense urban neighborhoods in large number for the first time. 1 The condominium became a
legally recognized form of owner-occupancy only by 1970, after states passed enabling legislation
to authorize the development of condominiums. To the best of our knowledge, our paper offers
the first empirical analysis of the effect of condominiums on urban space.
       In a time series, the spread of the condominium form coincides with a rise in owner
occupancy in multi-family units for college-educated household heads. Table 1 compares the
ownership and rental patterns in 1960, before the rise of the condominium, with those in 2010,
forty years after the condo form first emerged. During this period, the overall homeownership rate
rose for both college-educated and non-college educated household heads. At the same time, the
multi-family share of owner-occupied units doubled for the college educated, while declining
somewhat for the non-college educated. 2
       In this paper, we ask whether cities that built more condo units after 1970 were able to
attract more high income residents. Our empirical challenge is that any observed correlation
between condo development and residents' characteristics could be driven by the (endogenous)


1
  Before the advent of the condo, the main options for owning multi-family units was to form a
housing cooperative, a solution that was common only in New York City, or to own a duplex and
rent out one unit (Bennett, 2011). We discuss this history in Section II.
2
  For college-educated owner-occupiers, the probability of living in a multi-family unit rose from
around 10 percent in 1960 to 20 percent in 2010 (=6 percent/64 percent in 1960, and 14 percent/73
percent in 2010).
                                                                                                1
construction decision of developers, responding to the perceived demand for condos in areas
otherwise valued by high-income households. We exploit policy variation in the strictness or laxity
of municipal codes regulating condominium conversions to identify the supply-side effect of
condo availability on gentrification.
         We collect new archival information for the 100 largest cities on the passage of city-level
ordinances intended to regulate conversion of rental buildings into condominium units. These
regulations include protection against evictions, advance notification requirements for existing
residents, and temporary moratoria on condo conversions, among other provisions. Thirty-four
cities passed some form of restrictive condo ordinance between 1973 and 2009, 28 of which
imposed substantial restrictions on the development process.
         Our main analysis focuses on the 54 metropolitan areas that can be consistently identified
in the Integrated Public Use Micro Data Series (IPUMS) from 1980 to 2010. We use a difference-
in-differences specification comparing central cities that passed a restrictive ordinance to those
that did not, before and after the regulation passes. Regardless of the city's regulatory structure,
suburbs rarely regulated the process of converting rental units to condominiums, in large part
because few suburbs had a housing stock conducive to conversions. As a third difference, we
incorporate data on the suburban ring of each city, which allows us to control for common
metropolitan level trends.
         We start by documenting a strong OLS relationship between the percent of the housing
stock made up of owner-occupied condominium units (which we call "condo density") and
demographic characteristics of the city residents. A 1 percentage point increase in condo density
(roughly the difference between Dallas and San Francisco) is associated with a 4 percent higher
mean income for city residents. This pattern holds when following areas over time, looking at the
association between changes in condo density and changes in the attributes of residents, and is
also present (but smaller) when focusing only on the residents of the multi-family stock. Similar
associations hold for the share of residents holding a Bachelor's degree and the share that are non-
black.
         We then turn to our causal analysis, which uses the passage of a restrictive ordinance as an
instrument for condo density. Our first stage estimates confirm that condo density falls by 1
percentage point of the full housing stock (and 3 percentage points in the multi-family stock) after
a city passes a restrictive ordinance, as compared to cities that did not regulate condo conversions,

                                                                                                   2
and relative to the suburban ring in the metropolitan area. We use tract-level data from the
Neighborhood Change Database to document that the effect of municipal regulation on condo
density also holds at the municipal border between cities and suburbs.
       In contrast to the correlation between condo density and residents' characteristics in OLS,
the 2SLS coefficients are generally small and statistically insignificant. That is, despite a strong
first stage, we find no causal impact of condo development on the income, education level or racial
composition of city residents when using city regulations to instrument for condo density. The
coefficient estimates drop by an order of magnitude, demonstrating no relationship between the
availability of condo units and characteristics of urban residents.
       By ruling out the importance of condominiums in attracting high-income residents to urban
areas, our paper provides additional evidence that the primary factors behind gentrification reflect
changes in the demand for urban living rather than housing supply. One group of related papers
argues that gentrification is driven by the growing value that workers place on living close to their
place of employment, a byproduct of rising work hours and increases in female labor force
participation (Kahn, 2007; Edlund, Machado, and Sviatschi 2015). A second strand of the literature
emphasizes the increased availability of local amenities in urban areas that are attractive to high
income households, including restaurants, shopping, and other cultural venues, as well as
proximity to other wealthy residents themselves (Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2006; Guerrieri, Hartley,
and Hurst, 2013; Diamond, 2016; Couture and Handbury, 2017). 3 Our empirical strategy, which
leverages changes in regulations to local housing markets, is most similar to a set of papers
examining the effect of lifting rent control on housing prices and rents, crime rates and racial
composition of residents in Cambridge, MA and San Francisco (Sims, 2011; Autor, Palmer, and
Pathak, 2014, 2019; Diamond, McQuade, and Qian, 2018).
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We start in Section II with a brief economic
history of the condominium, which informs our empirical design. We then introduce our data,
including a new dataset of city-level regulations on condo conversions in Section III. Section IV
describes our research design and estimating equations. Section V contains results and Section VI
concludes.



3
 Ellen and O'Regan (2010) and Foote (2015) find little empirical effect of falling crime rates on
urban population since 1990.
                                                                                                   3
II. The Condominium: A Brief Economic History

       The condominium is a recent addition to the housing market in the United States. In a
condominium, individual housing units within a multi-family dwelling are owned separately as a
"divided" property interest, whereas common areas are owned collectively. The land under a
residential building is considered to be common, as are any shared external surfaces, heating and
plumbing, and other building infrastructure.
       Beyond the condominium form, joint ownership of multi-family dwellings is only possible
via informal partnership or housing cooperatives. 4 However, the transaction costs for these
arrangements are high and so their use is relatively rare. In 1960, before the advent of the condo
form, only 5 percent of units in apartment buildings (buildings with 5 or more units) were owner-
occupied. With the exception of New York, Chicago (to a lesser extent) and a few other scattered
locations, housing cooperatives were (and still are) very uncommon in the United States (Lasner,
2012). 5 In a cooperative arrangement, households do not hold title to the particular unit that they
occupy, but rather own shares in the cooperative itself, which carry with them the right of
occupancy of the unit as a leasehold. In historical cooperatives, these shares could not be used as
collateral to qualify for a mortgage loan on the unit. Although these mortgage restrictions have
moderated in recent years, resale of shares in a cooperative is still tightly regulated by the
building's board of directors which typically sets stringent requirements for prospective residents
and, ultimately, approves (or rejects) the sale. As a result, the bundle of property rights associated
with cooperative occupancy is not as flexible as the condominium, which may explain
cooperatives' relatively limited scope.
       Although condominiums did not exist in the United States in the early twentieth century,
the contractual form was already available in Europe, where its origins date back to twelfth century
Germanic towns, before spreading to cities in Belgium, France and elsewhere (Leyser 1958;Ferrer
and Stecher 1967; Lasner 2012, p. 41). The condominium form was included in the Napoleonic
code in France in 1806, which influenced the legal structure of other civil law countries in Europe



4
  A third option is for a single individual to own a multi-family dwelling, live in one of the units,
and rent out the others.
5
  The first co-op building, which was called "The Rembrandt," opened in 1881 and was located at
152 W. 52nd Street in Manhattan. An earlier project, "The Palace Home," was proposed before the
Civil War for a location on the Upper West Side but was never built (Lasner, 2012).
                                                                                                    4
and Latin America. The statutory basis for condo development was further strengthened by the
passage of "enabling legislation" in the 1920s throughout Europe (Bennett 2011, pp. 251-52).
       However, despite a rising urbanization rate ­ and, hence, a growing share of the population
living in multi-family dwellings ­ there seems to have been little demand for establishing the
condominium as a legal form in the United States prior to World War Two. When and why,
therefore, did the condominium first enter the United States? According to Hansmann (1991), a
key causal factor was the high marginal federal tax rate on income in the aftermath of World War
Two. Using a simulation analysis, Hansmann shows that, by the late 1950s, the tax benefits of
owner-occupancy were far higher than prior to World War Two. However, not all households
aspiring to homeownership preferred to live in detached single-family dwellings and the
cooperative apartment was too specialized a contractual form to be broadly useful.
       The condominium emerged as an off-the-shelf solution to the rising demand for
homeownership in the 1950s. Puerto Rico, a US territory with a civil law tradition, was the first
area to authorize condominiums in 1951. The Puerto Rican real estate industry then successfully
lobbied Congress to include Section 234(c) in the Housing Act of 1961, which legally recognized
the condominium form and permitted the Federal Housing Administration to extend its mortgage
insurance to condominiums (Bennett 2011, p. 254, 262). In the continental United States, enabling
legislation at the state level followed soon after. 6 By 1963, six states had enacted enabling
legislation that giving a statutory basis to condominiums, largely copying the language of the
Puerto Rican law. 7 The FHA drafted a "model statute" that served as a further guide. By 1965, 43
states had enabling legislation and the last state ­ Vermont ­ followed suit in 1969.



6
  According to Berger (1963, p. 35) enabling legislation was unnecessary, because so-called "flat
ownership" existed in Scotland and England, both common-law countries. Berger also highlights
the handful of examples of condominium-like arrangements in the United States prior to the 1961
Housing Act. In 1947, a dozen veterans successfully persuaded the Veteran's Administration to
issue separate loans for each unit in a multi-family building on the Upper East Side of Manhattan,
and each received title to a specific unit with an undivided interest in common property. While the
arrangement proved successful in the sense of lasting for several years, it does not seem to have
spurred additional examples in Manhattan. In Los Angeles in the late 1950s, the local Real Estate
Commissioner approved several apartment projects in which households could own, in fee simple,
and finance separately their respective apartments; however, property taxes for the building were
still undivided (unlike in a true condominium). However, such examples were rare suggesting that,
as practical matter, enabling legislation did spur condominium development.
7
  These first states were Arkansas, Hawaii, Arizona, Kentucky, South Carolina, and Virginia.
                                                                                                 5
       Yet, with some exceptions, the initial flurry of enabling legislation did not produce an
immediate supply response; Census data suggests that, to a first approximation, there were hardly
any condominiums in the US in 1970. Condominium density rose to 1.5 percent of the housing
stock in 1980 and to 3 percent in 2010, the most recent census year. As illustrated in Figure 1, the
diffusion of condos has been uneven across locations. In cities like Oklahoma City, OK or San
Antonio, TX, condos are a minimal presence, accounting for less than one percent of housing units.
By contrast, in Atlanta, condos represent 15 percent of the housing stock.
       The variation in condominium density across metropolitan areas depends on both the
demand for and supply of housing units. The focus of this paper is on differences in the supply
conditions for condominium development across cities. Units can be added to the housing stock
either by constructing a new building or by converting an existing rental building into condos. The
supply of new condominiums therefore depends on the costs of new construction and on the
suitability of the existing stock of multi-family housing for conversion. Our identification strategy
is motivated by the observation that condominium supply was affected by specific municipal
legislation designed to restrict conversions. In particular, the first wave of condominium
conversions in the 1970s prompted a "tenants' rights" backlash that led some cities to place
restrictions on the conversion process. 8 We discuss the history of this movement in the next
section, alongside our description of the dataset of municipal ordinances.



III. Data

3.1 City-level data

       We use Census data to calculate the condo density and residential characteristics of central
cities and suburbs by decade. We focus on metropolitan areas that are anchored by one of the 100
largest cities and whose central city and suburban ring can be consistently identified in the public
use Census data from 1980 to 2010. Unfortunately, we are not able to incorporate data from 1970
because we cannot separately identify the central city and suburban ring of each metropolitan area
in that year. These restrictions leave us with a sample of 54 metropolitan areas, with two
observations for each area in each decade (one for the central city and one for the suburban ring).


8
 There was also a second wave of enabling legislation in some states directed at technical problems
with the original legislation (Bennett, 2011, pp. 264-65).
                                                                                                   6
         For each observation, we use the underlying micro data to measure condo density and a
series of characteristics of the local residents, including mean income (and income at different
percentiles), share of residents with a Bachelor's degree or higher, and the share of residents who
are black. We calculate these characteristics for the full housing stock and, separately, for residents
of multi-family units, where our definition of "multi-family" includes single-family attached units
(town houses), along with duplexes, triplexes and larger buildings. In 1980, the Census only asked
about condominium status for owner-occupied units. To ensure consistency across years, we
define condo density as the share of housing units made up of owner-occupied condominiums in
all years. 9
         Table 2 presents summary statistics of our condo density measure and of residential
characteristics of household heads living in central cities or suburbs in our sample from 1980 to
2010. Condo density was increasing in central cities from 1.2 percent of housing units in 1980 to
3.7 percent in 2010. In each year, condo density was slightly higher in the suburban ring, reaching
4.5 percent of the housing stock in 2010; many condos in the suburbs are centered around common
space, such as a park or golf course. Socio-economic status gaps between city and suburban
residents are as expected: Residents of central cities earned a lower mean income than residents of
suburbs through this period (gap of 29 log points). These values exclude household heads reporting
zero income. The share of household heads (25 years or older) holding a Bachelor's degree steadily
rose in central cities from 20 percent to 32 percent of household heads; suburban household heads
were around 2 percentage points more likely to hold a Bachelor's in each year. Central cities had
a larger black population share than suburbs, rising to 27 percent black by 2010 (in comparison,
the suburbs were only 9 percent black in that year). 10



3.2 Municipal Condominium Ordinances

         Prevailing local regulations are one factor that may affect the cost of converting a rental
building to a condominium. We collected archival data on a series of municipal ordinances passed
between 1970 and 2010 governing aspects of the condo conversion process.


9
  In 1990, the first year that condo status was asked about all units, 62.7 percent of condo units in
our estimation sample were owner-occupied.
10
   In years with multiple race options, we define anyone who reports being black and any other
race as black.
                                                                                                     7
          The political economy of restrictive condo ordinances was influenced by rapid initial
conversions in the context of a tight housing market, giving rise to a strong tenants' rights
movement. Between 1970 and 1976, 106,000 units were converted from rental housing to
condominiums. In the following three years the pace of conversions more than doubled, to 260,000
units (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 1980). This first generation of condo
conversions coincided with the lowest rental vacancy rate nationwide since the Census Bureau
began collecting the data in 1960, and was often met with public opposition (Judson, 1983). Local
officials were concerned about reductions in the rental housing stock and the displacement of
current tenants. For example, the Mayor of Washington D.C. testified to the Senate Committee on
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs in 1979 that "[t]he conversion of rental apartments to
condominium ownership has become a national phenomenon which has reached crisis
proportions" (96th Congress, 1st Session § 9). Newspapers blared alarmist headlines about
"Condomania in Chicago" (Tamarkin, 1978) and "The Condo Squeeze" in Boston (Klibanoff and
McNamara, 1981).
          To address these issues, some cities passed ordinances to control the conversion process.
These regulations included provisions that required notice periods for tenants of the upcoming
conversion, rights of first refusal for existing tenants to purchase their units, or relocation
assistance for existing tenants to move elsewhere (Fine, 1980).
          We construct a new data set of municipal condominium ordinances coded by degree of
restrictiveness. The ordinances apply to the conversion of existing rental housing stock to
condominium ownership, not to the construction of new condominium buildings, a process that
was far less regulated. To identify ordinances related to condo conversions, we reviewed the
municipal codes of each of the 100 largest cities as of 2016 searching for the word "condominium"
in the municipal code and identifying any local laws restricting condominium construction or
conversion. 11 We also searched the Proquest newspaper archive for the terms "condominium" and
"ordinance" together with each city name to identify any earlier ordinances that could have been
enacted and subsequently repealed. 12
          Once condominium provisions were identified in the current municipal code or in Proquest,
we used the name of the ordinance to obtain the original regulation from online city records or to


11
     The municipal codes are available from each city's website and are electronically searchable.
12
     http://www.proquest.com/products-services/newsarchive.html
                                                                                                     8
search through Proquest to identify the dates on which the ordinance was passed or amended. For
instance, the Detroit, Michigan Municipal Code governs the conversion of dwelling units to
condominium ownership and requires that prior to the transfer of title of any building containing
4 or more residential units to a developer undertaking a condominium conversion, the owner shall
give the tenants of a majority of the rental units a joint right of first refusal to accept the owner's
offer of sale or the right to match any third party developer's offer of purchase (Detroit Municipal
Code § 26-6-4). The ordinance allows senior citizens residing in subsidized or otherwise low-rent
apartments to elect to executive a lifetime lease for their unit, with limited rent increases (Detroit
Municipal Code § 26-6-5). The ordinance also requires owners to provide the mayor, the city
planning commission, and each tenant with 120 days' notice of the intent to convert apartments to
condominium ownership, prohibits evictions without cause during the notice period, and grants
the tenants a 60-day right of first refusal to purchase their dwelling units as condominium estates
((Detroit Municipal Code §§ 26-6-6, 26-6-7, 26-6-10)). Finally, it requires relocation assistance
payments equal to one month's rent to be paid to any tenant of a subsidized or otherwise low-rent
apartment (Detroit Municipal Code §§ 26-6-11). The notes to the code indicate that these
provisions were enacted by Ordinance 400-H of 9180. Archives of the Detroit Free Press confirm
that the ordinance was approved 4-1 by the Detroit City Council on July 30, 1980. Mayor Young
vetoed the ordinance, objecting that, "A potential investor might go to a city that does not have
such an ordinance," but the council voted 9-0 to override the veto on August 7 (Jackson 1980a:
4C; Jackson 1980b).
       Central cities in our analysis sample are listed in Appendix Table 1, alongside the year
that the city passed a restrictive condo ordinance (if such an ordinance was passed). We also
develop a three-point ranking to classify the severity of local ordinances, which is listed beside
each city and summarized in Appendix Table 2. Ordinances that recognize or facilitate
condominium conversions but do not provide any protections for tenants or impose costs on
developers are ranked as a "0." Ordinances that set out time frames and requirements for tenant
notification of condominium conversions or offer tenants the right of first refusal are ranked as a
"1." Ordinances that went further to require tenant relocation assistance or tenant relocation
payments are ranked as a "2." Ordinances that went still further to impose a cap on the number of
permissible annual condominium conversions, to establish a minimum city-wide rental vacancy
rate before conversions were permitted, to grant some categories of tenants' lifetime leases, to

                                                                                                     9
require the replacement of low-income rentals elsewhere, or to require tenant approval for
condominium conversion are ranked as a "3."
       For our main analysis, we categorize any municipality with an ordinance score of one or
higher as having passed an ordinance. Any city with an ordinance that does not include tenant
protections (coded as "0") is grouped with cities that have no ordinance at all. Our reading of the
municipal codes leads us to conclude that suburban towns rarely passed restrictive condo
ordinances, which applied only to the conversion of existing rental stock (few suburban areas had
a relevant rental housing stock in 1970). To the extent that some inner-ring suburbs passed a
relevant ordinance (and if such passage is correlated with the legislative activity of the neighboring
city), our first stage estimates will be biased against finding an effect of regulation on condo
density.
       Figure 2 plots the number of ordinances passed each year from 1973-2015. Newark, NJ
was the first city to successfully pass a condo ordinance in 1973, followed by Indianapolis, IN in
1975 and Washington, DC in 1976. The pace of local legislation accelerated in earnest after 1980.
Of the country's 100 largest cities, 34 cities had passed some sort of municipal ordinance by 2015.
In our analysis sample of 54 metropolitan areas, 17 cities passed a restrictive ordinance. Eight of
these regulations were passed in the 1970s, before our data begins, and so these cities function as
part of our control group. Our difference-in-differences specification thus compares the nine cities
that passed an ordinance during our sample period ("treated") to the eight cities that passed a
regulation in the 1970s ("always treated") and the 37 cities that have no such ordinance today
("never treated").
       Appendix Figure 1 maps the central cities with and without an ordinance as of 2015. Cities
with a condo ordinance are larger and more coastal, including Boston, New York City,
Philadelphia and Washington, DC on the East Coast, and Seattle, San Francisco and Los Angeles
on the West Coast. Cities in the Midwest and the South were less likely to pass an ordinance. Cities
with a larger demand for development, as well as those with a larger rental population who would
oppose the conversion of rental buildings, are more likely to pass such restrictions. As a result of
these clear cross-sectional differences, our preferred specification includes city and decade fixed
effects to focus on changes in condo density within a city over time.




                                                                                                   10
IV. Empirical Strategy and Estimation

        Our goal is to understand whether the development of condominium units has a causal
effect on attracting residents of high socioeconomic status to central cities. Let  be the
condominium density of the housing stock in the central city (or suburb) c of metropolitan area m
in decade t. Outcome variables (y) include the income (in logs) of the mean resident, the share of
the population with a college degree and the black share of the population. We formalize this
relationship in the following regression specification:


                          =  +  +  +                                     (1)


A metropolitan area-by-decade fixed effects ( ) captures any regional trends that are shared
between the central city and suburb of the same metropolitan area (e.g., a growing or declining
industrial base). We also add a time-invariant local fixed effects ( ) to control for distinct
attributes of the city and suburb of the same metropolitan area (e.g., the density of the housing
stock as of 1970). Our condo density measure varies at the local area (city or suburb) by decade
level, and so this specification is fully saturated.
        If condominiums were randomly assigned to cities,  would indicate the effect of adding
more condo density on the characteristics of city residents. In reality, condo development is a
function of local supply and demand conditions. If high income residents have a stronger demand
for condos relative to rental units, developers may anticipate larger profits ­ and thus, be more
willing to undertake ­ conversion projects in cities that are attractive to high-income residents for
other reasons. Cities with positive (unmeasured) amenities or levels of productivity have high
values of the idiosyncratic error term,  . Developer behavior will then lead to an association
between a city's condo density and the error term,     0, leading to over-estimates
of the true effect of condo availability on resident attributes.
        One solution to this classic simultaneity problem is to find a supply shifter that changes the
cost of building condos in some neighborhoods relative to others. Our approach is to use local
regulation, which can increase the cost of condo conversions, as a variable that will shift the supply
of condominium units. The presence of a municipal ordinance can then become an instrument for
condo density in a two-stage least squares model.


                                                                                                   11
       We estimate the first stage relationship, or the association between municipal regulation
and condo density, using the following equation:


               =  +  + 1      +                                                    (2)


The dependent variable  is the percent of housing units that are condominiums in central
city (or suburb) c of metropolitan area m in year t. We define an indicator ( ), which is equal
to one for both the central city and suburbs of a metropolitan areas in which the central city passed
an ordinance. Our main right-hand side variable of interest is thus a triple interaction between
     , which contrasts central cities and suburbs in metropolitan areas that are
anchored by a central city that passed a restrictive condo ordinance (and those that are not), before
and after the regulation's passage. We saturate the specification with two sets of fixed effects. The
vector  allows for fixed differences between each central city (or suburban ring) in the sample,
so that larger cities with high-skilled industries like New York City are not directly compared with
smaller cities. The vector  allows each metropolitan area to have its own housing market trends
over time that are shared between central city and suburb. These fixed effects absorb the main
effects and double interactions (e.g.,  and  are absorbed into  ). 13 Our identifying
assumption is that the housing market in the city and suburbs of the same metropolitan area follow
similar trends. We cannot include central city-by-metropolitan area time trends, as that would
absorb our identifying variation. 14




13
   In addition, the indicator for being in a decade after the regulation's passage ( ) is absorbed
into the metropolitan area by decade fixed effects ( ). Being the central city of a metropolitan
area with an ordinance (   ) is captured by the city-by-metropolitan area fixed effects
 and being in a metropolitan area with an ordinance after passage (   ) is captured
by the metropolitan area-by-decade fixed effects  . Note that the third double interaction
   cannot be separately identified from      because  is
always equal to zero in metropolitan areas that do not pass an ordinance (when  = 0).
14
   Intuitively, our specification is a staggered difference-in-differences design where metro areas
are treated at different points in the sample period (Athey and Imbens 2018, Goodman-Bacon
2018). Our main results also hold in a simple difference-in-differences design, presented in
Appendix Tables 3 and 6, where we treat 1980 as the "pre-period" for all metro areas and focus
on cities that adopted an ordinance in the 1980s as our treated observations. These cities constitute
the majority of the sample (see Appendix Table 1).
                                                                                                  12
       Our second stage equations consider the effect of predicted condo density, rather than
actual condo density, on residential characteristics.


                         =  +  + 1  + µ                                 (3)


Our instrument for condo density is the triple interaction (     ), which
compares central cities that passed an ordinance to those that did not, before and after the passage
of the regulation, and relative to the suburban ring of the metropolitan area.
       Finally, in a parallel analysis, we use data from the Neighborhood Change Database
(NCDB) to provide further evidence on the efficacy of restrictive condo ordinances in limiting
condo density. Notably, these data are mapped into consistently defined census tract areas, which
allows us to compare the evolution in condo density over time at the neighborhood level, and to
sharpen our comparison by limiting attention to neighborhoods on either side of the city-suburban
boundary. We supplement the published NCDB database, which only has information on condo
density in 1980, with a special tract-level extract specially prepared for us by the Census Bureau
containing information on condo density at the tract level in 2010. Formally, we estimate a long
difference regression, stacking data from 1980 and 2010 at the tract level,:


               =  +  + 1  ×  +                                                     (4)


where i indexes tracts, c indexes central cities (or suburbs), m indexes metro areas, and t indexes
years. 15 We estimate equation (4) using tracts that are near the city-suburban border using an
increasingly narrow set of comparisons (starting at 2000 meters and running to 200 meters). The
variable of interest is  ×  , which is equal to one in all tracts of a central city
in the years after the passage of a condo conversion ordinance, and zero otherwise. That is, the
variable is always equal to zero in suburban tracts and in cities that never passed an ordinance, and
is additionally equal to zero in central city tracts before the passage of an ordinance. To compare
tracts within the same metropolitan area and to control for broader metropolitan area trends, we


15
  As with equation (2), the time-invariant area fixed effects,  , absorb the indicator for ever
passing an ordinance. Moreover,  is perfectly collinear with the DiD term of interest. For
expositional purposes, we report the interaction of  ×  .
                                                                                                  13
include metro by year fixed effects  . Intuitively, this identification strategy compares the
evolution of condo density in otherwise similar census tracts, where tracts in some center cities
were exposed to condo conversion ordinances, and tracts in neighboring suburbs were not. This
research design is similar to spatial regression discontinuities that have been used to estimate the
willingness to pay for school quality (Black and Machin, 2011) and for varying land use
regulations or school desegregation regimes across city-suburban borders (Boustan, 2012; Turner,
Haughwout and Van Der Klaauw, 2014).



V. Effect of Condo Development on Resident Characteristics

5.1 Correlation between condo density and resident characteristics

       We start by estimating the correlation between condo density and residential characteristics
of a location using OLS. Table 3 documents that areas with more condo units also have higher
income residents who are more likely to hold a college degree and are less likely to be black.
Columns 1 and 2 consider all housing units in the area. A one-percentage point increase in condo
density is associated with an increase in mean personal income of 3.6 percent, a 1.7 percentage
point increase in share of residents with a Bachelor's degree or higher, and a 2.3 percentage point
decrease in the black share of population. When we weight our estimates by number of household
heads in each metro-city-year cell in Column 2, we continue to find strong correlations between
condo density and resident characteristics in the full stock of housing units.
       More than 90 percent of condo units are in a multi-family structure and so we expect the
relationship between condo density and residential characteristics to be stronger in this subsample.
Columns 3 and 4 focus on housing units in multi-family buildings, including single-family
attached dwellings. Contrary to our predictions, we find that the associations between condo
density and resident characteristics are only 20 to 30 percent as large as in the full housing stock
(yet, they are still statistically significant). Weighting these correlations by the number of
households yields precisely estimated zeroes, suggesting no relationship between condo
development and resident characteristics within the multi-family housing stock.
       The lack of a correlation between condo density and resident characteristics in the multi-
family housing stock is our first indication that the broader correlation with residents' socio-
economic status may be driven by reverse causality ­ that is, condo developers are more likely to

                                                                                                 14
build condo units in areas with high income residents. We consider this possibility in more detail
in the next sections, which introduce an instrument for condo density based on municipal
regulations.

5.2 First stage relationship between local ordinances and condo density

        By raising the costs associated with condo development, municipal ordinances that regulate
the process for converting rental housing into condominiums should reduce the condo density in
the local housing stock. Table 4 presents estimates of our first-stage equation (equation 2), which
relates condo density to the passage of local ordinances. In the full housing stock, the passage of
an ordinance is associated with a nearly 1 percentage point decrease in central city condo density
(Column 1), a large effect relative to an average density of around 2 to 3 percentage points reported
in Table 2. Weighting this estimate by the number of household heads heightens the estimated
decline to 1.4 percentage points (Column 2).
        Panel B documents larger effects of restrictive ordinances on the multi-family housing
stock, which was the likely target of such regulation. The passage of an ordinance decreases central
city condo density by 3.4 percentage points, or by approximately 50 percent, relative to the sample
mean (column 1). Weighting the estimates by number of households increases the estimate to a
5.7 percentage point decrease (column 2). In Columns 3 and 4 we explore the potential for
intensive margin effects using the 0-3 coding developed in Appendix Table 2. These results are
smaller and less precise, suggesting that the important margin is passage of a restrictive ordinance,
not the gradations of severity in the ordinance text. 16
        Anecdotal evidence suggests that the push to convert buildings from rental to condo was
stronger in the first half of our sample period, when the pool of rental buildings conducive to condo
conversion was still large. 17 To allow for this possibility, we estimate a simpler version of our first
stage which focuses on the cities that adopt restrictive ordinances in the 1980s. This specification
compares the seven cities that passed a regulation in the 1980s ("treated") to the 37 cities that never


16
   We note that this intensive margin specification assumes a linear relationship across ordinance
severity levels. We do not have enough variation in the sample to test the importance of specific
regulations.
17
   In the case of Boston, for example, an official city document (Condominium Trends, published
in 2000) suggests that the peak of conversions occurred in the 1980s, before undergoing a steep
decline in the 1990s.
                                                                                                     15
passed a regulation ("control"), dropping the eight cities that passed a regulation in the 1970s and
the two cities that passed a regulation later in the sample period. We estimate a standard difference-
in-differences that treats 1980 as the "pre-period" and 1990 as the "post-period." These estimates,
presented in Appendix Table 3, are similar in magnitude to the main results and statistically
significant in the weighted regressions, suggesting that the ordinances had an immediate and
binding impact on condo conversions.
       In some cases, suburbs might follow different housing market trends than their central city.
Suburban Detroit, for example, has experienced stable or rising housing prices, as the central city
has declined dramatically. This concern is mitigated at the city-suburban border where the housing
stock was built around the same period at the same density in neighborhoods that have similar
amenities. Table 5 thus compares neighborhoods on either side of city-suburban borders using
tract data from the Neighborhood Change Database (NCDB).
       Each column of Table 5 contains sets of tracts that are progressively closer to the border.
The first column, for example, only contains tracts whose centroids are within two hundred meters
of border, the second column contains tracts within five hundred meters, and so on. The final
column contains all tracts in the metropolitan area. We focus on neighborhoods that are
substantially "at risk" of condo development due to the presence of multi-family housing. 18 Our
two definitions of neighborhoods "at risk" of condo development include tracts with a sizeable
share of single-family attached and multiplex (2-4) units (Panel A) or tracts with a sizeable share
of larger multi-family buildings with 5+ units (Panel B). We find that, consistent with the full city
analysis, restrictive ordinances lowered condo density by 3-6 percentage points in both
neighborhood types. This relationship is more statistically precise in neighborhoods with smaller
multi-family buildings, even up to the tightest bounds around the border (within 200 meters).

5.3 Causal effects of condo development on resident characteristics

       Municipal laws restricting condo conversions were effective in reducing condo density.
We now use these laws to consider the causal effect of condo density on the attributes of residents
in an area. Table 6 presents our two-stage least squares results. In contrast to OLS estimates, 2SLS
estimates suggest a minimal effect of condo density on resident characteristics. First, the


18
  Results using the full sample of tracts are presented in Appendix Table 4 and find little effect
of restrictive condo ordinances on the full housing stock.
                                                                                                   16
relationship between condo density and all resident characteristics in the multi-family housing
stock completely disappears after instrumenting for condo density (Panel B). Second, in the full
housing stock, the estimated effect of condo density on income is completely eliminated and the
effect on education falls by 70 percent when weighting by population (Panel A, column 2). Third,
even the largest 2SLS estimates on income (unweighted regressions, Panel A, column 1) fall by
40 percent and are not statistically different from zero. The only 2SLS estimates that are similar in
magnitude to OLS (if imprecise) are unweighted estimates of the effect of condo density on
educational attainment and black population share.
       We also explore causal effects of condo density on resident characteristics in the border
sample. In Appendix Table 5, we present two-stage least squares results for both "at risk"
subgroups of tracts. These estimates should be interpreted with caution due to a weaker first stage
in smaller bandwidths. As in the metro analysis, we see no evidence that condo density is causally
related to residents' income or educational attainment. However, at many bandwidths, areas with
more condo density have fewer black residents, such that a one percentage point increase in condo
density is associated with a 2-3 percentage point decrease in the black share of the population.
       For completeness, Appendix Table 6 estimates two-stage least squares results for the
simple difference-in-differences that focuses on the cities that passed regulations in the 1980s.
Note that the first stage is only strong in the weighted specification (see Appendix Table 3). As
in the main estimates, we find no association between predicted condo density and any residential
characteristics in the weighted specification, with all of the point estimates are very close to zero.
       Investigating causal effects at the mean might mask heterogeneity in treatment effects
across the income distribution. To further investigate income effects we estimate equation (3) at
different ventiles of the income distribution. In Appendix Figure 2, we plot the estimated two-
stage least squares coefficients along with 95 percent confidence intervals. In the full housing stock
(Panel A), we see some evidence that higher condo density increases resident income in the lower
part of the distribution. Specifically, resident income increases between 5 and 10 percent in the
lowest fifth of the distribution. Similarly, in single-family attached and multi-family units (Panel
B), resident income also increases by 2 to 3 percent in this lower part of the distribution. There is
little evidence of meaningful effects in either panel throughout the rest of the income distribution.
Higher income at the lower end of the income distribution might be an indication that condo
conversions eliminate rental units previously occupied by low-income city residents.

                                                                                                   17
       Taken together, our causal estimates of condo density suggest little evidence that condo
development attract high-income residents. These null results are in contrast to naïve OLS
estimates which yielded strong correlations between condo density and resident characteristics in
the full housing stock. The positive association between condo development and resident income
seems to be driven by reverse causality, whereby developers choose to convert rental units into
condo buildings in areas with pre-existing concentrations of well-to-do residents.



VI. Concluding Remarks

       In recent years, some central city neighborhoods reversed decades of population decline, a
phenomenon known as gentrification. This paper considers ­ and ultimately rejects ­ a plausible
"supply side" explanation for gentrification: the diffusion of condominiums, which enabled
higher-income households to own and occupy multi-family units in the urban core. We find strong
correlations in OLS between condo density and resident income, education, and race in the full
housing stock, but these associations are reduced in a sample of multi-family units.
       To further explore the role of condominium development in the gentrification process, we
develop an instrumental variable strategy that exploits the passage of restrictive municipal-level
condo ordinances in some central cities. Our first stage specification, which compares cities that
passed regulation to those that did not, relative to their neighboring suburbs, shows that these
ordinances largely functioned as their proponents intended ­ namely, to reduce condo density
throughout the city and at the city-suburban border. If condo development facilitated
gentrification, we should see a strong association between predicted condo density and resident
characteristics. Instead, the estimated effects of condo density on resident income and education
in our 2SLS analysis are very small in magnitude and statistically insignificant (although we do
see a continued relationship between condo density and racial composition in some specifications).
       Our results suggest that most central city condo development is driven by the demand for
urban residential location, bolstering the previous literature in economics on the causes of
gentrification. Developers respond to the demand for downtown living by providing condo units.
However, the condominium form itself and the resulting ability of urban households to owner-
occupy per se does not seem to have attracted high-income households to cities and may have
reduced available rental units for the poor.


                                                                                               18
                                          References

Athey, Susan, and Guido W. Imbens. 2018. "Design-Based Analysis in Difference-in-Differences
Settings with Staggered Adoption." NBER Working Paper No. 24963.

Autor, David H., Christopher J. Palmer, and Parag A. Pathak. 2014. "Housing Market Spillovers:
Evidence from the End of Rent Control in Cambridge, Massachusetts." Journal of Political
Economy, 122(3): 661-717.

Autor, David H., Christopher J. Palmer, and Parag A. Pathak. 2019. "Ending Rent Control
Reduced Crime in Cambridge." AEA Papers and Proceedings, 109 : 381-84.

Bennett, Donna S. 2011. "Condominium Homeownership in the United States: A Selected
Annotated Bibliography of Legal Sources." Law Library Journal, 103(2): 249-279.

Berger, Curtis J. 1963. "Condominium: Shelter on a Statutory Foundation," Columbia Law Review
63 (6): 987-1026.

Black, Sandra E., and Stephen Machin. 2011. "Housing Valuations of School Performance."
Handbook of the Economics of Education, 3: 485-519.

Boustan, Leah Platt. "School Desegregation and Urban Change: Evidence from City Boundaries."
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4, no. 1 (2012): 85-108.

Couture, Victor, and Jessie Handbury. 2017. "Urban Revival in America, 2000 to 2010." NBER
Working Paper No. 24084.

Diamond, Rebecca, Tim McQuade, and Franklin Qian. 2018. "The Effects of Rent Control
Expansion on Tenants, Landlords, and Inequality: Evidence from San Francisco." Stanford
University Mimeo.

Diamond, Rebecca. 2016. The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers' Diverging
Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2010." American Economic Review, 106(3): 479-524.

Edlund, Lena, Cecilia Machado, and Maria Micaela Sviatschi. 2015. "Gentrification and the Rising
Returns to Skill." NBER Working Paper No. 21729.

Ellen, Ingrid Gould, and Katherine M. O'Regan. 2010. "How Low Income Neighborhoods
Change: Entry, Exit, and Enhancement." US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper
No. CES-WP 10-19.

Ferrer, Alberto and Karl Stecher. 1967. Law of Condominium with Forms, Statutes, and
Regulations. Oxford, NH: Equity Publishing Corporation.




                                                                                             19
Fine, D.A. 1980. "The Condominium Conversion Problem: Causes and Solutions." Duke Law
Journal, 306.

Foote, A. 2015. "Decomposing the Effect of Crime on Population Changes." Demography, 52(2):
705-728.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2006. "Urban Resurgence and the Consumer City."
Urban Studies, 43(8): 1275-1299.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018. "Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment
Timing." NBER Working Paper No. 25018.

Guerrieri, Veronica, Daniel Harley, and Erik Hurst. 2013. "Endogenous Gentrification and
Housing Price Dynamics." Journal of Public Economics, 100: 45-60.

Hansmann, Henry. 1991. "Condominium and Cooperative Housing: Transactional Efficiency, Tax
Subsidies, and Tenure Choice." Journal of Legal Studies, 20(1): 25-71.

Jackson, Luther. 1980a. "Council OKs Law to Regulate Condo Switches." Detroit Free Press,
July 31, 1980, p. 4B.

Jackson, Luther. 1980b. "Council OKs GM Loan Plan." Detroit Free Press, August 7, 9180, p.
8C.

Judson, V.A. 1983. "Defining Property Rights: The Constitutionality of Protecting Tenants from
Condominium Conversion." Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review, 18(1): 179-230.

Kahn, M.E. 2007. "Gentrification Trends in New TransitOriented Communities: Evidence from
Fourteen Cities that Expanded and Built Rail Transit Systems." Real Estate Economics, 35(2):
155-182.

Kilbanoff, Hank, and Eileen McNamara. 1981. "The Condo Squeeze." Boston Globe.

Lasner, Matthew Gordon. 2012. "High Life: Condo Living in the Suburban Century." Yale
University Press: New Haven, CT.

Leyser, J. 1958. "The Ownership of Flats ­ A Comparative Study." International and Comparative
Law Quarterly, 7(34).

Sims, David P. 2011. "Rent Control Rationing and Community Composition: Evidence from
Massachusetts." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 11(1): 1-30.

Tamarkin, Bob. 1978. "Condomania in Chicago." Forbes.

Turner, Matthew A., Andrew Haughwout, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 2014. "Land Use
Regulation and Welfare." Econometrica, 82(4): 1341-1403.

                                                                                           20
US Department of Housing and Urban Development. 1980. The Conversion of Rental Housing to
Condominiums and Cooperatives: A National Study of Scope, Causes, and Impacts. Washington
DC: Government Publishing Office.

United States. Cong. Senate. Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. Condominium
Housing Issues: Hearings before the Committee, June 28, 1979. 96th Cong. 1st sess. Washington
DC: Government Publishing Office.




                                                                                          21
                                                                                                                                                                Percent Condo and Owner Occupied                                                                       Percent Condo and Owner Occupied




                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                   25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          25




                                                                                                                                               Portland, ME                                                                                      Oklahoma City, OK
                                                                                                                                             Las Vegas, NV                                                                                          San Antonio, TX
                                                                                                                                            Atlantic City, NJ                                                                                        Fort Wayne, IN
                                                                                                                                                Phoenix, AZ                                                                                            Stockton, CA
                                                                                                                                           Provo-Orem, UT                                                                                      Memphis, TN/AR/MS
                                                                                                                                            Des Moines, IA                                                                                            Spokane, WA
                                                                                                                                             Columbus, OH                                                                                      Chattanooga, TN/GA
                                                                                                                         Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Lompoc                                                                                           Bakersfield, CA
                                                                                                                                  Salt Lake City-Ogden, UT                                                                                              Fresno, CA
                                                                                                                                           Cedar Rapids, IA                                                                                               Tulsa, OK
                                                                                                                              New York, NY-Northeastern NJ                                                                            Riverside-San Bernardino, CA
                                                                                                                                              Brockton, MA                                                                                           Baltimore, MD
                                                                                                                                             Baltimore, MD                                                                                          St. Louis, MO/IL
                                                                                                                                                 Detroit, MI                                                                                          Pittsburgh, PA
                                                                                                                                          Grand Rapids, MI                                                                           Hartford-Bristol-Middleton- New
                                                                                                                                             Waterbury, CT                                                                                     Kansas City, MO/KS
                                                                                                                                            Manchester, NH                                                                                         New Orleans, LA
                                                                                                                           Melbourne-Titusville-Cocoa-Palm                                                                                      Philadelphia, PA/NJ
                                                                                                                           San Francisco-Oakland-Vallejo, C                                                                                        Sacramento, CA
                                                                                                                                               Madison, WI                                                                                          Des Moines, IA




1
                                                                                                                               Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA                                                                                          Baton Rouge, LA
                                                                                                                             Hartford-Bristol-Middleton- New                                                                       Providence-Fall River-Pawtucket,
                                                                                                                                        Seattle-Everett, WA                                                                                          Milwaukee, WI
                                                                                                                           Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater,                                                                                        Portland, OR/WA
                                                                                                                                   New Haven-Meriden, CT                                                                                                 Austin, TX
                                                                                                                                              San Jose, CA                                                                                           Worcester, MA
                                                                                                                                   Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN                                                                                   Houston-Brazoria, TX
                                                                                                                                             Bridgeport, CT                                                                                New Haven-Meriden, CT
                                                                                                                                        Denver-Boulder, CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Panel B: All Metro Areas                  Grand Rapids, MI
                                                                                                                                                Trenton, NJ                                                                                           Nashville, TN
                                                                                                                                            Boston, MA/NH                                                                          Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater,
                                                                                                                                             Anchorage, AK                                                                            New York, NY-Northeastern NJ
                                                                                                                                              Ann Arbor, MI                                                                                Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Panel A: Estimation Sample - Central Cities




                                                                                                                                             San Diego, CA                                                                                    Dallas-Fort Worth, TX
                                                                                                                                    Washington, DC/MD/VA                                                                               Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA




    The samples include all housing units and both central city and suburban areas.
                                                                                                                                 Fort Myers-Cape Coral, FL                                                                         San Francisco-Oakland-Vallejo, C
                                                                                                                             Ventura-Oxnard-Simi Valley, CA                                                                                     Denver-Boulder, CO
                                                                                                                                                Chicago, IL                                                                          Ventura-Oxnard-Simi Valley, CA
                                                                                                                                               Danbury, CT                                                                                      Seattle-Everett, WA
                                                                                                                                              Stamford, CT                                                                                           Bridgeport, CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 1: Percent Condo and Owner Occupied in 2010




                                                                                                                                               Sarasota, FL                                                                                           Ann Arbor, MI
                                                                                                                                               Honolulu, HI                                                                                             Chicago, IL
                                                                                                                                          Miami-Hialeah, FL                                                                                 Washington, DC/MD/VA
                                                                                                                         West Palm Beach-Boca Raton-Delra                                                                                           Boston, MA/NH
                                                                                                                         Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood-Pompan                                                                                               Atlanta, GA




    45 highest condo density central cities in our estimation sample and the top 45 highest condo density metro areas.
    Note: These figures report the the percent of housing units that are condo and owner occupied in 2010 for the top
                                           Figure 2: Cumulative Condo Ordinances Passed: 1973-2009

                                      40




                                      30
              Cumulative Ordinances




                                      20




                                      10




                                       0
                                              1972   1976   1980   1984     1988   1992    1996     2000   2004   2008

                                                               Estimation Sample     Top 100 Metro Areas


Note: This figure plots the cumulative condo ordinances for the 54 areas consistently identified metro areas and the
top 100 largest metro areas in four-year bins.




                                                                             2
   Table 1: Homeownership Rates by Educational Status of Household Head, 1960 and 2010
                                                           1960                      2010
                                                     Owner     Renter          Owner     Renter
               Panel A: Bachelor's or More            (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)
                All Housing Units                    0.641      0.359          0.729      0.271
                 Multi-Family                        0.061      0.287          0.144      0.229
                 Single-Family                       0.580      0.072          0.585      0.042
               Panel B: Less than Bachelor's
                All Housing Units                    0.575       0.425          0.587      0.413
                 Multi-Family                        0.114       0.345          0.097      0.319
                 Single-Family                       0.461       0.080          0.490      0.094
Note: This table reports aggregate trends in ownership for homeowners, separately by educational attainment. The
sample includes household heads who are at least 25 years of age. Single-family includes single-family detached units.
Multi-family includes single-family attached and all multi-family units.




                                                        3
                        Table 2: Aggregate Trends in Metro Areas: 1980-2010
                Panel A: Central City                    1980       1990       2000      2010
                 Share with Ordinance in Metro           0.241      0.278     0.278     0.315
                 Percent Condo and Owner Occ.            1.212      2.111     2.415     3.746
                 Log Mean Personal Income               10.221     10.341     10.440    10.401
                 Share Black                             0.212     0.237      0.266     0.273
                 Share Bachelor's or More               0.195      0.241      0.276     0.323
                Panel B: Suburbs
                 Share with Ordinance in Metro           0.241      0.278     0.278     0.315
                 Percent Condo and Owner Occ.            1.574      2.774     3.199     4.550
                 Log Mean Personal Income               10.506     10.660     10.769    10.685
                 Share Black                             0.047     0.054      0.067     0.085
                 Share Bachelor's or More               0.223      0.273      0.306     0.349
Note: This table reports aggregate trends in the 54 consistently identifiable metro areas, separately by city center
and suburbs. All means are constructed from household heads and the sample includes all housing structure types.
Income measured as total personal income and is reported using 2000 dollars.




                                                       4
Table 3: OLS Relationship Between Condo Density and Resident Characteristics at City/Suburban
Level
                                                All Housing Units           SFA and All    Multi-Family
                                                 (1)        (2)               (3)              (4)
             Log Mean Personal Income           0.036 0.028                  0.010          -0.002
                                               (0.005)    (0.009)           (0.003)         (0.005)
                                               [10.307]   [10.433]          [9.996]         [10.171]
             Share Bachelor's or More           0.017 0.014                  0.003          -0.000
                                               (0.002) (0.003)              (0.001)         (0.002)
                                               [0.273] [0.300]              [0.243]          [0.275]
             Share Black                       -0.023 -0.023               -0.007           -0.002
                                               (0.003)  (0.005)            (0.001)          (0.002)
                                                [0.155] [0.152]             [0.188]          [0.217]
           Observations                           432     432                 432              432
           Metro x CC Fixed Effects               Yes     Yes                 Yes              Yes
           Metro x Year Fixed Effects             Yes     Yes                 Yes              Yes
           Weighted                               No      Yes                 No               Yes
 Note: This table reports ordinary least squares results of percent condo and owner occupied on various outcome
 measures. The samples contain the housing units listed in the column header. The dependent variables are listed in
 each row and are constructed using household heads. Dependent variable means are reported in brackets. Columns 2
 and 4 weight by number of household heads. All specifications include metro-by-year and metro-by-central city fixed
 effects. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at the 1 percent level, ** = significant
 at the 5 percent level, * = significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                         5
Table 4: First Stage Relationship Between Condo Ordinance Passage and Condo Density at
City/Suburban Level
                                                            Ordinance (0-1)           Ordinance (0-3)
                 Panel A: All Housing Units                  (1)       (2)             (3)       (4)
                  Ordinance × Post × Central City         -0.919 -1.416             -0.412    -0.673
                                                          (0.380) (0.260)           (0.803) (0.438)
                                                           [2.698]   [3.831]         [2.698]   [3.831]
                 Panel B: SFA and All Multi-Family
                  Ordinance × Post × Central City         -3.390 -5.713             -1.481     -4.104
                                                          (0.880) (1.327)           (1.867)    (1.022)
                                                           [6.719] [7.887]           [6.719]    [7.887]
                 Observations                                432     432               432        432
                 Metro x CC FE                               Yes     Yes               Yes        Yes
                 Metro x Year FE                             Yes     Yes               Yes        Yes
                 Weighted                                    No      Yes               No         Yes
 Note: This table reports first stage results of a triple interaction on percent condo and owner occupied. Panel A
 reports results using all housing types and Panel B reports results using single-family attached and all multi-family
 units. Columns 1 and 2 utilize a 0/1 coding for condo ordinance, and columns 3 and 4 recode the ordinance to 0-3,
 depending on the severity of the ordinance. Columns 2 and 4 weight by number of household heads. All specifications
 include metro-by-year and metro-by-central city fixed effects. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
 *** = significant at the 1 percent level, ** = significant at the 5 percent level, * = significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                           6
Table 5: First Stage Relationship Between Condo Ordinance Passage and Condo Density at Census
Tract Level
                                                       <200        <500       <1000       <2000    All
                                                     Meters      Meters     Meters      Meters   Tracts
       Panel A: Share SFA and 2-4 Units > 40%           (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)     (5)
        Post × Ordinance                             -3.457      -2.931     -3.026      -2.942 -2.833
                                                     (1.900)     (1.582)    (1.282)     (1.023)  (0.679)
                                                      [5.213]     [5.431]    [5.259]     [5.170] [5.607]
       Observations                                   1,500       1,832       2,642      4,278       8,858
       Panel B: Share 5+ Units > 60%
        Post × Ordinance                             -5.244      -6.544     -5.508      -1.054      -5.926
                                                     (4.899)     (4.334)    (3.308)     (2.605)     (1.794)
                                                     [23.906]    [24.033]   [24.103]    [23.031]    [20.845]
       Observations                                   1,250       1,512       2,042      3,030       6,538
       Tract FE                                        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
       Metro x Year FE                                 Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
 Note: This table reports first stage results of a post x ordinance interaction on percent condo using data from the
 Neighborhood Change Database. The sample contains all tracts whose centroids are within the distance to the
 city-suburban border listed in the column title and the baseline housing composition listed in the panel title. All
 specifications include tract and metro area-by-year fixed effects. Dependent variable means are reported in brackets.
 Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at the 1 percent level, ** = significant at the
 5 percent level, * = significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                        7
Table 6: Two-Stage Least Squares Relationship Between Condo Density and Resident Characteris-
tics at City/Suburban Level
                                                                     Ordinance (0-1)
                           Panel A: All Housing Units                 (1)       (2)
                            Log Mean Personal Income                0.021    -0.005
                                                                   (0.021)    (0.023)
                                                                   [10.307]   [10.433]
                             Share Bachelor's or More                0.016      0.005
                                                                    (0.010)    (0.006)
                                                                    [0.273]    [0.300]
                             Share Black                           -0.021      -0.013
                                                                   (0.013)     (0.010)
                                                                    [0.155]     [0.152]
                           Panel B: SFA and All Multi-Family
                            Log Mean Personal Income               -0.001      -0.006
                                                                   (0.008)     (0.007)
                                                                    [9.996]    [10.171]
                             Share Bachelor's or More              -0.000       0.001
                                                                   (0.004)     (0.001)
                                                                    [0.243]    [0.275]
                             Share Black                           -0.004       0.001
                                                                   (0.003)     (0.001)
                                                                    [0.188]    [0.217]
                           Observations                               432        432
                           Metro x CC FE                              Yes        Yes
                           Metro x Year FE                            Yes        Yes
                           Weighted                                   No         Yes
 Note: This table reports two-stage least squares results of percent condo and owner occupied on various outcomes.
 Percent condo and owner occupied is instrumented for using the triple interaction of Central City x Ordinance x Post.
 The dependent variable is listed in each row and is constructed using data from household heads. Bachelor's of more
 includes only household heads aged 25 or more. Dependent variable means are reported in brackets. Panel A reports
 results using all housing types and Panel B reports results using single-family attached and all multi-family units.
 Column 2 weights by number of household heads. All specifications include metro-by-year and metro-by-central city
 fixed effects. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at the 1 percent level, ** =
 significant at the 5 percent level, * = significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                        8
